It is a&nbsp;great&nbsp;honour to be here with you at&nbsp;Hasanuddin&nbsp;University.
After I was elected leader of the Australian&nbsp;Labor&nbsp;Party in 2019, the first international visit I made was to Indonesia.&nbsp;I am&nbsp;very&nbsp;pleased to return&nbsp;here&nbsp;as&nbsp;Australia’s&nbsp;Prime Minister.
It’s so good to be back.
Every time I return to Indonesia I am reminded of your warmth.&nbsp;
I arrived in somewhat different circumstances this time, but even if my personal&nbsp;situation has&nbsp;changed, your warmth has not.
Thank you all for making me and my delegation feel so very welcome.&nbsp;
I’ve been out cycling with&nbsp;your&nbsp;President.&nbsp;I was both honoured and touched that the President suggested a bike ride through the Bogor Palace gardens.&nbsp;
It was such an enjoyable way to see the magnificent grounds.
I’ve also had the great pleasure of meeting many&nbsp;in&nbsp;your business community.&nbsp;
They play such an essential&nbsp;role in the continuing vitality of our friendship.
I plan to return&nbsp;to Indonesia as&nbsp;Prime Minister often, because of the&nbsp;importance of this diverse and beautiful country.&nbsp;
As a neighbour. As a friend.&nbsp;As a matter of priority.
As&nbsp;we speak of&nbsp;the friendship between our two nations, it is particularly fitting&nbsp;to be&nbsp;in Makassar.&nbsp;
Centuries ago, the sea route between&nbsp;here&nbsp;and&nbsp;northern Australia&nbsp;was alive with&nbsp;a&nbsp;flourishing trade.&nbsp;
Each December,&nbsp;the Yolngu people of Arnhem Land would look to the sea, waiting for the horizon to fill with the sails of&nbsp;Makassan vessels.
The Yolngu immortalised those boats in their art, and you can find them&nbsp;painted&nbsp;on sandstone&nbsp;and bark, their sails forever full with the wind that brought them across the sea.
The long relationship between the&nbsp;Makassan seafarers&nbsp;and First Nations people of Australia was&nbsp;built around&nbsp;trade.
But what was most striking was that it was&nbsp;built on mutual respect.&nbsp;A&nbsp;relationship of equals.
It laid&nbsp;down the foundation stone for the people-to-people contact&nbsp;that is at the very heart of Australia’s&nbsp;relationship with the people of Indonesia.
The&nbsp;Makassan&nbsp;fishers were the first Muslims to visit Australia—writing&nbsp;the first chapter in&nbsp;the story of all that Muslim people&nbsp;have&nbsp;contributed to&nbsp;our&nbsp;nation.
Embracing multiculturalism
Today, there are now over 600,000 Muslims in Australia, and they are a vital and integral part of the rich&nbsp;mosaic of Australian society.
They have helped build our nation and are a valued and respected part of the Australian family.
I am delighted that my&nbsp;new&nbsp;Ministry&nbsp;includes two Muslim Australians.
Industry Minister&nbsp;Ed&nbsp;Husic,&nbsp;who is a member of this delegation,&nbsp;whose parents came from Bosnia in the 1960s and who is the first Muslim to serve in the Australian&nbsp;Cabinet.
And&nbsp;Dr Anne Aly from Western Australia was born in Egypt, grew up in Australia,&nbsp;then returned to Egypt as a teenager to attend university&nbsp;before coming home to Australia again.
Both of them held the Koran as they were sworn in as Ministers last week.&nbsp;
They were elected to Parliament from diverse and vibrant constituencies.
A very significant point to make here is that&nbsp;they were both elected in constituencies where Muslims are&nbsp;far&nbsp;from&nbsp;a majority.
I take&nbsp;all of&nbsp;this as&nbsp;heartening confirmation that&nbsp;we are maturing as a nation.&nbsp;&nbsp;
This is the enduring value of multiculturalism and the great spectrum of Australia’s&nbsp;religious and cultural diversity.
As I said in my first speech to Parliament:&nbsp;
“Multiculturalism provides Australia with a unique opportunity to be a microcosm of the world—to show that cultural diversity and respect can lead to a more peaceful, equitable and fulfilling life for all.”&nbsp;
Our embrace of multiculturalism speaks to our deepening&nbsp;sense of ourselves as a nation, which&nbsp;itself&nbsp;goes hand in hand with&nbsp;how we see and project&nbsp;our place in the world.
We are part of the&nbsp;most dynamic region in the world.
I see&nbsp;great opportunity&nbsp;to working&nbsp;closely with our neighbours.
It was&nbsp;another&nbsp;Labor&nbsp;Prime Minister, Paul Keating,&nbsp;who once said that&nbsp;the change&nbsp;that&nbsp;he sought was&nbsp;Australia finding security&nbsp;in&nbsp;Asia, not&nbsp;from&nbsp;Asia.&nbsp;
That&nbsp;holds true for the Government I lead—on the question of regional security and the challenge of global climate change.&nbsp;
Climate Change and Energy
I am ambitious for what Australia can achieve as we confront the challenge of climate change, and I am also ambitious what we can achieve in partnership with our friends and neighbours.&nbsp;
Late last year, I put&nbsp;forward my blueprint for tackling climate change.&nbsp;
It is a comprehensive response to climate change with economic growth and jobs at its heart.
One of the first steps we will take is&nbsp;to&nbsp;rewire our energy grid so we can integrate more renewables into our power system. It will ensure renewables are 82 per cent&nbsp;of our National Energy Market by 2030.
Our plan will reduce Australia’s emissions by 43 per cent by 2030 and ensure we are on track for Net Zero by 2050.
It will attract $52 billion of private investment and&nbsp;will generate 604,000 jobs by 2030.
In doing so, we will provide the certainty and clarity that&nbsp;businesses and investors need.
My Government&nbsp;sees enormous potential in green hydrogen&nbsp;and will look for opportunities to back green hydrogen projects.&nbsp;
For example, in our island state of Tasmania, we will help kick start a project using solar panels to produce green hydrogen on a commercial scale,&nbsp;and eventually create&nbsp;a green hydrogen export market.
This is the sort of vision we can seize. And we can seize it right now.
Sun Cable&nbsp;is another great example of Australia continuing to step up as a reliable, clean energy provider for the region.&nbsp;
When completed, it will be a 4500-kilometre pipeline&nbsp;transporting some of Australia’s abundant solar energy from the Northern Territory to Singapore.
Climate change is, of course, a global problem. And that requires a global solution.
I want better access to affordable, reliable and secure clean energy right across our region, as we move toward&nbsp;a net zero world together.
&nbsp;
That is why,&nbsp;my Government&nbsp;will expand our cooperation with Indonesia on climate change, including through our commitment to establish a new Climate and Infrastructure Partnership.
We will work together with Jakarta to build a resilient, clean energy&nbsp;sector&nbsp;and&nbsp;unlock green trade and investment opportunities—because both of our countries&nbsp;recognise&nbsp;that climate change is not only a problem to be solved, but presents opportunities for us to embrace.
Closer ties on education
As we face the challenges of the present and anticipate the future, what&nbsp;must&nbsp;underpin all of&nbsp;our efforts&nbsp;is&nbsp;education.
Education is the biggest and most powerful weapon we have against disadvantage.
Education is the strongest&nbsp;foundation on which we&nbsp;can&nbsp;build&nbsp;the mutual respect that characterises&nbsp;the relationship between our nations.&nbsp;
That is the spirit that is embodied by&nbsp;Hasanuddin&nbsp;University.
This great seat of learning is one with strong ties to Australia, with long record of cooperation with Australian universities including Monash, Griffith, Melbourne, La Trobe and Sydney.&nbsp;
I am especially pleased that the person in charge of guiding that spirit is your Rector,&nbsp;Professor&nbsp;Jamaluddin&nbsp;Jompa.
Professor&nbsp;Jompa’s&nbsp;research experience with coral reef biology and&nbsp;his work with coastal communities&nbsp;have&nbsp;both taken&nbsp;on even greater significance as&nbsp;the world&nbsp;faces&nbsp;the challenges of climate change.
As does&nbsp;his role as adviser to your&nbsp;nation’s&nbsp;Minister of Marine Affairs and Fisheries.
So it is a source of&nbsp;particular&nbsp;pride that&nbsp;Professor&nbsp;Jompa&nbsp;obtained his doctoral degree from James Cook University in Queensland.
Australia has long been a supporter of your institution, whether it was through early infrastructure support or the provision of scholarships.
The depth of&nbsp;engagement between our first class universities and&nbsp;this institution is evident in&nbsp;the remarkable 152 Australian alumni on your teaching staff.
So it is heartening that Australia’s part in the story of this great university gets to continue, in a way, through&nbsp;the story of&nbsp;your&nbsp;Rector.
It’s worth reiterating what&nbsp;his old university&nbsp;has said about him. And I quote:
“Professor&nbsp;Jompa&nbsp;shows exemplary leadership across Indonesia’s scientific community, engaging with policy makers and those who implement programs, by brokering knowledge between science and strategy.&nbsp;
“His leadership and care is ensuring that the upcoming generations of Indonesian scientists have the opportunities, the platform, and the capabilities to drive Indonesia’s economic, social, and environmental future.”
The university makes a note of Professor&nbsp;Jompa’s&nbsp;instinct to bring people together, an instinct that manifests itself in his passion for Australian-Indonesian relations.
I have spoken a lot over the past couple of years about the importance of bringing people together, and of rejecting&nbsp;powers that seek to divide&nbsp;people.
That is the spirit that can drive&nbsp;all of us and help us to shape a better future.
That desire to come together and find common ground, lighting the path ahead&nbsp;of us&nbsp;both&nbsp;with&nbsp;the&nbsp;knowledge&nbsp;we already have,&nbsp;and&nbsp;the burning&nbsp;curiosity&nbsp;to add to it.
Building our nations and making them stronger by&nbsp;strengthening our education systems.
And making the most of our education institutions’ capacity to foster&nbsp;people-to-people links—those very personal connections&nbsp;that lie at the heart of every international relationship.
We see it in the 18,000 Indonesian students who choose to study in Australia each&nbsp;year—a choice I believe ultimately contributes to both of our nations.
We&nbsp;will&nbsp;enhance it by supporting the vital work carried out the Australian Consortium for “In-Country” Indonesia studies, which will provide the support to make it possible for more Australians to study in Indonesia.
Every one of these steps can bring us closer together in the most positive and lasting way.&nbsp;
In a time when we’ve become used to short-term political thinking to deal with an ever-shrinking news cycle, this is long-term vision.
And in that spirit, yesterday I announced&nbsp;10&nbsp;new&nbsp;scholarships for Indonesians to undertake Masters or PhD studies in Australia in areas that promote Indonesia’s G20 priorities.
Specifically, these students will research&nbsp;global health architecture, sustainable energy, and digital transformation—Indonesia’s G20 priorities.&nbsp;
The research they will undertake will contribute to Indonesia’s economy and educational sector, and continue to create bonds between our nations.
Conclusion
I believe&nbsp;that unless we shape the future, the future will shape us.
I know we can face the future with confidence—every one of its challenges, every one of its opportunities.&nbsp;
Everything we need to turn us into&nbsp;shapers&nbsp;of the future&nbsp;is right here, as long as we&nbsp;are ready&nbsp;and willing&nbsp;to learn.
Like the wind that filled the sails of those&nbsp;Makassan&nbsp;boats&nbsp;all those years ago, education can fill us and drive us forward&nbsp;towards the bright horizon and the&nbsp;bigger world of opportunities&nbsp;that’s&nbsp;waiting&nbsp;for us.
Let’s embark on the journey together.


INTRODUCTION
I’d like to begin with a message for all of our Japanese friends here with us.
We’re all still in shock about the tragic death of your former prime minister, Abe Shinzo.
But for you, the shock must be all the greater.
His death is a profound loss for Japan – but also for the world.
He led a life of consequence and changed things for the better – in Japan, in our region and around the world.
I hope you can take some comfort from knowing that Australia stands with you in your time of grief.
We come together today in a time of great uncertainty.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed vulnerabilities, and laid bare challenges that we cannot ignore.
There are many lessons we will all take from this experience.
But one of the most critical ones for me– is that we are stronger when we work together.
We are, for all our differences, one single human family.
And we all call this one fragile planet, home.
When we pause and reflect on this, we recognise our connection to one another.
We recognise that we have a common stake in each other.
And that the best way to meet the challenges in front of us is by finding common ground.
This is the message that I've carried with me.
And this is the message underscored here today.
The diversity and unity of purpose in this room makes it very clear.
All of you coming together, from across sectors and nations, because you understand our future is linked.
All of us here know what needs to be done.
The nature of the challenge is not in question. Its urgency and scope is clear.
The question is our ability and our appetite, to seize the opportunities it contains.
And to shape them in our common interests.
As Prime Minister, I am committed to renewing Australia’s standing in our region.
This work is underway, demonstrating our Government’s commitment that each action we take, each policy we pursue in this space, will be driven by a larger vision of our shared future.
A future with new clean-energy industries and jobs as its foundation. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Powered by renewable energy produced in Australia.
But the only way to build this future is to start with the realities of the present.
CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES
Russia’s brutal and illegal invasion of Ukraine is a terrible humanitarian tragedy.
It is a challenge to the international order on which our peace and stability are based.
And it is exacerbating global energy insecurity, impacting the supply and price of energy and reshaping energy markets.
Australia has not been immune from these developments, with high global prices from gas and coal — and the impact of severe weather on both demand for energy and supply of renewables — putting our National Energy Market under enormous strain.
Our Government has also inherited a challenging set of circumstances when it comes to climate and energy policy.
An electricity network designed for a different century.
New investment in clean energy had stalled.
A lack of investment in storage or transmission.
As a result, everyday Australians don’t just pay for their power, but for the cost of building and operating an outdated grid.
We have had no coherent energy policy for a decade.
It has left us missing out on the jobs, growth and opportunities that our abundant renewable resources could deliver.
And has left businesses and investors without the clarity and certainty they need.
But, as this Forum highlights, this is a new day.
It is a new era.
We need to act — and we will act.
We will lay a new foundation for sustainable growth and prosperity.
A foundation that will move us from an era of inaction and delay to one where we create new jobs, new industries and drive down emissions.
This is a matter of urgency.
But also optimism.
Because we know Australia has the workers, the resources and the capacity to become a renewable energy superpower.
And to support the region’s move toward a clean energy future with secure, reliable and resilient supply chains.
This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity.
And our Government’s policies are designed to seize that opportunity with the determination and resolve it demands.
GOVERNMENT PLAN
My Government has already submitted a new, more ambitious 2030 Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We’ve committed to reduce emissions to 43 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030, putting Australia back on track to achieve net zero by 2050.
But our plan for tackling climate change encompasses so much more.
At its core it is a plan for economic reform and economic growth.
It will create 604,000 extra jobs, with five out of six new jobs to be created in regional Australia.
It will unlock $52 billion of private sector investment in Australian industries.
By the end of this decade, renewable energy will make up 82 per cent of our National Energy Market.
We will accelerate the decarbonisation of our electricity grid.
And we will allocate up to $3 billion for existing industries to adapt and new industries to grow, in areas such as batteries and energy storage; clean energy component manufacturing; hydrogen electrolysers; and fuel switching.
We see enormous potential in hydrogen, and Australia has all the ingredients needed to become both a major hydrogen producer and a global exporter.
We currently have over 70 hydrogen projects in the pipeline with over 91% of production planned to be green hydrogen.
And we also have plans to establish hydrogen refuelling infrastructure to support the next generation of heavy vehicles.
Similarly, we will establish our nation’s first National Electric Vehicle Strategy, make electric vehicles cheaper and double existing investment in electric vehicle charging.
We will create community batteries for shared storage and solar banks for households that can't install rooftop panels.
And we will create programs such as New Energy Apprenticeships and a New Energy Skills Program that will make sure Australians have the skills and training they need to work in this growing sector.
Crucially, we will work with business to drive emissions down predictably and gradually over time in the industrial sector.
And we will do so in a way that is consistent with reaching net zero emissions by 2050.
This is a plan to take Australia forward.
To create jobs, cut power bills and reduce emissions by boosting renewable energy.
And we will be transparent and held accountable as we progress our agenda.
When Parliament resumes at the end of this month, my Minister for Climate Change and Energy, Chris Bowen – who is here with us today and will be leading this Forum -- will introduce our Climate Change Bill.
It will seek to enshrine our targets into law, providing the certainty industry and investors need – in Australia and beyond.
And it will legislate a requirement for the Minister to report annually on progress in meeting our targets.
After decades of inertia, Australia is choosing action and innovation.
We have both the resolve and the expertise to take this on.
But we know that the best way to achieve our ambition is to work alongside friends and partners.
To take this journey together.
We are proud of our place in the Indo-Pacific.
Proud of the ties of friendship and cooperation that bind our countries together.
And few regions have more at stake, or more to gain, in meeting this challenge collectively than our own.
INDO-PACIFIC
We are the fastest growing region in the world.
Home to more than half of planet’s population.
Nearly two-thirds of the world’s economy.
And more than 60 per cent of global energy supply.
But we also bear many of the burdens of climate change.
70 per cent of the world’s natural disasters occur in our region.
And, in 2019, over 90 million people in the Indo-Pacific were affected by climate-related disasters.
In Australia, we have experienced successive seasons of unprecedented bushfires and floods – again here in Sydney and its surrounding regions in the past week.
We all recognise the enormous challenges of this moment in history.
But while the task we face is great, if we act boldly and decisively, so is the opportunity.
PARTNERSHIPS
The Indo-Pacific is the leading target for private investment in clean energy, accounting for nearly 80 per cent of global investment in 2021.
And this will only increase, because if the world is to reach net zero emissions by 2050, our investment in clean energy must more than triple.
Meeting this demand will require a renewable energy supply around six times greater than our region’s current annual solar and wind energy generation.
The numbers shouldn’t daunt us. They should energise us.
If we empower businesses, scientists, engineers, workers, and the private sector to work together across our region, we can unleash investment and innovation in clean energy at a scale we have never seen before.
And it gives us the impetus to push boundaries of science, technology, and imagination in pursuit of a better future for generations to come.
It is essential that the unprecedented levels of investment in clean energy technologies required over the coming decades unlocks more diverse and secure supply chains than we have today.
Greater diversity and security of critical minerals extraction and processing, greater diversity of clean technology manufacturing, and security of clean energy supply are essential for managing supply and strategic risks.
Together, we can ensure better access to affordable, reliable and secure clean energy right across the Indo Pacific, as we move to a net zero world.
Australia is eager and ready to do our part.
Our nation has a long, proud history as an established and reputable global energy exporter.
We have an abundance of the rare earths and critical minerals that will underpin new energy economies – such as aluminium, lithium, copper, cobalt and nickel.
And through our research and engineering endeavours we will continue to get the best of Australian ingenuity out into the global market.
And we are bringing all these components together for the benefit of our region and our world.
Take, for example, the Sun Cable’s Australia-Asia PowerLink project which aims to bring all these components together to export Australian solar energy from the Northern Territory to Singapore.
Or our national science agency’s innovative ‘UltraBattery’ which will soon power hybrid electric vehicles across North America.
Or the Asian Renewable Energy Hub, in the Pilbara region of Western Australia, which has the potential to be one of the largest renewables and green hydrogen hubs in the world.
Our Government has also committed to do more — much more — with our regional and global partners.
Already, we’ve announced new climate finance and infrastructure partnerships to support and strengthen cooperation with our Pacific neighbours.
We will deepen our engagement with Southeast Asia and ASEAN as a priority.
And last month I announced a $200 million Climate and Infrastructure Partnership with Indonesia during my visit.
Climate change was also a focus of my first international engagements at the Quad Leaders’ Summit in Japan in May, the Major Economies Forum on Climate and Energy in June, and in my meetings with friends and allies during my recent visit to Europe.
And we’ve made great progress on a new and innovative Green Economy Agreement with Singapore to facilitate trade and investment in environmental goods and services, strengthen environmental governance, and help build global clean energy capacity.
My Government has also affirmed Australia’s commitment to the creation of a global coalition for blue carbon, and we’ve promised ongoing help to support blue carbon projects in the Pacific.
And I look forward to attending the Pacific Islands Forum, where I will discuss our proposal to co-host a UN climate summit with our Pacific partners, to elevate and prioritise issues which impact our region the most.
Australia will once again be a trusted global partner on climate action.
I am ambitious about what we can achieve together.
FORUM
Our co-host, the International Energy Agency, has stated that 50 per cent of what we need for a zero emissions future is already at our disposal.
But the other 50 per cent will come from technology that is still under development.
Here at this Forum, we have a deep reservoir of ideas.
We need your inspiration and vision to forge the path forward.
The findings, information, and data presented by the world’s leading experts over the next two days will be invaluable to the work that lies ahead of us.
To achieve the scale, diversity and security of clean energy supply chains necessary for our collective emissions reduction goals.
To challenge convention, share ideas, and boldly imagine the future in an all-encompassing enterprise.
And to release a surge of creativity and innovation.
A surge that will shape actions and help inform other international efforts — including in the IEA, G20 and COP27.
When G7 leaders met last month, they discussed innovative ways to ensure an orderly, fair and equitable energy transition — including with partners in our region.
And when I meet G20 leaders in Bali in November — to discuss accelerating energy transitions globally — I will draw on this Forum’s discussions, particularly your views on energy security and the transformative role of clean energy technologies.
I firmly believe our willingness to work together on this issue will inspire greater ambition and action around the world.
This challenge demands our ambition.
And future generations need us to deliver on it.
CONCLUSION
Hosting this Forum on our shores underlines Australia’s commitment to confront this challenge.
It's a commitment shared by all of you and by all the nations you represent.
And it comes from a shared understanding that we owe all that we know and are to this one precious planet.
And that, together, we can accomplish so much more than we could ever do alone.
Our work, here and now, will determine the quality of life for future generations.
It won’t be easy.
Each step will bring its own challenges and we will need to learn and adjust our approach as science advances and technology evolves.
But I have no doubt that if we work tirelessly in common effort, we will achieve our common purpose.
Confident in the innovation and ingenuity at our disposal, let us create an enduring framework for a better future.
And an enduring legacy of the partnership between our Indo-Pacific nations.
Thank you.


Thank you very much.
Firstly, I will begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging and commit on behalf of the government to the Uluru Statement From The Heart in full. We will have more to say about that at the Garma Festival that I will be attending along with members of the team on Friday and Saturday. That will be an important event.
Welcome to Fatima and to Linda: our new Senators. To get a third Senator from WA – I spoke to Fatima during the campaign and I did say I was confident about three in WA; you could feel the sense of change that was there throughout that great state. But it took a significant campaign, including a Senate campaign, to get that third seat across the line.
And in Linda, I am so pleased that I have a dear friend of mine for decades, we’re both very young but we met very young. Linda has been an extraordinary contributor through the ASU, particularly for women's work and for equity and social justice issues. She also has, of course, been a member of the ALP National Executive of long standing and has done great work with Chifley – in terms of getting some of our think tanks to play a leading role. In Linda and Fatima we have two outstanding additions to the team – so, welcome.
But, indeed, I think we have a great team and I welcome all of you here the day before Parliament begins. It will be a big deal tomorrow, there are many people who have been here for a while without having sat on a different side of the chamber. And, believe me, as somebody who has done both, one is a lot better than the other. But it is also an enormous privilege and one that we should never take for granted and we should cherish each and every day.
We have an incredible responsibility, as the political party in Australia that seeks positive change in the interest of working people, that seeks to change existing power relationships in society in favour of more equality and in favour of fairness, to make a difference in the way that we legislate and the way that the government acts each and every day. And the government has, fair to say, in its first two months that we celebrated on the 21st, we have certainly hit the ground running. And we have hit the ground running because Labor governments are passionate about changing things for the better.
We were elected with a very significant platform, one in which you will be reminded of with the Governor General’s speech before the Parliament tomorrow when Parliament opens. That Governor General’s speech will outline a government of ambition, a government which sees it has a responsibility to break Australia out of the inertia that the former government was stuck in. We often came to the Parliament without much to do in terms of an agenda before the Parliament. This Labor Government will not be like that and we will hit the ground running.
Already we have made the changes that we made to the minimum wage. I said during the election campaign – I held up my $1 coin – that people on $20.33 deserve an extra $1 an hour. And, indeed, the Fair Work Commission granted them $1.05 an hour, with a 5.2% increase. There is no doubt that that would not have occurred had the change of government not happened on May 21.
We have already submitted our nationally determined contribution – our changed climate change target – to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change of 43%, consistent with what we took to the election. That has meant we have been able to walk through the door of international discussions, not just about climate but about trade and economic relationships, about our social relationships – whether that be at the Quad leaders meeting, whether it be with Indonesia, whether it be the NATO summit, where European countries welcomed the change in our position and where we've restarted negotiations for a European trade agreement that's very much in the interests of Australia. That change has made an enormous difference.
Climate change is a national security issue. That is well understood throughout the world, but nowhere more so than with our Pacific neighbours. And when we met at the Pacific Islands Forum just a couple of weeks ago, our changed position was included in the communique and it was very much welcomed going forward. It is made an enormous difference.
We have dealt with the challenges that come to government. One of those is, of course, the consequences of having a decade of inaction on energy policy means we've had a decade of a failure of investment in new, clean energy. How can you invest, if you’re a business, when you don't have any certainty going forward, when there is no policy framework? Business has been crying out for that framework. But we've had to deal with the consequences of that inaction and Chris Bowen has done a remarkable job in dealing with that challenge.
In addition, we have the ongoing challenge of dealing with COVID and Mark Butler has been working with the health authorities and I've been working with states and territories to deal with the consequences of COVID: making sure that we get those messages out there, making sure that people continue to do the right thing, get their boosters if they are eligible, making sure that support is available and that's why we've extended support for the hospital network beyond that which was envisaged by the former government.
We have also had to deal with natural disasters. All of these things are not unrelated. The floods, where many people in Susan Templeman's electorate have been hit with three floods and a bushfire in the last few years. We were there providing support earlier than ever before, the earlier deployment of the ADF, earlier deployment of state support, the support that goes from the two levels of government – but also, earlier engagement of support that is provided by the Commonwealth with those payments, and Bill Shorten was straight onto the government services to make sure that that support was available really early.
And Murray Watt has had an enormous amount to deal with – between that and dealing with, responsibly, the foot-and-mouth disease issue that we know is affecting Indonesia. We were there up on the ground and making a difference here, not trying to create opportunistic positions like our opponents, but working with the National Farmers' Federation, the Northern Cattleman’s Association, the sector that were directly affected and doing action in consultation with them.
Labor governments don't just occupy the space; we are here to make a difference. This week we will have legislation, at least 18 pieces of legislation, including legislation for our climate change targets, legislation for ten days paid domestic and family violence leave – something we've spoken about for a long period of time – legislation to respond to the Aged Care Royal Commission. Why do you have a royal commission and then sit on the recommendations? That's what the former government did. And legislation to create Jobs and Skills Australia which is important in the lead-up to the jobs and skills summit that will be held in a little over one month's time here in the Parliament. In addition to that, in coming weeks we will have child care legislation. We will be acting on our urgent care clinics, putting them in place. We will, by the end of the year, have legislation on the anti-corruption commission. We will be advancing a Voice to Parliament enshrined in our Constitution.
All of this is the what, and the how is also important. We want to change the tone of politics in this country. We want to be more inclusive. We want to make sure there's less shouting and more delivery. The former government sat around and talked about how to wedge the other side of politics. We're not really interested in that. What we are interested in is getting solutions to people for the challenges that are there and we will be doing that.
We will also be dealing with the legacy that we've inherited. $1 trillion of debt with not much to show for it is a real challenge. The people that we represent are suffering under cost of living pressures, we know that that is the case. But we know as well that you can't continue to spend money without having consequences. We want value for money, which is why we will be going through the budget line by line, getting rid of the waste and the rorts that we have seen that cost us so much, not just in terms financially but has cost in our humanity as well. Schemes like Robodebt have cost us as a society – as well as sports rorts and all of these things that were baked into the budget. We will be going through those going forward.
I think if we needed a final reminder of the legacy that we inherit, it's come out on the weekend with the report into what occurred on May 21. An action by a government breaching all convention, breaching all principles and breaching everything that is decent. Trying to scare people into a vote on polling day and trying to trash the separation that is there between government and the independent public service during caretaker convention periods. This is unprecedented for a government to act like that on polling day. What we know now is that the then-Prime Minister gave a statement before any public statement had been given by the department. This is a guy who used to say that he would not give answers to anything about these issues – that they were on-water matters. And here we have an unprincipled action by a government that was desperate and was prepared to do anything whatsoever to try to retain power. It was an appalling act and they should be held to account for that appalling act on the final day. That crushing of convention – which is the way the politics has to operate if we're going to have faith in the political processes.
But it was one last example of a government that will be defined by its seeking of division in society. Our task is very different. Our task is to unite people. To look for common ground and common purpose. That's something I want this caucus to do. This caucus has such a critical role to play. 103 members strong; that makes an extraordinary difference. We have a great responsibility to the people who have sent us here: people who need a Labor government to make a difference to their lives. I'm very confident that over coming weeks, months and years that is precisely what we will be doing.
So, welcome to Canberra. Welcome back. And enjoy tomorrow. This is the fourth time since the Second World War and the fifth time in a hundred years that Labor has formed government from Opposition. We are only able to do that because of your hard work, because of your commitment, because of your principles, because of the people, the party members and volunteers and union members, who have sent you here, who do so much work and will never be interested in appearing in a public forum.
We have a great responsibility to those people to really be the best government that we can possibly be and to make them proud. I'm very proud to lead this party and to lead this government. And I hope that we make the people who have sent us here collectively proud each and every day. Thanks a lot.


The first bullet of World War I heralded a calamity on a scale unknown to humanity. The last shot was followed by silence.
As Charles Bean wrote of the eerie quiet that settled along the Western Front:
“The change went too deep for actual rejoicing… The sound of guns ceased – the gates of the future silently opened.”

While many of our soldiers found ways to celebrate, many greeted the peace with their own quiet.
Unlike the children who chalked the walls of village houses with messages celebrating the end of the war, many couldn’t even bring themselves to note it in their diaries.
In the spare words of one Australian digger:
“It was over. That was enough.”

We thank them for the peace that came when the final shell crater had uncurled its final wisp of smoke.
When the sea and the sky were killing grounds no more.
When the last coil of barbed wire had been cut apart or turned to rust.
When the singing of bullets had given way to the song of birds.
When the naked mud had begun to once again be clothed in grass and flowers, hellscapes turned back to meadow and farmland.
When ruin had given way to rebuilding.
But as those who survived the War to End All Wars soon learned: victory in war offers no guarantee of the victory of peace.
Another war came. Another generation of Australians went. And at the end of it, another silence.
It was the silence of guns suddenly stilled, of planes left on the ground, of ships with their cannons lowered.
But it was also the silence of the dead, and the grief of those they left behind.
Each time we honour our fallen with silence, it is a silence that also contains within it the hope that humanity has at last learnt its lesson.
The hope that this will never happen again.
Hope, it must be said, is playing a long game. And hope may yet win out.
But we will keep returning to this silence.
This solemn quiet that holds both endings and beginnings.
Of exhaustion and rebirth, and a belief in humanity that somehow survives and holds on despite everything that is thrown at it.
It is a silence I hope that our courageous, suffering friends in Ukraine will also soon know.
For so many of our veterans, silence is also a shield against the world – an outer stillness while within them, the cacophony of war rages on.
That has been the experience for so many, whether they raised arms against the enemy, or worked desperately to save the lives of the wounded and the dying.
But when that outer silence ends, when that shield is lowered, we must listen.
Listen even to the silence.
Just as our veterans stepped up for us, we must step up for them.
We owe them a debt greater than mere gratitude.
I have stood here before and cited the examples of my great mentor Tom Uren – a giant of the Labor Party – and Sir John Carrick, a giant of the Liberal Party.
Two great Australians who, even amid the deprivation of prisoner of war camps, managed to encapsulate what is best about our national character: that our deepest instinct is to respond to the worst of times by being our best.
As we gather in this place of memory, we honour all those who have gone in our name.
We honour them as the bugler sounds the Last Post.
We honour them as the piper plays The Flowers of the Forest, a lament of stately sadness unsoftened by the passing of centuries.
But in our gratitude and sorrow at their sacrifice, we honour them most profoundly with silence.
Lest we forget.


Ngarra ga Buku guru-pan Gumatj, Yothu Yindi nha go Yolgnu mala.
[Translation: I pay my respect to Gumatj, Yothu Yindi and Yolngu Mala.]
I acknowledge the people of the Yolngu nation. I recognise all the elders, leaders and families who have made great contributions to our nation.
In particular, I acknowledge the Gumatj clan whose lands we are meeting on today.
Last night’s Bungul was a deeply moving moment for me, it was an honour to bear witness to dance and song and story and tradition tracing back some 60,000 years.&nbsp;
As the breeze came across me, your ancestors’ presence in these lands and waters makes real your 60,000 years and more, custodianship of this land.
And I was also grateful for the chance to meet, again, with Gallarwuy and share in his wisdom, to talk about the opportunities and the challenges in this special part of Australia.
Friends,
I am delighted to be back at Garma for my fourth visit - and I am delighted Garma is back.
Here - on what is, was and always will be Aboriginal land – Today, I re-affirm my Government’s solemn promise to implement the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full.
I’m joined by my colleagues:

Linda Burney, the Minister for Indigenous Australians
Senator Patrick Dodson, Special Envoy for Reconciliation and the Implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart
Senator Malarndirri McCarthy, Assistant Minister for Indigenous Australians and Indigenous Health
Attorney General Mark Dreyfus
Luke Gosling, the Member for Solomon
Chief Minister Natasha Fyles
And our new Member for Lingiari, Marion Scrymgour

And in the spirit of co-operation, which is so necessary – can I acknowledge the Shadow Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Julian Leeser.
Thanks, Julian. I look forward to working with you.
We are all here, eager to work with you, to bring our commitment to Uluru to life.
To see Australia answer that gracious, patient call for respect and truth and unity.
The Uluru Statement is a hand outstretched, a moving show of faith in Australian decency and Australian fairness from people who have been given every reason to forsake their hope in both.
I am determined, as a Government, as a country, that we grasp that hand of healing, we repay that faith, we rise to the moment.
To work with you in lifting the words off the page and lifting the whole nation up:

With a new spirit of partnership between government and First Nations people
Through the work of Makarrata, treaty-making and truth-telling
And by enshrining a Voice to Parliament, in the Constitution.

We approach these tasks and the work of constitutional change, with humility and with hope.
Humility: because over 200 years of broken promises and betrayals, failures and false starts demand nothing less.
Humility because – so many times - the gap between the words and deeds of governments has been as wide as this great continent.&nbsp;&nbsp;
But also hope.
Hope in your abilities as advocates and campaigners, as champions for this cause.
And hope because I believe the tide is running our way. I believe the momentum is with us, as never before.
I believe the country is ready for this reform.
I believe there is room in Australian hearts for the Statement from the Heart.
We are seeking a momentous change – but it is also a very simple one.
It’s not a matter of special treatment, or preferential power.
It’s about consulting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples on the decisions that affect you.
Nothing more – but nothing less.
This is simple courtesy, it is common decency.
It recognises the centuries-old failure that my dear friend Paul Keating spoke of at Redfern, the failure to ask the most basic human question: how would I feel, if this were done to me?
And along with common courtesy, it is common sense.
Respect works.
When a government listens to people with experience, with earned knowledge of kinship and country and culture and community…
…when we trust in the value of self-determination and empowerment…
…then the policies and programs are always more effective.
We see it with:

Justice Reinvestment
Indigenous Rangers
Respecting Homelands
And the National Partnership Agreement process driven by the Coalition of Peaks and the remarkable Pat Turner.

There are success stories out there – but we know they are not universal.&nbsp;
Enshrining a Voice in the Constitution gives the principles of respect and consultation, strength and status.
Writing the Voice into the Constitution means a willingness to listen won’t depend on who is in government or who is Prime Minister.&nbsp;
The Voice will exist and endure outside of the ups and downs of election cycles and the weakness of short-term politics.
It will be an unflinching source of advice and accountability.
Not a third chamber, not a rolling veto, not a blank cheque.
But a body with the perspective and the power and the platform to tell the government and the parliament the truth about what is working and what is not.
To tell the truth – with clarity, with conviction.&nbsp;
Because a Voice enshrined in the Constitution cannot be silenced.
Friends,
I believe the best way to seize the momentum is by settling - as soon as possible - on the referendum question that will be put to the people of Australia.
Now, I respect the fact that many people have done a power of good work to bring us to this point, particularly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander campaigners, best represented by the delegates to the Uluru Convention in 2017.
I am grateful and I honour everyone who has made a contribution to the process.
And now, I am hoping we can draw those threads together.
I am hoping we can progress the efforts of good-willed, hard-working people who want to see the nation move forward and justice realised.
Recognising that this is one of the steps in our nation’s journey of healing.
Our starting point is a recommendation to add three sentences to the Constitution, in recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders as the First Peoples of Australia:

There shall be a body, to be called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice may make representations to Parliament and the Executive Government on matters relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples.
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to the composition, functions, powers and procedures of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.

These draft provisions can be seen as the next step in the discussion about constitutional change.
This may not be the final form of words – but I think it’s how we can get to a final form of words.
In the same way, alongside these provisions, I would like us to present the Australian people with the clearest possible referendum question.
We should consider asking our fellow Australians something as simple, but something as clear, as this:
Do you support an alteration to the Constitution that establishes an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice?
A straightforward proposition.
A simple principle.
A question from the heart.
We can use this question - and the provisions - as the basis for further consultation.
Not as a final decision but as the basis for dialogue, something to give the conversation shape and form.&nbsp;
I ask all Australians of goodwill to engage on this.&nbsp;
Respectfully, purposefully we are seeking to secure support for the question and the associated provisions in time for a successful referendum - in this term of Parliament.
If not now, when?
Back in 1967, not a single member of the House of the Representatives or the Senate voted against the referendum provisions.
In the same spirit - I hope that the Opposition and the crossbench will support the proposal, join the campaign for a Yes vote and bring their supporters to the cause.
We will seek-out every ally and every advocate from, to quote the Statement, ‘every point under the southern sky’.
Fundamentally, this is a reform I believe every Australian can embrace, from all walks of life, in every part of the country, from every faith and background and tradition.&nbsp;
Because it speaks to values that we all share and honour – fairness, respect, decency.
Enshrining a Voice will be a national achievement. It will be above politics.
A unifying Australian moment.
There may well be misinformation and fear campaigns to counter.
But perhaps the greatest threat to the cause is indifference.
The notion that this is a nice piece of symbolism - but it will have no practical benefit.
Or that somehow advocating for a Voice comes at the expense of expanding economic opportunity, or improving community safety, or lifting education standards or helping people get the health care they deserve or find the housing they need.
Championing a Voice won’t stop us from upgrading all-weather roads, so communities can get the supplies and services they need.
It won’t delay our plan to train 500 new Aboriginal healthcare workers.
It won’t stand in the way of our new investments in lifesaving kidney dialysis treatment.
Let us all understand this, very clearly: Australia does not have to choose between improving peoples’ lives and amending the Constitution.
We can do both – and we have to.
Because 121 years of Commonwealth governments arrogantly believing they know enough to impose their own solutions on Aboriginal people have brought us to this point.
This torment of powerlessness.

A life expectancy gap of 20 years.
Some of the worst incarceration rates in the world.
A broken system that burns billions of dollars and delivers precious little for the people who are supposed to be able to trust in it.

And if governments simply continue and insist they know better – then things will get worse.&nbsp;
Friends,
In my lifetime, there has been an extraordinary and joyous change in the way Australians from all walks of life have embraced the privilege we have to share this island continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
We have cast aside the discriminatory fiction of terra nullius and offered a National Apology to the Stolen Generations.
We have said Sorry - and begun the task of making good.
States and territories are embarked on agreement-making, truth-telling, and the work of treaty.
First Nations people sit in our parliaments in record numbers and serve as Ministers.
Our environment benefits from the wisdom of people who have cared for it and thrived in it, through hundreds of generations.
The cult of forgetfulness, ‘the Great Australian silence’ that dishonored our history has been broken by a chorus of song and language and art and sport and celebration.
You haven’t just witnessed that change – you’ve fought for it, you’ve championed it, you’ve been the spark and carried the fire to every corner of this vast country.
And I believe Australians – as fair-minded people, recognise that if we want to share in the riches of 60,000 years of history and tradition…
…then we also share in the responsibility for helping First Nations people build and own a better future.
Because we are all diminished, all of us, when First Nations people are denied their right to a happy and fulfilling life, denied the chance to play a full part in the life of our country.
We are all diminished. And we are all involved.&nbsp;
And soon – all of us – will have a chance to exercise our democratic right and our basic human responsibility to vote for something better.
To have a sense of ownership over the change that this country so desperately needs.
Friends,
A referendum is a high hurdle to clear, you know that and so do we.
We recognise the risks of failure - but we also recognise the risk of failing to try.
We see this referendum as a magnificent opportunity for Australia.
I am optimistic that this historic decision, this long-overdue embrace of truth and justice and decency and respect for First Nations people will be voted into law by the people of Australia.
The voice of the Australian people will create a Voice to Parliament.
All Australians have the chance to own this change, to be proud of it, to be counted and heard on the right side of history.
To vote the unique Australian gift of the wisdom of the world’s oldest continuing civilisation into the Constitution of our nation, into our birth certificate.&nbsp;
My optimism for the success of this referendum derives from my optimistic view of the Australian character.
And I am hopeful, in years to come, when we gather here at Garma, we will be able to measure that success not just by the number of people who vote for a Voice…
…but by the lives that the Voice helps to change.
The communities it empowers, the opportunities it creates, the justice it delivers, the security it will bring to First Nations people around our country.
I am determined for us to succeed in this great project.
And – working together, with humility, with hope – I am absolutely sure we can.


Thanks, very much, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Can I congratulate on your election as Deputy Speaker.
Can I say to the previous speaker, who is not a bad bloke, but, for goodness sake, to speak about facts when it comes to climate change. Wow.
Yet, we should listen to the facts and we should listen to the science. Because the science is very clear, that we need to act. And the facts are very clear that by acting, we can actually create economic activity and create jobs.
The fact is that in our first month in office, we updated our Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement to reflect the target that we were elected on a 43 per cent by 2030 and to set Australia on the path to net zero by 2050.
We sent a message to the world, to our friends, to business, to our trading partners that for the first time in a decade, Australia has a Government that takes climate change seriously.
We have a Government that understands the opportunity which is there, particularly for the regions in acting on climate change.
Passing this legislation sends a great message to the people of Australia that we are taking real action on climate change. That the decade of inaction and denial is over. That Australia is out of the naughty corner in international forums and we are once again engaging with the global community who understand the importance of acting on climate change and understand that this is also not just an environmental issue, this is the biggest economic transformation that we will see globally in our lifetime, as big and as significant as the Industrial Revolution.
The Industrial Revolution was based upon fossil fuels. It brought great prosperity. But what we know also is that it is changing our climate.
And that is why we need to respond to the science.
Australia knows that by responding, we can create that certainty, drive new jobs, drive new industries, with new technologies and a new era of prosperity for Australian manufacturing.
This bill is also about our national security.
One of the things that we found when it came to the pandemic was that Australia needs to be more self-reliant. We need to be able to stand up for ourselves and our economy, more self-sufficient.
One of the things that cleaner, cheaper energy will do is to drive advanced manufacturing in this country.
We should continue to export our resources that we have. But, where possible, we should value-add. When you value-add, you create jobs, you create economic activity there.
The risks of climate change are here, right now.
This isn't some economic debate in an academic journal.
Australians in recent times have experienced first drought, then bushfires, then flood and then more flood. Australians have experienced the catastrophic consequences on human beings, on families, on communities. But they have also experienced the economic cost of climate change, with whole towns destroyed by fire, with devastation of floods. In some cases, in parts of Sydney, the Member for Macquarie's electorate has been impacted by bushfires and then three floods in a very short period of time.
I don't know what it will take for those opposite to wake up and to say, 'Yes, we were wrong, the science is clear, the science told us that there would be more extreme weather events and they would be more intense and that is what is happening'.
Remember when the bushfires were occurring here and Government members and Ministers were standing up saying, ‘How dare you relate that to climate change?’ That it was being woke.
Well, for the people of regional Australia, for the people who were impacted by those bushfires, whether it be in Gippsland or in Eden-Monaro or in the Blue Mountains or other communities on the north coast of New South Wales, they know the harsh reality of climate change.
That's why we have seen a real transformation in the amount of support that is there for action.
And I thank those on the crossbench who have been prepared to engage constructively legislation, who have been prepared to put forward their ideas within the parameters that we weren't about to change our essential mandate that we had of 43 per cent by 2030, that we understand that when you put in place the mechanisms that are there in the Powering Australia plan, what you will see is the market operating to drive that change through the economy, to drive those jobs through the economy, to drive that change.
We also understand that we need to bring communities with us, to make sure that where there are changes in the nature of work in communities, that communities aren't left behind. And we're determined to do that as well.
That's why, when we signed the new Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC, the Minister and I stood in front of the Business Council of Australia Secretary and President, Australian Industry Group, representing Australian manufacturers, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the National Farmers’ Federation, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Clean Energy Council, the Australian Conservation Foundation and others, including the Greenpeace and others who have come out in support.
What you have is people not quietly, loudly, screaming out for action, saying, 'Enough is enough'. We need to actually get on with the business of transition, of putting in place structures that will encourage that investment to occur.
Because when that investment occurs, we know from the modelling that we did through Reputex, over 600,000 jobs will be created. And half a million of those will be in regional and rural Australia.
We know the incredible opportunity which is there from the change that will happen in our economy.
We see it with innovative Australian businesses. We see it particularly in the regions.
Projects like Sun Cable, which will be the world's largest solar farm, which will use renewable energy there, using - those opposite are a bit obsessed by nuclear - well, there is the largest nuclear power plant, it is up in the sky and it is free.
The Sun Cable project will use solar power to help to power up to and perhaps beyond 20 per cent of Singapore's power needs.
This is what we talk about when we talk about being a renewable energy super power, as Australia can actually export that energy.
And because it's renewable, because it's free, it is not finite. It is infinite what we can achieve in this century, whereby renewables will dominate the century as we go forward.
That's why this is such an opportunity.
The market for batteries, for example, is only just going to grow.
We have already introduced our legislation to make electric vehicles cheaper. We have nickel, copper, lithium and everything that goes into a battery. Why aren't we making things here?
There is not a solar panel in the world that doesn't have some intellectual innovation that was created here in Australia at UNSW or ANU just up the road but we hardly make any of them here.
If we actually open our eyes to the opportunity, we can transform this economy, we can create jobs, we can make such an enormous difference going forward.
I think this is as important a piece of legislation as will come before this Parliament.
It's a matter as well of our responsibility.
And I say this to the young people out there.
When you know that pollution is being created, you have a responsibility to act on it.
Just as we don't accept people just putting their rubbish on the ground so someone else will pick it up, we have a responsibility to not just say we won't worry about emissions because we will worry about the future generations to fix it.
We have a great responsibility to this beautiful island continent that we live on to make sure that we act on climate change.
This Government will.
And then we will tell our children responsibility that we stepped up, we took responsibility and we met the moment.


It is a true honour and pleasure to come here as Prime Minister and congratulate you on your 90th anniversary.
Through nine decades, the ABC has brought us closer together as a nation.
You’ve added to our identity. You’ve added to our voice.
You’ve brought us laughter and tears.
You’ve exposed hard truths and celebrated triumphs.
You’ve brought sunshine into dark corners.
You’ve sought out the bright moments in order to share the light.
As one of the mainstays of Australian life, the ABC has woven so many great strands into the fabric of our nation.
And no one should ever diminish the sheer scale of your achievement in cementing a pair of talking bananas in our national consciousness.
Trust and truth
As the ABC has added to Australia’s collective voice, you’ve done it in part with voices we knew instinctively we could trust.&nbsp; Among them:
James Dibble. Geraldine Doogue. Mark Colvin. Andrew Olle. Caroline Jones. Kerry O’Brien. Liz Jackson. Chris Masters. Norman May. Alan McGilvray. Bill Peach. Richard Morecroft. Leigh Sales. Laura Tingle. Tony Jones. Fran Kelly.
I could list them all night. They have slotted perfectly into the ABC, because the ABC has never been afraid to treat issues with the seriousness they deserve.
Even the briefest rollcall of programs over the years is testament to that: Four Corners. PM. This Day Tonight. Foreign Correspondent. 7.30. And of course Lateline – which I still miss, by the way.
What they have all offered is journalism worthy of the fourth estate.&nbsp; Quality analysis and real reporting. Investigation determined to uncover facts and extract hard truths.
Anyone can skim a quick opinion off the top of their head in a beautifully lit echo chamber.
Not everyone can shine a light so brightly that it burns away the darkness.
Not everyone can report a truth that changes the course of events.
And certainly not everyone is still willing to devote the time and the resources that make such an essential public service possible.
The ABC does. Why? Because it matters. Truth matters. Accountability matters.
If they ever cease to matter, we’ll be left with very little that does.
Confidence in our democratic system is underpinned by strong public organisations contributing accurate information and well-informed, carefully reasoned analysis.
That has to be delivered in an atmosphere of independence, without any form of intimidation – no matter how subtly applied.
And one of those public organisations has to be the ABC.
Democracy is not something we can afford to take for granted.
As we look around the world, we see democracy under sustained attack – either through direct assault or a more insidious erosion.
A strong ABC is an insurance policy against the misinformation and disinformation chipping away at what we hold dear.
Amid the rising tide of social media, the ABC is a beacon of trust. Trust takes a long time to establish – and it takes energy to maintain.
A lifeline in disaster
It is in no small part due to that trust that the ABC has been invaluable during the pandemic. So many Australians turned to you, safe in the knowledge they could rely on the COVID-19 information you made available online.
And you were absolutely crucial during the bushfires and the floods. Commercial broadcasters and community radio have played an important role, but times of disaster have seen our treasured national institution really shine.
When mobile phone towers have been knocked out, or Telstra exchanges submerged, when the power’s gone and people are down to a handful of batteries in a radio …
… you’ve been there, ready with critical information in some very fast-moving, often desperate situations.
There have been moments when you’ve been the difference between life and death. Ponder that. There are people still alive right now because of the ABC.
Keeping the nation connected
As I crisscrossed the country during the election campaign, I was reminded again just how vast our continent is.
There’s something especially comforting about knowing that this great space is humming with voices thanks to the ABC – whether it’s TV, the internet or, especially important, local radio.
If the ABC doesn’t entirely defeat the tyranny of distance, it certainly softens it.
Just as the ABC keeps regional Australia in touch with metropolitan areas and other parts of the country, it also provides important insights from regional and remote Australia to those in the suburbs and inner cities.
There’s nothing quite like sharing our stories to stop us becoming strangers to each other.
We’ve all heard the mantras about the ABC as a haven of inner city elites, repeated with straight faces by critics based … in our inner cities.
I hope those commentators take note of the 48 regional ABC bureaus spread in a great constellation across the country, and the continued existence of Landline.
Likewise your announcement in December of 50 new journalist roles and a trial of five new mini-bureaus across regional Australia.
The ABC has one of the largest dedicated rural reporting workforces in the world. It’s all part of your commitment to being a truly national broadcaster.
Comedy and beyond
As part of our great national conversation, the ABC has also provided a great haven for comedians and satirists and purveyors of absurdity.
Sometimes it’s laughter wrapped around a great truth. Sometimes it’s just laughter.
And sometimes it feels mainly like an exercise to keep the members of the complaints unit in gainful employment.
The Gillies Report. Wendy Harmer. The Doug Anthony Allstars. Elle McFeast. The Late Show. Mad as Hell. Roy and HG. John Clarke and Bryan Dawe. The perfection of Frontline. The confronting accuracy of Utopia.
And I’ll mention my friend Andrew Denton, because he has my phone number.
The thing about the ABC is just how ubiquitous a presence it is in our memories, whether it is drama so compelling it becomes part of our dialogue, or the massive earworm that is the Majestic Fanfare. Or memories of Backchat.
Or Richard Glover’s and Peter FitzSimons’s world-record, 24-hour, one-on-one radio interview – congratulations, Richard, on getting a few words in.
The sheer electricity of Phoenix and Redfern Now.
Richard Roxburgh creating menace in a cardigan in Blue Murder.
Every minute we spent in the garden with Peter Cundall and Costas Georgiadis.
Every back road Heather Ewart has ever taken us down.
The great Energiser Bunny that is Australian Story.
Aunty Jack bringing colour to Australian TV a couple of minutes before any of the commercial stations.
Tony Armstrong reacting to the Socceroos qualifying for the World Cup.
And more reruns of Doctor Who and The Goodies than we ever really knew what to do with – except to just keep watching.
Fire up the amps
Then there’s the ABC’s many years building our national soundtrack.
I believe the fact I am a Triple J fan has been detected along the way. Even before I got into Parliament, I was campaigning for it to become a national station. A truly righteous cause.
Look at what Triple J’s Unearthed alone has achieved in discovering fresh Australian talent. You could put together a pretty solid playlist from the galaxy of Unearthed artists, from Montaigne to Thelma Plum to Gang of Youths.
Imagine the great Australian jukebox without all those voices.
Think of every time Molly Meldrum implored us all to do ourselves a favour.
Think of the night TISM hosted Rage.&nbsp; And for that matter, the night I hosted Rage – an absolute career highlight.
Then of course there’s your role in the birth of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra. You’ve made classical music accessible to a bigger audience and strengthened its place in our nation’s cultural life.
The kids are all right
I don’t want to get on Jemima and Big Ted’s bad side, so I’d also like to talk about the powerhouse of your children’s programming.
As ABC Kids has grown into one of the nation’s most trusted babysitters, you have been capturing hearts across the globe, whether it’s Bananas in Pyjamas, the juggernaut that is the Wiggles, and, of course, Bluey.
There’s an ABC story for you. A family of dogs, one of them voiced by the lead singer from Custard, going out and conquering the world.
Bluey has the second-highest rated TV episode on the International Movie Database, beaten only by Breaking Bad.
Imagine a crossover episode. Things would have turned out better for Walter White if Bandit and Chilli had got involved.
It’s fun, but it’s also important. Without it, an important aspect of the development of cultural identity in young Australians’ formative years would be lost to a tide of imported programming.
Just as in drama, we need other voices and all the perspectives they bring, but not at the expense of our own.
It’s also important that our notion of ourselves has become broader and more inclusive – with the ABC as a driving force.
One example is Little J &amp; Big Cuz, a great SBS and NITV-initiated kids’ show available in a host of Indigenous languages, including Warlpiri and Noongar.
A voice in region
You also help us to share our voice in the region. That was undervalued by the previous government, even trivialised. That was a mistake.
If we don’t have our voice out there – if we cut programming or drop out of shortwave frequencies – others are only too ready to fill the gap.
The ABC is a crucial part of our ongoing conversation with our regional neighbours.
That is why my Government is committed to delivering an Indo-Pacific Broadcasting Strategy that includes increased funding to the ABC to boost Australian content and to project Australian identity, values and interests to the Indo-Pacific region.
On top of every other consideration, it is a prudent investment in our security and national interest.
Amid it all, the ABC has been powered by a spirit of innovation. You were the home of some of the earliest podcasts. You jumped into social media when it was still a novelty. And where would we be without iView?&nbsp;
Pillar of democracy
The health of our democracy is underpinned by truth, and by the strength of our cultural identity – how we see ourselves as a people and what unifies us in all the splendour of our diversity.
A government that chooses to attack a public broadcaster does so motivated by either ideology or fear – or a toxic cocktail of the two.
No government should fear the ABC – unless it fears the truth.
A government of integrity and transparency should welcome the accountability that a strong, properly resourced public broadcaster brings.
There is little that is so at odds with who we are than an ideology that demands a tame public broadcaster, debased to the status of government mouthpiece.
The ABC must always be a public broadcaster, never a state broadcaster.
A government confident of its own ideas and principles should embrace independent questioning as crucial to the democracy it purports to uphold.
But just as the Government should welcome scrutiny from the ABC, so the ABC should welcome scrutiny from the Government. Accountability is a two-way street.
However strong our affection for the ABC, it cannot be blind. No organisation is infallible, and we can all freely admit that Aunty is no exception.
National government and national broadcaster can both share the goals of transparency, accuracy, effectiveness, diversity, and value for money.
When it comes to your money, which of course is from the taxpayers we all serve, the only condition that should be attached is accountability.
I want to take this opportunity to reiterate my Government’s vow to provide the ABC with 5-year funding terms …
… restore $83.7 million in funding to the ABC …
… and review options for delivering greater financial sustainability to safeguard against political interference.
Conclusion
I want us to be a country at home with our own identity. And a part of that is cherishing the ABC and respecting the ABC.
Our ABC.
Our celebration of your nine decades is a celebration of Australian voices, Australian culture.
Our drama. Our music.
Our struggles. Our triumphs.
Our lives. Our society. Our truth.
And just as you help us see ourselves, you let us see the rest of the world through a lens of our own making.
Put it together and it’s something we can all take pride in.
Thank you for having me. It’s always good to come to Ultimo.
I look forward to celebrating your 100th anniversary – as Prime Minister – up the road in Parramatta.


It’s always an honour to speak at the Bush Summit. And it’s a particular pleasure to come to Griffith for the first time as Prime Minister.
This summit is a valuable initiative in the life of the nation and I thank Ben English and The Daily Telegraph for it.
Anything that brings us closer together as a nation is a good thing.
Our common ground will always be the most fertile place to plant our hopes and enhance our future.
I see a better future for all Australians.
And key to that is making sure that we tackle the challenges that just keep on coming, because if we don’t shape the future, the future will shape us.
As I crisscrossed our continent during the election campaign, I was reminded just how vast our country is.
Look at a basic map of Australia and you might just see the capitals marked out – little dots spread out like stars around the fringes of the continent.
It can be easy at first glance to get lost in their glare, but you’d be missing what lies between them: the great, glowing constellations of communities that sustain us as a nation.
Not least here in the Riverina – one of the great food bowls of Australia.
We sometimes talk about “the bush” as if it were homogenous, but that’s a mistake.
Each community has its own character, its own set of challenges.
Farming is both a way of life – and what makes our way of life possible. We should never take it for granted, or downplay the challenges our primary producers face.
There are great successes and times of glorious boom, but a life on the land is not for the fainthearted. Not for nothing did Midnight Oil sing about farmers hanging on by their fingertips.
But the communities that make up the bush aren’t just about farming.
I have had the pleasure of spending time with Australians who raise crops out of the earth, or extract the minerals from it.
Those who raise herds and live by the cycles of other species.
Those who drive the harvesters or painstakingly pick fruit with their hands.
But also those who teach, who treat the sick, or run a business.
The tradies and the artisans, the artists and the posties.
Those who’ve been here for generations, or who’ve moved from the city in search of a better life under a bigger sky.
And those who’ve come from other countries in search of a better life, and enriched their new homes here in the process.
All of you work in so many ways to make your community just that: a community. And these communities do so much to hold Australia together.
But there are major challenges, ranging from biosecurity and climate change, to water and infrastructure. Some have been decades in the making, some are looming suddenly.
I want to talk to you about the solutions to those challenges – but also about the opportunities those challenges contain.
Biosecurity
Just how much we depend on the strength and security of our bio-borders should never be underestimated. That we have the best in the world is something we can be proud of. But nothing is infallible.
As COVID-19 so powerfully emphasised, when the threat of disease arises, we have to move quickly.
As an island nation, we are blessed with a big natural advantage. But as we’ve seen, it is an advantage easily squandered.
Right now, we are focused on the threats of foot-and-mouth and lumpy skin disease.
Last week I visited Raglan Station near Rockhampton and heard directly from cattle farmer Ryan Olive and AgForce Queensland’s Will Wilson about the biosecurity challenges we face.
A foot and mouth outbreak could cost the Australian economy $80 billion.
It’s a devastating number calculated not just in dollars, but in mental health and in the very viability of communities.
The best way to stop FMD reaching Australia is to stop its spread through Indonesia.
That’s why Agriculture Minister Murray Watt’s first overseas visit as Minister was to Indonesia.
He is leading important work with our friend, neighbour and trading partner on fighting diseases together.
As part of that fight, Australia has provided expert veterinary assistance to Indonesia along with over 430,000 vaccines for lumpy skin, to be followed soon by 1 million vaccines for FMD, and additional biosecurity funding.
We’ve dialled up protection measures at our borders. More biosecurity officers, detector dogs, sanitisation mats at airports and biosecurity response zones.
We’re screening all mail from Indonesia and China, and risk-profiling all passengers from Indonesia.
This is the strongest biosecurity response in our nation’s history, supported by improvements to our readiness in the event of an outbreak here.
That includes a new Exotic Animal Diseases Preparedness Taskforce to ensure that Australia is better prepared in the event of an outbreak.
It’s not the only biosecurity challenge we face. Australian honey producers are grappling with the arrival of varroa mite.
In consultation with the industry, we have in place an $18 million compensation package for registered beekeepers.
We are always best placed when we plan rather than just react, and at our strongest when we work together.
That’s why we’re working closely with industry, the states and territories, on our response to these critical biosecurity issues.
Climate change
When it comes to climate change, the message I delivered at the 2019 Bush Summit still stands: anyone looking for a true understanding of climate change should look for it here.
Farmers see its effects every day. There is no ideological opt-out clause – you live with it.
You recognise what is happening and are getting on with the job of dealing with it – because this is your home, this is your workplace and your livelihood.
One of the things we’re seeing is the change in agricultural practices as our understanding of our unique environment grows.
And a key part of that understanding comes from a relationship with the land, sometimes built over multiple generations.
It is a relationship found on the knowledge that the old practice of environmental exploitation is the deadest of dead ends, and that the greatest reward lies in a sense of stewardship of the land.
In this there are echoes of the stewardship by First Nations people across this continent, and the knowledge they built over millennia.
As you grapple with climate change, and the intensifying cycles of flood, fire and drought, you deserve nothing less than a Government that has your back.
In that spirit, I announce today that the Government will deliver $75 million post-disaster resilience to areas across New South Wales devastated by the February-March floods.
Delivered via the Emergency Response Fund, which sat idle under the previous government, this money will go towards:

A flood impacts and risk management measures report;
A levee assessment and improvement program;
Valley level flood risk management assessments;
Flood warning infrastructure and systems and associated community awareness;
Flood mitigation infrastructure and voluntary house raising.

It will cover all 62 LGAs affected by the February-March floods.
Biodiversity
As we move toward net zero, we are creating a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity – not just to protect Australia’s natural environment but to kickstart a nationwide restoration.
We will introduce legislation to underpin a market for biodiversity. This will operate in a similar way to our current carbon crediting legislation.
The markets for biodiversity and carbon credits will operate in parallel, both regulated by the Clean Energy Regulator.
As companies look to invest in carbon offsetting projects like tree planting, we need to make sure there is a path for farmers and the environment to benefit.
We need to protect waterways, provide habitat for native species, reduce erosion, protect topsoil, improve drought resilience and create shelter for livestock.
Placing a market value on biodiversity helps us achieve that.
Farmers could receive biodiversity certificates for planting mixed native species and managing their existing, remnant vegetation.
This is a chance to support farmers using their knowledge and expertise in a way that benefits us all. A chance to shape a better future.
Water
I’ve spent time in flood-ravaged communities this year and I will never forget what I saw, or the stories I heard. Homes gone, livelihoods destroyed.
And yet, perversely, as we talk about all that water, the last drought is still so fresh and raw in many people’s memories.
As the world’s driest inhabited continent, we have a precarious relationship with water. We often have either too little, or far too much.
Managing water well is crucial for Australia’s future, and there are big challenges ahead.
The Murray Darling is Australia’s biggest and most important river system. Its future is critical for the livelihoods and welfare of millions of Australians.
Secure water supplies help regions like the Riverina feed and clothe us – and many people around the world. We must get this right.
Through the National Water Grid Fund, my Government is investing in nationally significant water infrastructure that addresses water security and quality issues.
Just up the road from here, the Commonwealth has committed $4.5 million to the West Wyalong Water Reliability project.
As well improving water flow and pressure in West Wyalong, it will support the expansion of agribusiness and mining in the Griffith area, and open up opportunities for new investment across the region.
The government is broadening the investment framework for the National Water Grid Fund to support projects that secure essential town water supplies in regional and remote communities.
This commitment will provide greater investment in water security across the country, in partnership with states and territories, so that all communities can access safe and secure water.
Communication
Like all the work that Labor has put into – and will continue putting into – improving road and rail, improving communications will also chip away at the tyranny of distance.
The Government has already delivered $480 million in funding to upgrade NBN Co’s fixed-wireless network.
The Government has also committed to expand full-fibre access to a further 1.5 million homes and businesses.
This is about productivity. And it’s about ensuring that all Australians – no matter where you live – have access to world-class digital infrastructure.
It will make it easier for a whole range of businesses to be able to leave the congestion and expense of big cities and set up in regional towns.
And one of the pay-offs is that as regional economies diversify, they will no longer be hostage to the whims of the market or the fate of a commodity.
Economic diversity means strength and resilience.
The Government has also committed to expand on farm connectivity, to support the productivity and safety of our farmers, by enabling expansion of wireless connectivity from the homestead to the field. 
This will enable more farmers to fully utilise sensor and connected-machinery technology to improve efficiency.
Just as with rail and bitumen, improved digital infrastructure strengthens the nation in so many ways.
In remote areas, it can be a lifeline. And perhaps most important of all, it makes possible the great hum of conversation across Australia, binding us closer together.
There’s nothing quite like sharing our stories to stop us becoming strangers to each other.
Conclusion
No one needs a fairweather friend. You need a government that stands with you in good times and in bad.
A government that knows true solutions are not imposed. Instead, they are found in dialogue, consultation and collaboration – with communities and the local councils that serve them.
Throughout my time in public life, a lot of my energy was devoted to regional and rural Australia – not least as Minister for Infrastructure and Regional Development. I am proud of what I was able to do in with roads, rail and aviation.
What excites me now is the prospect of doing so much more.
I haven’t taken on any extra portfolios this time – being Prime Minister should cover it.
But even in my new role I will be guided by the same energies that have always guided to me – looking at the evidence and listening to expertise, and working through partnerships built on transparency, fairness, honesty and respect.
That collaboration is critical to the commitment I made on the evening of 21 May.
To represent the interests of all Australians, no matter where they live.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
And I’m proud to lead a government advancing the implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
The great privilege, the great opportunity and the solemn responsibility of government is putting our ambition for the country into action.
Converting the promises of a campaign, into the progress of a nation.
Writing our vision for Australia’s future into the laws of the land.
Our government is only 100 days into this journey - but we are resolved on the destination of a better future.
We are focused on building a fair-wage, strong-growth, high-productivity economy.
An Australia where working hard means you can pay the bills, support your family, save for the future and achieve your aspirations.
An Australia where everyone can trust in quality services:

Strong Medicare
Affordable child care
Decent aged care
And a National Disability Insurance Scheme that fulfils its promise.&nbsp;

An Australia where investments in education and training and skills and housing and infrastructure and technology mean the doors of opportunity are open to everyone, in every part of our country
I recognise we’re facing challenging times right now.
I know a lot of people are doing it tough.
But I’m optimistic about our country.
I believe in the Australian people and I’m energised by the work of building a better future.
And after a wasted decade, we are not wasting a day.
From the moment we were sworn in, we’ve been working to clear-away the mess and chaos of a government who dealt in short term political stitch-ups, not long-term solutions.
We’ve hit the ground running:

Restoring security to the national energy grid
Delivering support to flood-affected communities
Implementing the strongest-ever biosecurity measures to protect our agriculture sector from foot-and-mouth disease
Establishing the Defence Strategic Review to make sure that our defence force has the capability to meet our changing national security environment
Backing a pay rise for workers on the minimum wage
Lifting our climate change ambition
AND rebuilding Australia’s reputation in the region and in our international relations.

We’ve also moved to change the way that government functions.
Because we understand governing is bigger than cleaning-up after your predecessors and more than reacting to events.
Governing can’t just be an exercise in getting through – to the end of the day, to the other side of the story, to the next election.
Government has a responsibility to plan for the future, to build for the long-term, to implement the reforms that arm people with every chance to fulfil their potential.
Not change for the sake of it, reforms that help people lead better lives.
Central to all of this, fundamental to everything we seek to achieve, is a fairer, stronger, more resilient and more rewarding economy.
And getting there - building that high-productivity, strong-growth, fair wage future - depends on understanding where Australia is now and what’s brought us to this point.
I see it in phases.
We’ve been through the pandemic response.
We are in the middle of the recovery.
And reform will be the key to renewal.
From response and recovery – to reform and renewal.
The guiding focus of government action for the coming years.
If you think back to March 2020, virtually the sole priority of every level of government was containing the pandemic.
That meant border closures, lockdowns, restrictions, and billions of dollars in support to try to&nbsp; take the edge off the economic consequences.
There’s plenty about those times we would happily forget - but there are vital lessons we have to learn.
It was a race – and in too many ways Australia wasn’t ready.
We were left vulnerable – not just by complacency and a failure to plan, but by years of cuts and wilful neglect to the very services and skills we needed most.
We found ourselves economically exposed, hanging on the end of the global supply chain.
And we saw the harm of petty partisanship – the damage done by the Federal Government stoking division with the States.
Now, whatever we might wish, Covid isn’t gone or forgotten.
Our health system, our hospitals – and our extraordinary health care workforce - are still under tremendous strain.
We continue to encourage all Australians to get their third and fourth dose of the vaccine.
And we’ve made it a priority to co-operate with State and Territory leaders and the health experts to provide support and resources where they are most needed.
But, clearly, no-one is going back to the ‘response’ phase.
Australia is already in the ‘recovery’ phase - and that’s presenting its own economic challenges.
Including significant and unpredictable supply and demand imbalances which are driving up costs, for businesses and families.
Our immediate priority as a Labor government is shoring up the economy to give families, households and businesses the security and certainty they need.
There are also many industries and small businesses that were effectively switched off at the wall and are struggling to re-boot.
We see that with hospitality and tourism and international education.
And then there are sectors that were already under pressure from cuts and neglect, which have been pushed to breaking point over the last two years.
Aged care. Child care. Schools. Hospitals.
Through hard times, Australians have been magnificent: resourceful, resilient, always looking out for others..
We saw small businesses innovate and evolve; investing in a decade’s worth of technological change in one year.
We saw workers adapt and thrive, proving flexibility and productivity can go together.
The success stories are a continuing inspiration.
But there were heavy sacrifices too.
Teachers reinventing learning for our children, practically overnight.
Health care and aged care workers being asked to carry on when so much about Covid was unknown.
It’s no wonder people are exhausted, it’s no surprise so many teachers and nurses and carers are thinking about leaving their vocation.
In the pressure cooker of the Covid response – educators and the care and community sector were hailed as ‘essential’ to the strength of our economy, to the wellbeing of our society.
But the fact is, this has always been true.
There’s nothing more important than educating our children, or caring for our family members when they are sick, or looking after our parents when they grow old.
A healthy economy depends on healthy people.
And education is our most powerful weapon against disadvantage, the best long-term generator of economic growth and productivity.
Over the next decade, we are going to need more educators and carers and nurses, in every part of our system. We won’t do that with broken institutions and burnt-out staff.
And whether it’s education or skills or health care or aged care we can’t just stem the bleeding and hope for the best.
We can’t return to business-as-usual, when we know business-as-usual was simply not good enough.
We have to aim higher than recovery. That’s why I say we need reform to achieve renewal.
To drive the change we need in the here and now, but always with a view to how we can shape the future.
This is the core of the economic plan we took to the election:

Cleaner and cheaper energy
Better skills and training
Cheaper child care
And a future made in Australia

My team and I are taking on the challenges of today – and we are building for the opportunities of tomorrow.
We are cleaning-up the mess of the last decade - and we are preparing Australia for success in the next decade.
Whether it’s wages or skills, national security or energy, we will act with urgency when it is required.
But we will never take our eyes off the big prize - the future. The chance to secure a new generation of prosperity and fairness for all Australians.
Good governments – reforming, Labor Governments - do both.
Face-up to the urgent problems of the here and now - and take Australia forward.
To not just imagine a better future, but set about creating one.
And the way we do that - the ‘how’ - matters too.
In my last speech at the National Press Club three days before the election, I said the best way to make progress is to bring people together.
And we are giving life to that statement this week.
I know there’s a school of political thought that views co-operation as capitulation, consensus as weakness.
I know there are those who think that everything has to be about conflict.
But Australians have conflict fatigue.
Australia has lost nearly a decade to the inertia that division produces.
We’ve seen the damage this does to the economy, the toll it takes on the country:

Skills and apprenticeships degraded by cuts to TAFE and training
National infrastructure consumed by political pork barrelling
Australia falling to 70th in the world for women’s economic participation and opportunity
Climate action and energy policy hostage to denial and delay

And a workplace relations system that’s not delivering productivity gains for business or pay rises for workers. These aren’t abstract problems. Australians are paying a real price.
Of course, there are international factors driving up the cost-of-living - but it’s also clearly the legacy of:

A decade of wage suppression and insecure work, and too many Australians being locked out of the labour force
Years of undercutting bulk-billing
Goading manufacturers into leaving the country, so we make less here
Supply chains neglected for a decade
And chaos on energy policy driving up power bills

Not only does a culture of division and dysfunction and conflict create these kind of urgent problems in the short-term, it stops our country building for the long term.
If your priority is scoring day-to-day political points, then the future loses out.
This is why our government is focused on solutions, not arguments.
The Jobs and Skills Summit we’re convening this week is evidence of this.
It signals we are willing to look at the hard questions, to face-up to the big challenges, to embrace the need for real reform.
To solve widespread skills shortages that act as a handbrake on our economy to remove the barriers that prevent people entering the workforce to make sure productivity gains translate into rising incomes for Australians.
And the Summit shows we’re determined to do it by bringing people together, getting everyone in the room:

Premiers and Chief Ministers
Business and industry leaders, union representatives.
A cross-section of civil society and community groups.

This week’s gathering will be the culmination of more than 100 pre-summit consultations that Ministers and government members have conducted all over the country, drawing on input from thousands of Australians looking at everything from improving economic participation for people with disability, to addressing our migration challenges, to boosting the numbers of Australians training in new technologies.
The Treasurer has published a clear set of ground rules, so we’re not starting with a blank of piece of paper, we’re working to a plan.
I’m hopeful there will be some immediate actions coming out of the Summit that we can work to implement – but Friday isn’t the end of the story.
The Government is preparing an Employment White Paper and this week’s discussions and ideas will feed into that important document.
For us, the principle is straightforward: we want every Australian to have the opportunity and skills to find a secure job, with fair pay, in a safe workplace.
Not a hand-to-mouth existence where bills chase you from shift to shift - but a job that helps you build a life and plan for the future.
The policies we took to the election were central to this:

Making job security – and gender pay equity - objectives of the Fair Work Act
Making wage theft a crime
Closing the loopholes that allow firms to use labour hire as a tool for driving down pay, rather than as a source of specialist skills
Investing in fee-free TAFE, additional university places, and creating new apprenticeships
And creating Expert Panels focused on pay equity for the care and community sector.

In our first 100 days we’ve argued for - and secured – a 5.2% pay rise for minimum wage workers, the heroes of the economic frontline.
We have made a submission to the Fair Work Commission in support of higher pay for aged care workers.
We’ve introduced legislation for 10 days’ paid family and domestic violence leave – because no woman should ever have to choose between their safety and their job.
But after a decade in which low wages were deployed as a ‘deliberate design feature’ – we want wages rising and productivity increasing across the board.
And after 30 years in which the gender gap has hardly budged, we need serious improvement in economic equality for women.
This is going to take more than legislative change, we need a culture change too: a revitalising of bargaining and negotiation and give-and-take, new leadership on respect and safety and fairness for working women.
This is why we’re bringing employers and employees to the table this week in Canberra, to elevate and accelerate these conversations.
Of course, none of us imagine that a two-day summit will entirely fix wages and job security.
I know that when we wrap up on Friday afternoon:

There will still be a trillion dollars of debt
Australian families will still be struggling with cost-of-living pressures
Businesses big and small will still need help with staff and skills

But for the first time in a long time, I believe we will be moving to agreement on how to solve these problems – rather than arguing over who is to blame for them.
So, yes, I want to see progress on skills and training, on wages and apprenticeships.
But the biggest single outcome I’m hoping for is the beginning of a new culture of co-operation.
A renewed understanding – between unions and industry and small business and government and community groups that building a stronger, fairer and more productive economy is our shared responsibility – and our common interest.
This is how we get employers and employees and small business negotiating for genuine win-win outcomes.
It’s how we make the Federation work better, lifting efficiency, improving services and boosting productivity.
This is how we sweep aside the persistent, structural barriers that prevent women from securing decent jobs and careers and enjoying financial security over their lives.
It’s how we change the way Australia looks at child care – as an economic reform which promotes inclusion and growth – not a babysitting service.
An economic reform that delivers benefits to two generations of Australians, simultaneously:

The best start in life for our children
Flexible support for modern families
And a multi-billion dollar boost to productivity and participation, without adding to inflation.

It’s how we seize the transformative opportunity of Australia as a clean energy superpower:

More affordable, more reliable renewable energy powering a new generation of advanced manufacturing and value-adding.
Australian workers, Australian technology, Australian research and Australian resources taking the world to net zero.

And it’s how we build the sense of ownership and common purpose our country needs to achieve real and lasting change – in everything from early education to aged care.
I’m not saying this will be easy, or come without compromise - but I want the Australian people to know that we are up for this challenge.
Put simply: we’ve having a crack, not just occupying the space.
Governments can build infrastructure, they can create institutions – and they can also draw on our national values.
Governments can foster a culture of reform and progress and co-operation, nourish a spirit of shared effort for fair reward.
Whether it’s the Summit, or the Parliament, or National Cabinet, or here with the Canberra Press Gallery, we’re never going to agree on everything.
We’re never going to have 100 per cent of people, 100 per cent happy with every decision and outcome.
But I know we’ll get more done – and we’ll do it better – if we disagree constructively, debate respectfully, look at the substance of issues rather than question motives, and together search for solutions.
Good government must drive this culture, to make the case for reforms.
In order to do that we need to rebuild trust in government.
My colleagues and I don’t share the strange self-loathing of our predecessors.
Raging against the role of government, while in government.
Obsessing over secrecy.
Having to be shamed into doing the bare minimum at the last possible moment.
An ideology that meant even as they made government bigger, the Liberals and Nationals showed no interest in making government work better.
One hundred days ago, on the 21st May, the Australian people voted for a better future.
Australians have placed their trust in our new Labor Government.
We are determined to repay that trust - by demonstrating a commitment to transparency and integrity.
Holding ourselves to a higher standard of behaviour than ‘it’s not illegal’.
Creating a National Anti-Corruption Commission, with real power and authority.
And examining brutal failures of government services, like Robodebt, to make sure that kind of betrayal of vulnerable people can never happen again.
Above all, we recognise that renewing people’s trust in government requires us to prove government can deliver for people.
I know good government can change lives.
But I understand that many Australians feel like government doesn’t work for them; that politics is obsessed with the short term.
And – frankly - the only way to change that, is to deliver on what matters to the Australian people.
That means taking action on cost-of-living:

Cheaper medicine
Cheaper child care
More affordable housing
More renewable energy to bring down power bills.

And it means implementing the reforms which create opportunities, lift living standards and include people in the benefits of our national progress.
We’ve been in government for 100 days.
But my colleagues and I are not here to mark time.
We’re here to build the strong-growth, fair-wage, high productivity economy that will deliver the next generation of prosperity for Australians.
Achieving this - moving beyond response and recovery to reform and renewal - will take hard work and tough decisions.
It will demand co-operation. It will require us to persevere in the face of tough times.
But I have unlimited faith in the people of Australia and their ability to rise to the challenge.
At the most basic level, three things got us through the pandemic.
One, closing our borders.
Two, our public health system and vaccinations.
And three, the resilience and resolve of Australians.
We can’t close our borders to the challenges we are facing now.
We can’t vaccinate ourselves against economic competition in our globalised world; we are not immune to evolving technology.
We can’t isolate ourselves from climate change, or the national security challenges in our region.
But our most powerful advantage, our greatest asset remains: the Australian people.
And investing in people is how we make economic reform work.
It’s the answer to the productivity question, and it’s the foundation for long-term renewal.
This the heart of our agenda – responding to the challenges of today, reforming for the opportunities of tomorrow:

More secure work and fair wages in safe workplaces
Proper funding for every stage of education and training and skills
Real action on equality for women
Backing the services which empower people to fulfil their potential – Medicare, the NDIS, aged care
And cleaner, cheaper energy which will power a new generation of jobs in communities across the country particularly in our regions.

This is how Labor Governments change the country: investing in people’s potential, rewarding their hard work, supporting their aspirations.
If we co-operate, if we work together, if we act with purpose and urgency and ambition then we won’t just ride-out these tough times, we will be well on our way to a better future.
That better future remains our light on the hill.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
We are here over the next two days striving for agreement, for the good of our country.
And I hope we can begin by agreeing that there is so much for our country to gain from answering the generous, patient call of the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
Sometime, together we will all be lifted up as a nation. Thirty years ago this wouldn’t have happened, now it happens as a matter of course. And we will with a Voice to Parliament enshrined in our constitution we will all wonder why it hadn’t happened thirty years ago as well.
To the Premiers and Chief Ministers, welcome.
To my colleagues, parliamentary colleagues from across the spectrum, welcome as well.
To all of our friends who are here from all of Australian society, welcome.
Friends, colleagues, fellow Australians.
Welcome to Parliament House.
Thank you for bringing your energy, your ideas and your leadership to this National Jobs and Skills Summit.
The two days ahead of us have been shaped by more than 100 different roundtables and consultations, undertaken by Ministers and government members, across every portfolio, involving thousands of Australians.
And I also want to acknowledge all the conversations that businesses and industry and unions and community groups have engaged in, and led themselves, working to bring shared principles and concrete proposals to this gathering.
I thank you for the spirit but also the substance of your contribution.
And - in the same vein - I am very pleased to announce that yesterday at National Cabinet, we reached an agreement between the Commonwealth and every State and Territory Government to create an additional 180,000 fee-free TAFE places, for 2023.
This is a $1.1 billion package – and we’ve agreed to share the costs between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories.
We will continue to co-operate on the design of a long-term National Skills Agreement, and indeed we have agreed to the principles that will shape it.
But in recognition of the urgent challenges facing our nation, we are taking action now – with a billion-dollar training blitz, driven by public TAFE.
We want to see more Australians gaining the skills they need to find good jobs, in areas of national priority.
And I want this to be the beginning – not the end – of the progress that we see on skills and training over the next two days.
Because it’s my great hope that this Jobs and Skills Summit marks the beginning of a new culture of co-operation.
A new focus on working together, to deal with the urgent challenges our economy is facing.
And new efforts to build together for the long-term, so Australians can seize and own the opportunities of the next decade.
The Summit’s agenda reflects the challenges that the industries and businesses and people you represent are dealing with every day.

Staff and skill shortages
Missing links in supply chains
Growing demand on our caring and community sector
An energy grid past its use by date
Structural barriers that deny women equality - in opportunity, in pay and in financial security
And the squeeze of stagnant wages and rising living costs.
These challenges are significant – but more than that, they are urgent.

In a few moments, the Treasurer will speak to the combined pressure that these forces are placing on the Budget and the economy.&nbsp;
And, once Jim has done that, I respectfully ask that all of us take the context as read and assume that our respective starting positions – our opening bids if you like - are known and understood.
We’ve got a bit under two days.
Let’s promise each other that we won’t spend them playing our greatest hits, re-hashing the same arguments or re-heating old conflicts.
We have not gathered here to dig deeper trenches on the same old battlefield.
Our goal and indeed our responsibility – all of us – is to carry the conversation to the common ground, where the work is done and the progress is made.
Building a stronger, fairer economy – on the broadest possible foundation.
Of course, I don’t expect us to solve every problem and fix every issue before tomorrow afternoon.
Nor do I imagine everyone will be happy with every outcome.
Compromises will need to be negotiated, sacrifices will need to be made.
But if we can get it right, if we can seek out the points of consensus rather than reasons for disagreement the results will certainly be worth it. I’ve said before, Australians have conflict fatigue, it’s is one of the reasons I’m standing here as Prime Minister in a new government. They want politics to operate differently and we intend to lead in that regard. And I must say that the way the National Cabinet is functioning with agreement across the political spectrum is an example of what we are searching for and what is being achieved already. Increased productivity, we need stronger wages, we need a workforce ready with the skills and smarts and support to succeed in the years ahead.
This is the opportunity that is in front of us – but more than that it is our responsibility as leaders.
The responsibility we owe to the people who don’t have a seat in this room:

Nurses on their way home from the night shift.
Farmers up before the sun
Small business owners, there long before opening, staying well after close.&nbsp;
Child care workers, not only doing a vital job in the face of pressures and shortages – but making it possible for millions of other people to do their jobs too.
The workers in this very building who are making this event possible, the cleaners and caterers and security staff.
All those Australians stacking shelves, cleaning offices, building homes, moving freight around the country – these are the heroes of the pandemic they deserve more than our thanks, they deserve us putting our shoulder to the wheel to make sure they have the opportunity that is this great country’s promise.

The Australian economy is not some abstract concept, removed from people’s lives. It is about them.&nbsp;
Australians, Australian workers are our economy.&nbsp;
Educators and carers, miners and producers and farmers and tradies, tourism operators and hospitality workers, entrepreneurs and innovators, start-ups and small business owners.
Every Australian holds a stake in the outcome of our discussions.
Every Australian deserves our very best efforts to seek consensus, to achieve progress.
And when we work together to unlock the new growth and broader opportunity and productivity gains our nation needs – every Australian should share in the benefits.
Including people who have been trapped in long-term unemployment or held back by disadvantage.
Including older Australians, who want to get back into work and have a great deal to give.
Including people with disability, being empowered to fully participate in careers in every part of Australian society.
Including our Veterans, people of extraordinary capacity, looking for someone to recognise their potential.
Because the work of building a stronger economy should include everyone it should lift everyone up.
Now - we’ve all got work to do - so I will finish with this.
When Bob Hawke brought the National Economic Summit to the old building down the hill in 1983, he concluded his opening remarks with a quote from John Curtin, summoning ‘the inherent quality’ of the Australian people to face the crisis ahead.
That summit of 1983 is as many years removed from us, as the Second World War was from them - just think about that.
Time, trade and technology mean we confront a very different set of challenges in our globalised world, the world has been transformed.
We don’t have the same levers to pull.
But the ‘inherent quality’ of the Australian people remains a constant.
Through all the hardship and heartache and uncertainty and disaster of the past few years, Australians have been magnificent.
Australians have shown – time and again - they can rise to any challenge.
Businesses did it. Unions did it. Australians did it. They got us through the pandemic.&nbsp;
So, let all of us, as leaders and representatives, rise to this moment.
Let’s work together.
Let’s listen to each other.
Let’s make every effort to turn agreement into action, for the benefit of all Australians.
Thank you very much.


Friends, I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we are meeting and pay my respect to elders past and present, and thank the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are here with us today who have contributed and made this forum just so much better through your input.
I do want to now return the favour and ask everyone to thank Jim Chalmers.
This has been an event which has been far more successful than we could have hoped, and to Jim and your team, to all of my ministerial colleagues who’ve done so much hard work, to your staff and to all of the dedicated public servants.
I said at the Press Club this week, being a public servant is an honourable profession. And one of the things that we have to do as a new government is to rebuild the public service. Rebuild it as a body that can give frank and fearless advice.
Rebuild it as a body that is given respect and ensure that it can deliver the sort of advice and delivery of services that Australians expect.
And it is one of the things that I believe has characterised the first 100 days of the government I’m proud to lead is Ministers going to their Departments and talking to their people and the people in those departments on the ground, and engaging with them and encouraging them to be the best that they can be.
And all of those people are deserving of our thanks. But most importantly I want to thank all of you – the participants at the summit.
For attending in good faith.
For leaving old disagreements behind.
For contributing and presenting with conviction and depth.
For challenging our assumptions, pushing us to think.
And for engaging and listening with that respect.
Respect for one another and respect for the people you represent.
The people this Summit was designed to serve are the everyday Australians whose courage and initiative and hard-work help power our national prosperity.
I believe that people will look back on this summit, and they mightn’t remember all of the 36 points that have come out of this two day process and the lead up to it, as outcomes.
But I tell you what, they’ll remember the first time there was a national gathering of this sort that had 50% representation of men and 50% representation of women.
Not just as people who were here participating and listening to debate but as presenters and chairs as contributes.
They’ll look back and remember the diversity that was there. The fact that the group represented, by having working people talk about their experience, people with disabilities talking about their own experience, as people did in that remarkable discussion this morning.
Having people that are incredibility successful business people.
It’s a big deal to come and give a presentation if that is not the thing that you do for a living like myself and my colleagues, in front of not only the Cabinet but CEOs of major global and Australian based companies, of people they see on TV from time to time.
I thank the courage of those people who came and spoke out of their usual comfort zone, because you enriched these two days by your contributions.
There has been a great diversity of perspectives, but I think also, a striking sense of unity. Of common purpose.
When we had the discussion before about workers in the AG sector, I think it’s fair to say that Daniel Walton and David Littleproud haven’t always been on the same page, but essentially they were on the same page about what was needed.&nbsp;
A great example, I think, of the good will that’s been here. That sense of common purpose.
I was talking with my colleagues a bit earlier – we were saying that across every panel, every presenter in every session was totally clear about the scale of the challenges we are facing.
No-one sought to downplay, or explain away the circumstances in which we find ourselves.
And yet the prevailing atmosphere over the past two days has not been one of dejection or frustration or resignation.
Instead, there has been a powerful sense of hope and optimism – a belief in the transformative opportunities this moment presents for our country.
And above all, a determination to seize these opportunities, to make change work for everyone across our country.&nbsp;
We owe it to each other – and we owe it to the Australian people – to carry that spirit forward.
The discussions, the engagement, the shared principles – all of this is greatly encouraging, of course it is.
But the real test, the true measure of these days, will be if we can look back and say that as a result of what we agreed here:

More young Australians found apprenticeships, or enrolled in TAFE
More small businesses could find and keep the staff they need to grow
More people turned good ideas into successful companies
More workers were able to sit down with their employers and negotiate for better pay and greater security
And more Australians who have been locked-out of the economy, were given a way in.

If we can look back and say that these conversations helped open the doors of opportunity:

for people with disability
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians
for First Australians
for Veterans
for older Australians
for people who have suffered the dislocation of long-term unemployment

Then this Summit will have done more than exceed our expectations - it will have helped change the country for the better.&nbsp;
I can promise you, the government is determined to see these discussions make a difference.
I want to draw attention to three areas giving proof to that:
Firstly: we are boosting our national skills – with 180,000 fee-free TAFE places to launch a training blitz from 1 January 2023.
More Australians learning the skills they need, for the jobs they want.
Helping more young people learn a trade and build a rewarding career.
And alongside that, tackling the immediate shortages across the country, with an increase in the skilled migration intake to 195,000. But something in which there is clear consensus from people in this room,&nbsp; that we need a more straightforward and certain pathway to permanent residency.
And I believe there’s a very important and genuine consensus in this room and around our country that migration should not simply be about bringing in workers in to fill gaps, it should be about helping people put down roots, to join in the life of our country towns and suburbs.
To make a home, to raise a family, to join our Australian family – strengthening our economy and our great multicultural society.
Secondly, I’m very pleased we will be making up to $575 million available within the National Housing Infrastructure Facility to invest in social and affordable housing and to attract more investment from private capital – such as superannuation funds – into housing.&nbsp;
Because so many opportunities in life, depend on having a secure roof over your head.
And thirdly, picking up on the very good discussions we’ve had around increasing workforce participation for older Australians.
Today, I am pleased to announce that the Government will act to provide age pensioners with a new $4000 Work Bonus income bank credit.
This will mean older Australians who want to work can earn more income before their pension is reduced.
And we will move quickly to change the law, so that instead of pensioners having their payments cancelled after 12 weeks if they exceed the income limit, they won’t have to reapply for payments for up to two years.
And they will retain the Pensioner Concession Card for two years as well.
Some older Australians stay in the workforce longer because they have to – and some do it because they want to.
Because they love what they do – because their job is part of their identity, a source of friendship and stimulation and pride.
It’s been another great point of agreement to emerge from this Summit.
All of us – federal and state and local government, employers, unions -&nbsp; we can all do better at valuing older Australians for their wisdom, their experience and the contribution they make to our country.&nbsp;
A final point I want to make, before we conclude.
Michelle O’Neil noted yesterday that at the 1983 Economic Summit, 96 out of the 97 participants were men.
Just think about how far we have come as a nation, the steps that have been fought for. Let’s be clear – the doors that have been kicked down in order to advance gender equality in this country.
We of course have more to do, but I do hope that the participation and the coverage that this Summit has received will mean that when other gathering are held from now on – you don’t have to get 50% but you have to come close – we exceeded it this time.
If there are unrepresentative bodies, people will ask why.
If the National Jobs and Skills Summit could do it, why couldn’t you? And I think that will not really be needed as a sort of pressure because the participants that I have spoken to over the last two days and last night’s dinner have all spoken about what a difference it has made.
How it uplifted the very basis and culture in the room over the last couple of days.
Friends, we came here to find agreement. We have. Perhaps across a greater range of areas than we might have imagined or hoped.
Let us leave here resolved to build on this foundation.
And let the legacy of this gathering, be a stronger economy that works better:
For workers and business.
For the regions and the suburbs.
For women and men.
For young and old.
For all Australians, for the years to come.
This is how we turn what was a theme of my election campaign of ‘a better future’ into not an objective for a political party, but into a reality for a nation. A nation that can have a better future.
That the prospect of achieving that is far greater if we’ve got everyone heading in one direction. Or where we’re not completely in agreement about heading in that direction, we’re at least respectful and not questioning the motives.
Engaging, talking through differences, coming up with solutions rather than arguments.
If we continue that then we can realise the enormous potential we have as a nation.
The potential I spoke about yesterday when I opened the Summit and what I conclude with as it closes here.
Thank you.


I acknowledge traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
In that same spirit of respect and reconciliation – I want to acknowledge the public support so many of you here tonight have already given to enshrining an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice to Parliament, in our Constitution.
A Voice to Parliament is a matter of common courtesy and common sense.
It pays respect to the extraordinary privilege we have to share this ancient continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
And it recognises the right of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to have a say on the decisions that affect their lives.
Nothing more – but nothing less.
This straightforward act of Australian decency and Australian fairness should be above politics.
A shared national achievement.
And for a referendum to succeed, we will need to recruit and embrace every advocate and ally and supporter, from ‘every point under the southern sky’.&nbsp;
It’s heartening - and fitting - that leaders from the likes of BHP and Rio have already made such worthwhile contributions to this debate.
Because just as our history didn’t begin in 1788, mining in Australia didn’t begin with the Gold Rush.
First Nations people were digging for ochre in Wilgie Mia in the west - and trading it with people in the east, over 30,000 years ago.
And, alongside the conversation about constitutional change…
…I appreciate your industry is working hard to improve and strengthen your relationships with First Nations landholders, communities and organisations.
Deepening these partnerships is so important - to protect our cultural heritage and to promote economic aspiration, across the country.&nbsp;
****
Friends, parliamentary colleagues, distinguished guests.
Every Minerals Week is a chance to celebrate a great national success story.
For generations, your industry has driven economic growth, created good jobs, lifted living standards, and fostered innovation and productivity.
Not just in regional and remote Australia, where so much hard work is done – but in our cities too.
My own electorate in the inner west, is home to the headquarters of ABC Refinery which employs over 300 people and exports over $8 billion of precious metal, every year.
This includes the metal for the Melbourne Cup – and the Australian silver used to make the Australian Open trophy that the legendary Ash Barty held up earlier this year.
I love my tennis - and while I’m slowly coming to accept that I may never win the Australian Open - I’m very pleased to know that every champion’s journey begins in Marrickville.
On any measure, Australia is the world’s pre-eminent resources jurisdiction - the top exporter of iron ore, lithium, LNG, and metallurgical coal.
We are a resources superpower.
We can be a renewable energy superpower.
Australian metals and minerals will make this happen.
Here – and around the world – your work will drive the global transition to a low-carbon future.
The Minerals Council has reported on the increase in global demand we’re talking about here – and the increase in production required by 2030:

increasing lithium production fourfold
doubling rare earth element output
a two-thirds increase in nickel
a third more copper.

And the growth in demand will drive growth in jobs – and investment too.
Globally, annual clean energy investment will need to more than triple to reach net zero by 2050.
There is a world of opportunity here for our country.
We have an unmatched natural advantage in clean energy.
The sunniest continent on earth, some of the strongest winds in the world – and all the minerals and metals needed to drive the energy transition.
We are also home to the Southern Hemisphere’s best geoscientific research through the CSIRO and Geoscience Australia.
But you know very well – better than perhaps any other industry in Australia – that natural advantages are no guarantee of success.
Natural advantages only get you to the start line.
Winning the race, leading the world, requires investment and innovation and courage and commitment.
And it is a race, no doubt about that.
There’s strong global demand –and there’s fierce global competition.&nbsp;
Chile, Canada and Saudi Arabia are all chasing the same prize, the same jobs, the same chance to lead an economic change every bit as transformational as the industrial revolution.
The world doesn’t wait - and I know you haven’t been waiting on government:

Rio Tinto is investing in wind and solar farms in Queensland to sustainably power its aluminium assets.&nbsp;


BHP’s Nickel West refinery at Kwinana - one of the most sustainable and lowest carbon emission nickel producers in the world – will be supplying processed nickel to Tesla.&nbsp;


Iluka Resources is developing our nation’s first integrated rare earths refinery in Western Australia.


H2 Energy is working to decarbonise heavy transport and passenger vehicles by sourcing and supplying green hydrogen to heavy duty fleet customers.

I’m hoping that all of you no longer need to think of this as acting ‘in spite of’ government and instead we can view it as the chance to win the race together.
Both in terms of reducing the emissions footprint of extracting and refining resources...
…and harnessing the rise of renewables and clean energy to grow Australia’s economy, and expand the resources sector.
Our $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund will support new and emerging industries and the transition of existing industries.
It will invest in areas like green steel and aluminium; clean energy component manufacturing; hydrogen electrolysers; and fuel switching.
The NRF will dedicate a $1 billion investment in mining science technology and minerals processing to move Australia further up mineral value chains.
We are the world’s largest exporter of the raw materials necessary for clean energy technologies, but for decades we’ve shipped these materials overseas and bought back manufactured goods at a premium.
Our Government will invest to unlock more value from our minerals.
Because we understand how important your industry is to Australia’s future energy security and our broader economic self-reliance.
You’re not just part of the transition, you’re the foundation for the next generation of growth and jobs and industry that our nation needs to compete and succeed in a globalised world.
For nearly a decade, the Australian political debate over renewables and resources and climate action has been hostage to a false choice between creating jobs or cutting pollution.
Our Powering Australia plan busts that myth.
Embracing renewable energy technology will attract and generate tens of billions of dollars in investment.
And create hundreds of thousands of jobs – with 5 out of every 6 in regional Australia.
I want to emphasise that our Government will continue to work with your businesses to reduce emissions in a predictable and orderly way, underpinning the energy transition with certainty.
In the same way, Australia will continue to be a trusted and stable supplier of energy and resources to our key trading partners.
As we work with other nations to reduce emissions globally, we will continue to be a reliable provider of energy.
For example, Japan and South Korea are already looking to us for their clean energy needs, actively building partnerships with Australian companies for the supply of green hydrogen.
I’m hopeful that across the country, government and industry and researchers and universities can keep co-operating and co-investing…
…to commercialise and apply the innovations and ideas and technology that will drive future prosperity.
*****
Last week’s Jobs and Skills Summit showcased the value of co-operation and collaboration.
It was a powerful reminder of what can be achieved when we work together.
I want to thank the leaders from your industry who came to that gathering in good faith – and made really valuable contributions to the two days of discussions, across a range of issues.
The government is eager to keep the conversation going, working with all employers, so that we can get bargaining that delivers productivity gains – and wage rises.
We do this recognising and respecting the fact that the resources sector has a proud record as a creator of good, secure, well-paid jobs for working people.
The bigger and broader point is that co-operation and dialogue works.
It should not be a 48-hour exception. It should be the rule.
Because working together – respect, consultation, certainty – is how we build a more self-reliant, more secure nation for generations to come.
The resources sector has always been instrumental in shaping Australia’s success.
In an era of new opportunities, your work remains vital to Australia’s future.
‘Building our nation, leading the world’.
Thank you very much.


CEDA has always been an organisation which looks to the future, advocating for reform based on a broad base of evidence, not the narrow view or noisy voices of vested interest.
That same approach was behind our Jobs and Skills Summit, this time last week, in this very room.
Bringing together people from state and local government, business and industry, unions and the community sector.
People came in good faith – and participated in a spirit of genuine respect.
Of course, not all the attendees reached agreement on every element of every issue.
But it did become very clear, very quickly that across the broad sweep of employers and union representatives and policy advocates there was substantial common ground, more than perhaps any of us expected.

On skills and TAFE and a better pathway to permanent migration.
On increasing participation, boosting productivity and lifting wages.
On technology and innovation and research – and I know CEDA has been doing important work in this space and I will touch on that this morning.

One of the clearest threads running through the two days of conversations was how absolutely critical it is for Australia to remove the structural barriers that have denied women equal participation in the economy for far too long.
***
To me, that felt like a bit of a breakthrough moment in the public debate.
Not because it was a particularly new point but because all these smart, passionate, accomplished people looked around and realised they weren’t making the case on their own, or having their arguments go unheard.
Instead, we heard speaker after speaker – policy experts, business leaders, workers representatives - reinforce that equality for women is not an add-on, or a ‘nice-to-have’.
Equality for women – in participation, in pay, in leadership opportunities, in financial security – is an essential precondition for Australia’s future economic growth.
The challenge now is to convert that affirming moment of consensus and goodwill into lasting change and progress.
A key part of this is re-framing the national conversation about child care, recognising its power and value as an economic reform.
An investment that benefits two generations of Australians, simultaneously:

Early education for a great start in life
Flexible support for modern families
And a multi-billion dollar boost to productivity and participation – without adding to inflation.

The plan for cheaper child care we took to the election takes effect on 1 July 2023, delivering cost of living relief for over a million families.
And we are also tasking the Productivity Commission to investigate affordable, universal child care – in the great tradition of universal Medicare and universal superannuation.
Reliable, affordable, accessible early education, for every Australian family.
Of course, when we talk about expanding economic opportunity for women, it doesn’t begin and end with the parents of young children.
Closing the gender pay gap is a key economic priority for our government.
Before this year is over, we will introduce legislation to make pay equity an objective of the Fair Work Act.
We will create expert panels to give special attention to improving pay in the care and community sector…
…alongside the submission we have made to the Fair Work Commission, calling for a significant pay rise for Aged Care workers and committing to fund it.
These are all important initiatives on their own.
But we also need to recognise a simple reality: the workplace bargaining system in this country is broken.
It’s not delivering productivity gains for business – or wage rises for workers.
And the inescapable, uncomfortable reality is that the workforces with the most women are the ones with the least bargaining power – and, as a result, the lowest pay.
Aged care. Child care. Disability care.
Heroes of the pandemic.
Workers we celebrate as essential, people who give expression to our Australian values:

looking after our loved ones when they grow older
educating our children
empowering Australians with disability to fulfil their potential.

The Australians doing these jobs are among the best of us – but they are getting the worst of the deal.
So whenever we talk about closing the gender pay gap, we should acknowledge that getting bargaining back on track is central to the task.
Industry, small business and big employers will all benefit from a bargaining framework that’s more flexible, more straightforward and more attuned to the realities of work in Australia in the 2020s.
Better bargaining will mean stronger wages growth, helping people with rising living costs.
But the biggest winners from a better bargaining system will be working women.
Over the next five years, the National Skills Commission estimates that around 1 in 4 new jobs will be in the health care and social assistance sector.
The occupations expected to see the largest increases are aged care, disability care and registered nurses.
If we want to attract – and retain – the people to do this vital work, we need to pay them properly and treat them with respect.
****
Equality for women is at the heart of our vision for a better future.
It’s also one of the forces that will shape the economy over the coming decade.
Technology is another.
The great economic reforms of the Hawke and Keating Governments faced Australia to the world.
Breaking down tariff walls and building trade bridges to connect us with our region.
I believe technology can be as transformational for our generation, as trade was for theirs.
Helping us compete with – and sell to – the fastest-growing, most dynamic region in the world.
We took a target of 1.2 million tech-related jobs by 2030 to the last election.
And – as a result of discussions with business and unions at last week’s Summit:
We are implementing a Digital and Tech Skills Compact, to deliver Digital Apprenticeships which will support workers to earn while they learn in entry-level tech roles.
And the Australian Public Service will help lead by example, with 1000 new digital traineeships over the next four years.
This is an investment in the skills of those individuals and the digital literacy of the public service.
Harnessing the opportunities of technology requires us to look at the whole picture – from research and development to manufacture and export.
I see this as building on one strength – and correcting another weakness.
As CEDA’s new report notes, while Australia represents only 0.34% of the world’s population - we produce 2.7% of its scientific breakthroughs.
We punch way above our weight in innovation, we always have. Not the least in renewables.
Every solar panel in the world would contain some form of intellectual property driven by Australian research, developed by Australian scientists yet we haven't commercialised that opportunity, we haven’t translated breakthroughs in that technology into advanced manufacturing jobs.
Instead, 85% of the world's solar panels are made in one country.
If nothing changes over the next decade, this will rise to 95%.
We don’t want to find ourselves in a situation where at the same time as the world is becoming more and more reliant on renewable energy technology, that technology is becoming more and more concentrated in the hands of one country.
I’ve spoken at CEDA before about lessons Australia has to learn from the pandemic.
One of the fundamental lessons from this time of international instability is how important it is for Australia to invest in our economic self-reliance, in our ability to stand on our own two feet.
Our $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund is driven by this understanding - and we know science and research are central to its success.
Central to our energy security, our cyber security, our food and fibre security – and our manufacturing sovereignty.
I want Australia to be so much more than the last link in the global supply chain, or the springboard for an idea that makes another nation rich.
My vision is for a country that makes things here again.
Where Australian research, innovation, design and technology is commercialised here, creates jobs here, boosts productivity here and is exported to the world.
Of course, government can’t be in the business of dictating breakthroughs or directing research but it does have a vital responsibility to invest in our research agencies and universities and to support the field of smart and skilled Australians who will lead this work.
Our Minister for Industry and Science, Ed Husic has announced a review this week to look at how we can widen the pipeline of talent, so we see more women, more First Nations people and more young Australians in the regions studying science, technology, engineering and maths.
Beyond that, I believe there’s also a cultural contribution government can make:

Signalling a respect for science, evidence and research.
Valuing foundational work - as well as commercial applications.
Creating a sense of certainty and support for long-term projects, so researchers and scientists can do their work without looking over their shoulder, or spending their time re-applying for funding.

Your report talks about ‘captaincy’ – I firmly believe good captains trust their team and empower their teammates.
****
At the last election, my team and I ran on the promise of a better future.
In Government, we are now seeking to convert the pledges of our campaign into the progress of our country.
We recognise that Australia faces significant challenges – but just as importantly we can see the extraordinary opportunities.
The disadvantage, discrimination and disrespect faced by the women of Australia has been a handbrake on our national success for decades.
If we can accelerate progress to equality, then the whole country will benefit.
In a climate of cuts and neglect, Australian research has achieved remarkable things.
If we can empower and celebrate our innovators and scientists, we will enrich the whole nation.
Taking on the big challenges is an urgent responsibility - it is also a powerful opportunity.
If we work together, if we co-operate, if we seek out the common ground.
We can all play a role in building the better future Australians deserve.
Thank you very much.


I’m pleased to say Australia will join other nations in endorsing the Leaders Pledge for Nature.
This highlights Australia's reinvigorated approach to protecting our environment and climate leadership and signals our solidarity with other world leaders in our commitment to taking strong action on the dual crises of biodiversity loss and climate change.
Australia understands the urgency of the environmental challenges facing our planet and we're committed to being a leader in the global fight to solve them.
Australia is one of the most biologically rich and diverse nations on Earth, one of only a few mega-diverse countries that together comprise less than 10% of Earth's surface, but are home to more than 70 per cent of its living species.
Working together, we can better protect and conserve the world's land sea waterways and cultural heritage for future generations. Now is the time to act.


Your Excellency, distinguished guests, parliamentary colleagues, fellow Australians.
We gather today - around our nation - to offer Australia’s thanks for an extraordinary life dedicated to service, faith, country and Commonwealth.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II was the longest-serving monarch in the history of a centuries-old institution.
Her reign spanned more than half the life of our modern Federation.
And we proudly honour her memory today on a continent home to the world’s oldest continuous culture - paying respect to traditional owners and elders past, present and emerging.
****
This national day of mourning salutes a sovereign who served our whole country – and sought to know it too.
Our vibrant cities. Our beautiful country towns.
Farmlands and forests. Rugged coasts and red centre.
Mighty stadiums and local sporting grounds, grand galleries and humble halls.
Through 16 tours across seven decades, Queen Elizabeth visited and connected with every part of Australia.
Millions of fleeting interactions, still fondly recalled.
So many Australians have shared their memories – of a kind word, a gesture of respect, or a thoughtful act of grace in an always-busy day.
With Prince Philip at her side, The Queen embraced the scale of this vast nation: the breadth of our continent, the depth of our people’s hearts, the warmth of our humour.
We can see something of this understanding in the organisations Her Majesty served as patron:
From the RSL, a social focal point for so many towns and suburbs, to the Royal Flying Doctors Service, an essential lifeline for people in the outback, whose fortitude The Queen spoke of with such admiration.
It is fitting that today’s commemorations in our national capital will be mirrored in communities across our country, as Australians express their own affection and respect - and celebrate The Queen’s part in their stories.
****
Here in Canberra, we are reminded of The Queen’s presence in the life of our nation – and the world of change she witnessed.
In this very room, in 1988, Queen Elizabeth officially declared this building open.
Down the hill is the Old Parliament House the Queen’s father opened in 1927.
The House of Representatives in which Prime Minister Menzies fought back tears as he informed the chamber of the death of George VI and the accession of a 25 year old Princess Elizabeth.
The old Senate where the young Queen on her first tour addressed the Australian parliament summoned in her name – one of only a handful of women in the room.
The Lake - now home to Queen Elizabeth II Island - was dry for that first visit.
The Australian War Memorial had been open only 13 years, the veterans of the Great War that had inspired its construction were still in their 50s and 60s.
The mint was busily imprinting pounds, shillings and pence with the young sovereign’s profile.
Television was two years away.
Britain was our biggest trading partner and our number one source of migration.
That Australia, of 1954, where 7 million people - 70% of the population - turned out to welcome the first sovereign to visit these shores was, in virtually every respect, a different nation in a different world.
Think of the transformation that has re-defined our country since.
Through it all – in the good times and in days of trial and hardship - the Queen stood with us.
Always among the first to extend her sympathies to people and communities afflicted by tragedy or disaster.
Always taking pride in Australia’s progress, which The Queen observed with the thoughtful perspective of decades in public life.
In Adelaide, in 2002, she reflected:
"I have witnessed a steady and remarkable evolution in the character of Australia and its people.
There has been a growing confidence; an increasingly global outlook; a recognition of the distinctive contribution of Indigenous Australians; and the natural realisation that Australians can take on the best in the world and excel."
In all things - including our advance to Reconciliation - the Queen always wanted the best for our country.
She greeted every evolution in our relationship with Britain with good grace and an abiding faith in the judgement of the Australian people.
And so, amidst the noise and turbulence of the decades, the Queen endured – and so did Australia’s affection for her, our sense of connection to her.
Indeed, I believe those two truths run together: our affection held strong, because she did.
For so many, for so long, The Queen was a rare and reassuring constant in a world of change.
In an age of performative celebrity, The Queen embodied quiet dignity.
In an era of fads and fashionable causes, The Queen did not seek to chase the times - instead she held to qualities and virtues that are timeless:
Love of family
Loyalty to country
Service to community
Kindness to those in need
Respect for everyone she met
In this, she represented more than the monarchy.
She stood for things we loved and admired most about our own parents and grandparents.
Their decency, their wisdom, their patience, their work ethic, their instinct for service above self.
And - as the traditions and formalities of the past two weeks come to a close - I think something all of us can do to meaningfully honour the life of Queen Elizabeth in an ongoing way is take inspiration from her example.
****
Friends,
Monuments to The Queen dot our landscape, the name of Elizabeth lives in nearly every town.
Perhaps the greatest tribute we can offer her family and her memory is not a marble statue or a metal plaque.
It is a renewed embrace of service to community.
A truer understanding of our duty to others.
A stronger commitment to respect for all.
This would be a most fitting memorial, to a magnificent life.
May Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second rest in eternal peace.


PRIME MINISTER ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well, thank you very much for the welcome on my second visit to Japan as Prime Minister. It is important that Australia show our condolence to yourself as Prime Minister, but also to the people of Japan on the tragic loss of former Prime Minister Abe Shinzo. He was very well respected. And as an international statesperson, it is clear that the Quad Leaders’ dialogue would not have occurred without his leadership. The relationship between Australia and Japan is so important and that importance is underlined by the fact that I am here as the sitting Prime Minister, even though our Parliament is sitting. I have brought with me as well, former Prime Ministers Turnbull, Abbott and Howard. So you have a very high-level attendance to pay our respects and show our respects to not just Mr Abe’s family but to the people of Japan. We share such common interests in particular for a free and open Indo-Pacific which is so important that we continue to work together and to work with our partners as well to advance that common interest.


Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which meet and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging, and recommit, as I do now on behalf of the Australian Government, to the implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full.
Can I express my appreciation for all of you for being here, and for your leadership in this journey. And, as a non-Indigenous Australian, express my appreciation for the generosity of the offer which is embodied and enshrined in the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
I would like to think that, were I in the position that you are in, that I would come up with something as generous, as thoughtful, as gracious as the offer that is being presented to Australians for reconciliation. This is an important journey that Australia has the potential of walking with you on.
There was a lot to be made about my acceptance speech on the night of the 21st of May. To be frank, none of that was written down, I didn't prepare an acceptance speech in advance. But I did do a bit of dictating to someone sitting on the floor of my house at Marrickville. But it was just a natural thing to do.
Some people have said to me around the country, particularly before Garma and the speech I gave there: ‘Are you sure about this? It’s a big risk.’ It’s a bit like saying to Penrith or Parramatta players in the lead up to Sunday that they risk losing if they run on the field on Sunday. If they don't, it's called a forfeit. And that's what we're facing here.
If we don't have a referendum, then by definition it won't succeed. And, if not now, when? And if not under this government, which government is going to have the guts to do it? And so I recognise that there's a risk. But the risk has to be balanced up with the certainty of failure if you don't try. And that is what my government has done and what we'll continue to pursue.
One of the things that I want to assure you all is that we're not half in here. We're all in. Every one of us. And this is something that is too important to not succeed.
I know that getting people on the same page can be really difficult in any forum. The Australian Labor Party, from time to time, has those issues. But the common sense of purpose which is here, from the people around this room but everywhere I go in the country, I've got to say there is enormous goodwill, enormous goodwill towards this exercise.
As you know, there's essentially two pretty simple propositions. One is, our nation’s birth certificate should recognise the fact that our history didn't begin in 1788. That should be a source of pride that you have survived, as the songs go, and that that should be something that is absolutely celebrated, not just here as a nation for how First Nations people see themselves, but for how all Australians see ourselves as well. This is an opportunity to lift the whole nation up. But it's also how we're seen in the world as well. This is an opportunity to show that we're a mature nation that proudly is out there saying, ‘Yes, we're very proud of our history’.
We have so much to learn from Indigenous Australians. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have the relationship with land and water in a way that has so many lessons for those of us who are struggling with a planet that is in an environmental crisis. That respect and relationship that you have with land and sea is something that's so important.
That's why I asked my friend, young Patrick here, to go to New York for the United Nations, along with Senator Wong, the Foreign Minister, recently to the UN General Assembly. It is so important. And I know that when I have travelled overseas, it is something that was mentioned to me in London. It was mentioned to me, as well, in Japan in meetings I had over recent days.
So that's the first thing, that we recognise Indigenous people in in our nation's birth certificate. And the second thing is what I term good manners. If you're a parliament that is making decisions that has an impact on First Nations peoples, then it’s probably a good idea to ask them. If I'm doing something at my home in Marrickville that's going to impact the next door neighbour's, you knock on the door and you tell them ‘What do you think? What's going on?’ It's just what we should do.
And that's why the argument about practical advancement and Closing the Gap and what some see as symbolism is such a false one. Because you get better practical outcomes when you get buy in, when you get engagement, when you get direct involvement by people who are impacted.
We tried for most of the 121 years since Federation, and indeed beforehand, to decide what was best for people and impose it. The outcomes there for all to see: the gap there in life expectancy, health outcomes, education outcomes, housing. We need to do better.
And that's why this is about practical measures as well. You will get better outcomes because we know that when there is genuine engagement through things like justice reinvestment, through rangers programs and where people have that direct say. The work that Pat has done, the Coalition of Peaks is an example of something that's recognised.
I acknowledge the presence of the former Minister, Minister Wyatt, who is here with us. It's very important that you are participating in this process. I'll conclude with this:
There have been some questions. Before I gave the Garma speech, it was, ‘Righto, well we don't know what the question is’. Well people now know what's on the table with the question. People now know what's on the table of the actual constitutional change that will occur. It’s not final, because we want people to have input and if people have got a little bit of a better idea, then that's fine as well.
The stuff about detail: I know the work that Tom and Marcia have done in terms of detail, there’s an extraordinary amount of detail out there. But I've deliberately tried to create the space to be inclusive, so that people from across the spectrum can come in.
I don't want this to be a government proposal, or my proposal, or for that matter, Linda or Pat or Mark or Malarndirri’s proposal. We want this to be Australia’s proposal, for Australians to have ownership of this process.
Because we are doing this for Australia, Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia. This is a historic opportunity for our country to move forward and we will be doing as much as we can to make sure, as a government, that we're successful.
But I know already from the engagement that I've had with the business community, the trade union movement, sporting organisations. I know there was indeed a little bit of controversy over some of the people that got involved in the campaign. Let me tell you, I will seek support from anyone in any quarter in any corner of this community or the world for this without exception, without exception.
And if we can get people speaking to people out there who don't read the Fin Review or the Oz, or watch the late night news all the time, then all the better as well. Because everyone gets a vote in this, one vote in a referendum.
I'm very confident though. Because to me this goes to the character of the Australian people. And as a bit of an old fashioned progressive in some areas, I have faith in people. And I have faith in the capacity of the people in this room as well to argue the case.
When the Australian people had an opportunity way back in 1967, they seized it. And we want to give them the opportunity, again, to seize it.
There will be misinformation out there. You all see it. But one of the things about being disadvantaged and suffering from discrimination is that it forges you, in a way. And there is a bit of that, a bit about ‘special rights’ and all this sort of nonsense, which is what will be pedalled. But I'm convinced that Australians, when they have an opportunity to lift the nation up, they'll take it. They'll take it.
This isn't the end of the process either. The Voice is a vehicle for change, it's not the change itself. It's the vehicle to make sure that just as you shouldn’t identify someone's opportunities in life by their postcode, you certainly shouldn't identify the opportunities in life in this country by the nature of their birth. And at the moment you can. And we need to do better than that as a country.
As the leader of this great country I've been given a great honour. I'm not here to occupy the space, which is why we're going to roll this referendum out and give people the opportunity, because I think that the way that you have that process in itself will be a positive thing. And I know that the messages that we'll be seeing are very positive indeed. So I certainly await your input.
We haven't settled on a date, as you know. I genuinely haven't. At the end of the day, as the Prime Minister, that will be a decision that I'll have to advance. But I will be taking advice, including very strong advice from this group. But we need to be ready. I don’t want to rush into this. We've got time to explain it, to win people over. And I think the more that people discuss this the better.
The timeframe will be from sometime in that financial year – that's where the window is open – from July next year through to the next financial year. You don't want to get mixed up in in an election period. So we've got a little bit of time, but not too much. Not a day to waste. And I just want to very much thank this group for giving me the honour of being part of this process. Thank you.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
Sharing this ancient continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture is a source of great national pride.
And I know Western Sydney is proud to be home to the largest urban population of Aboriginal people.&nbsp;
The latest generation of those who have cared for these lands and waters for 60,000 years.
Including Pemulwuy, who led a resistance against British settlers during the Frontier Wars, including a significant confrontation in Parramatta.
It’s fitting you remember him today with the Pemulwuy Prize.
Friends, I’m delighted to be back at the Western Sydney Leadership Dialogue, to join in celebrating a great part of our country and the people who contribute to its strength and success.
And I’m always happy to be back here at Accor Stadium – a place where some of our nation’s most memorable sporting moments have taken place, like the Rabbitohs’ epic Grand Final victory in 2014.
Preparing for this speech today got me thinking about the many ways Western Sydney and Greater Western Sydney have grown and changed in my lifetime.
‘Singh’ has replaced ‘Smith’ as the most common surname in areas like Blacktown and Campbelltown.
Shops selling bubble tea and sugar-cane juice have joined the delis run by Greek and Italian migrants.
And Western Sydney residents are among the most likely to speak a language other than English.
This is one of the reasons our Minister for Communications, Michelle Rowland, has commissioned a feasibility study into moving the headquarters of SBS to Western Sydney.
We’ll wait and see what the study says, but it certainly makes sense for such a fast-growing, multicultural community to be the home of the broadcaster that celebrates and serves Australia’s diversity.
It would be an important cultural investment in Western Sydney and a creator of construction jobs.
The diversity of Western Sydney is a local treasure – and it is also a national asset.
It enriches our cultural life – and it drives our economic growth.
One of the great things about this area, through the generations, is the culture of aspiration and entrepreneurship and innovation.
The willingness to work hard and take risks, to start businesses and create jobs.
We all benefit from that.
Western Sydney is diverse. It’s young. It’s talented. It’s aspirational.
And it’s growing at an extraordinary rate – more people live here in the Greater Western Sydney area than in Adelaide, Canberra, Hobart and Darwin combined.
We can and should celebrate this growth – but we also need to respond to it, to plan for it, to seize the economic opportunities it represents.
Good infrastructure is absolutely central to this.
And investing in infrastructure has always been core business for reforming Labor Governments.
I’ve said many times that one of the most rewarding experiences of my life was serving as Minister for Infrastructure under Prime Ministers Rudd and Gillard.
And one of the reasons I’ve always enjoyed engaging with this group is because you share an understanding that infrastructure is not an end in itself.
We don’t build it for the sake of it, for the chance to turn a sod or cut a ribbon.
We build to last, for the long term.
We invest in infrastructure because we know it powers productivity, it supports growing communities, it creates jobs, it rewards aspiration.
It boosts access to services and it improves quality of life.
For me, infrastructure is never just about roads and railways and runways – it’s about living standards and job opportunities and community pride and quality of life.
Look at Western Sydney Airport, a long-standing passion of mine and a transformational infrastructure project.
It will be a catalyst for economic activity in Western Sydney.
The best drivers of regional economic activity are a university – or an airport.
Western Sydney airport will have a significant economic multiplier effect.
And it will create fair-wage, secure jobs, closer to where people live.
I’m pleased to say the project is tracking very well.
It’s more than a third complete and on schedule to start operating in late 2026.
It’s not only a great project in itself. It’s a great project that’s being done well.
It’s creating local jobs.
It’s being constructed sustainably. The project has used almost no potable water and has used more than five million tonnes of crushed sandstone from the Sydney Metro and WestConnex tunnelling projects.
And it will operate sustainably. The final airport precinct will be gas-free, it will use solar panels, and will use less electricity, water and liquid fuels.
Of course, there’s no point building a new airport without making it easy for people to get there.
That’s why I’ve always been a big supporter of the Sydney Metro – Western Sydney Airport rail line, which we’re delivering as part of the Western Sydney City Deal.
This will be a game-changer for the new Western Parkland City and the Aerotropolis surrounding the airport – connecting residents with jobs, education and training, services, goods and markets.
I’m proud our Federal Government is contributing $5.25 billion to the Metro.
My colleagues – particularly those who have the privilege to represent this area - see the Western Sydney Airport as a generator of prosperity across a range of sectors including research, tourism, education, advanced manufacturing, logistics and residential development.
I think we can all agree that one of the key lessons of the pandemic, is the importance of resilient supply chains.
Strong and reliable freight infrastructure are central to this – and the Moorebank Intermodal Terminal Precinct is a national success in this regard.
The Import-Export Terminal has been operating since 2019. And we expect the Interstate Terminal to be complete in 2025.
By moving more container freight by rail, the Moorebank Terminal will save around 3,000 truck journeys each day.
That’s a big impact on traffic on key arterial roads like the M5.
And it will provide a net save of around 110,000 tonnes of carbon emissions a year.
We need to better plan our infrastructure.
That’s why – at the last election – we committed to investing in planning and preparatory works for the Castlereagh Connection.
A project I know the Western Sydney Leadership Dialogue has championed for a long time.&nbsp;
This is a long-term project that recognises a long-term reality: we need to take flood and other extreme weather events into account when planning infrastructure investments.
We’ve also announced further investment for better planning on other key road projects, including Bandon Road and Richmond Road.
And to guide future decision making and to take the politics out of planning we will establish a Western Sydney Expert Panel to review and report on Western Sydney’s infrastructure needs.
Getting transport links right is vital – but the businesses that this infrastructure will help to serve also need human capital to grow and thrive.
I understand at the Western Sydney Jobs Summit in August, nearly one in three businesses reported difficulty finding suitable staff, and most cited a lack of experience or skills as a major factor.
That’s a common story right around Australia – and addressing these skills shortages was one of the key priorities for the national Jobs and Skills Summit we held in Canberra last month.&nbsp;
We brought together businesses, unions, community leaders and state and local government – and we agreed on some immediate actions to help address critical skills shortages.
Including:

A skills and training blitz, so that we can offer more fee-free places in TAFE, creating a larger pool of skilled workers locally, and
Increasing the number of people in our permanent Migration Program and investing additional funds to process visas and deal with the visa backlog.

As I said at the time, we don’t see migration as a narrow exercise in importing workers to fill workforce gaps.
And I think people in Western Sydney instinctively understand that reforming the migration program is about so much more than that.
It’s about helping people put down roots.
Making a home. Raising a family. Starting a business.
Buying-in, joining-up.
Making a life in our suburbs – and adding to the life of the community.
The Government is supporting smaller infrastructure in local communities too.
I remember growing up how much it meant to have a place to play outside.
And one of the really basic lessons from the harshest and hardest days of the Covid lockdowns was how important safe and accessible public spaces are to our physical health and our mental health.
That’s one of the reasons we made a series of election commitments right across the Greater Western Sydney area for infrastructure that makes life more enjoyable and fulfilling for families and individuals.

A new water play area for Schofields.
New walking trails for Grantham Farm.
Synthetic footy fields for Cook Park in St Marys, so if it rains on a Friday night, you can still play on a Saturday.
Building new change rooms and improving disability access in the grandstand for the Mount Druitt Town Rangers Football Club.

&nbsp;
Projects like these may not make headlines, but they can make a powerful difference to quality of life.
Just as we invest in roads and rail and runways and public spaces with the goal of lifting living standards in the immediate term and delivering productivity gains and economic benefit over the long term.
We are investing in policies that help with the cost-of-living here and now, while also delivering long-term economic dividends.
Child care is the perfect example. &nbsp;
Child care costs have gone up by 41 per cent over the past eight years.
This is a significant burden to many Australian families who are already battling to make ends meet – particularly in parts of Western Sydney.
And costs and distortions in the system mean that too many parents – particularly women - are effectively penalised if they want to work more than 3 days a week.
In other words, the child care you need to work, costs more than you earn.
It’s just wrong.
Child care benefits two generations of Australians simultaneously.

Early education for children
Help with the cost of living for working families
And greater economic opportunity for Australian women

&nbsp;
This is why Cheaper Child Care was at the heart of our election campaign – and is a key economic priority for us in government.
Last week, we introduced legislation to the parliament that will reduce the cost of child care for over 1.2 million families.
Including around 11,000 families in the Parramatta local government area, and about 10,000 in the Penrith LGA.
Child care is economic reform.
It takes pressure off family budgets, without adding to inflation.
And it boosts participation and productivity, making it easier for employers to retain great staff – and easier for working parents to pick up extra hours, extra days, or take on a new job.
Our reforms to child care and our plans for cheaper medicine are central to our plan to help families with the cost of living.
We understand as well that this week’s decision by the independent Reserve Bank board to increase interest rates will make things harder for households.
These consecutive rate increases began under the former Coalition Government and are occurring in the context of global economic uncertainty, driven by inflationary pressures.
Right now, advanced economies are seeing the steepest and most synchronised global monetary policy tightening in decades.
This only reinforces how important it is for fiscal policy to complement monetary policy - so as not to provide an incentive for monetary policy to be even more contractionary.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Our priority is an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
And this is why my colleagues and I are approaching the upcoming Budget responsibly and methodically.
Taking full account of the increasingly uncertain global economic outlook.
And recognising the long-term fiscal pressures of funding vital programs such as aged care, the NDIS, hospitals and defence and national security. As well as the growing costs of servicing a record national debt, when interest rates are rising.
We will make sure we do what we can to help families with their cost of living, in a way that doesn’t push up inflation or add pressure to demand.
And – as I’ve said before - we are prepared to make difficult decisions, to get Australia through hard times and to ensure our fiscal policy provides a sustainable path forward in the immediate circumstances, as well as the longer term.
Our Budget will be responsible.
It will be focused on strengthening Australia’s economic resilience, so we can protect and enhance people’s living standards.&nbsp;
The final point I want to touch on is climate change.
Since July 2019, Western Sydney has felt the brunt of five natural disasters, including storms and severe floods – two of them earlier this year.
You understand the urgency of responding to the challenge of climate change, because communities like yours are already living with its consequences.
Yet for the last decade, instead of working with you on solutions – government in Canberra has been part of the problem.
From our first day in office, we have been working to fix that.
Our Powering Australia plan will support a clean energy transformation that will increase access to cheap and reliable energy and drive down costs.
The 400 community batteries we’ll install across the country, including in Cabramatta and Bidwill, will enable homes with solar to store excess energy produced during the day for use in the evening or share the power they generate with other homes in the community.
These community batteries will be complemented by the solar banks we have committed to rolling out across Australia to ensure more households can benefit from rooftop solar.
And we’re also establishing a new Urban Rivers and Catchments Program to help restore habitats for native species.
It’s not just birds and frogs who benefit from these projects.
Healthy river and creek vegetation corridors provide cooler spaces that lower urban temperatures and improve air quality.
Just as we have moved beyond the false choice between acting on climate change and growing the economy.
We need to embrace the fact that a focus on sustainability is not the enemy of development – rather it is fundamental to its success.
I’ve been grateful for the opportunity today to talk to you about what we’re doing, and why we’re doing it.
But I’d like to end by emphasising ‘how’ we’re doing it.
By being collaborative.
By consulting and co-operating.
By bringing people together and really listening to communities – like we did at the Jobs and Skills Summit and we continue to do with the airport development.
I’ve always believed that when you get people involved in a dialogue, you get better ideas at the beginning and better results at the end.
When everyone helps lay a strong foundation, you can build to last.
And in the uncertain times the world is facing, working together is more important than ever.
Australia is not immune from international economic pressures – uncertainty overseas always applies pressure to the Budget here at home.
But – at heart – I’ve always been an optimist about our country’s future.
I have faith in the smarts and skills and potential of our people, their ability to rise to any challenge.
And whenever I’m in Western Sydney, that faith is renewed.
I see every reason to be optimistic for the future of Western Sydney and for our nation.
Thank you for inviting me today.
And thank you for the work you do, for the benefit of this great community.


Twenty years ago, the shockwaves from Bali reached our shores.
Twenty years ago, an act of malice and calculated depravity robbed the world of 202 lives.
They were visitors and locals alike, gathered in a place of joy.
Eighty-eight of them Australian.
Twenty years on, the ache does not dim.
For most of us, what happened on that fateful night is beyond imagining.
The sudden terrible light, the sudden terrible darkness. The awful postscript of fire.
Alongside the local workers and residents were team mates enjoying their end-of-season holiday.
Including members of Kingsley Football Club, Sturt Football Club, the Southport Sharks, the Dulwich Newtown Basketball Club and the Coogee Dolphins, their name bestowed upon this piece of land in an act of remembering of six team mates.
We think of them with the ache of knowing they should still be here, their senses filled with everything we feel now.
The salty tang of the air, the sea in its ancient rhythm foaming against beach and cliff, and the tapestry of voices of which they were all such integral part.
So many futures were stolen that night.
We think of every conversation never had.
Every moment of love never known.
We think of those who survived, and those who helped.
What they saw that night will never leave them.
Yet amid it all, the very worst of circumstances brought out the very best in people.
It brought out compassion. Selflessness. Heroism.
That night, the terrorists could not achieve their aim.
What they struck, they could not defeat.
Because what they struck at was the idea of us, the great fabric of dreams and ideals and compassion and fairness that make us who we are.
Indonesians, Australians, people from around the world.
They struck at the friendship between us.
They struck at the joy of a free people.
They struck at humanity.
But we remain.
In the end, they reminded us of what is so important to us.
And to not take for granted what we have built and nurtured over generations.
They sought to create terror.
But people ran towards the terror, to do what they could do for friend and stranger alike.
Because what drove them was a higher, more human instinct than those who
attacked them.
What the architects of this slaughter achieved was to make us reflect on what we most truly value – and to hold on to it more tightly than ever before.
No terrorist can take this from us.
But they did take life.
They left survivors to rebuild themselves, physically and mentally.
They left families and friends struggling with loss.
For them, the world could never be the same again.
Twenty years on, so many hearts are still tethered to that cruel night, every beat tempered by an abiding sorrow.
Many currents were stopped in the great river of life that night.
And some are still stranded on the bank, unable to walk away.
Grief is its own creature.
Grief does not travel in straight lines.
Grief may soften with time, but it does not fade.
As my predecessor Julia Gillard put it a decade ago, Bali is:
“A place, like London and Gallipoli, where something of the Australian spirit dwells upon another shore.”

And it is a beloved shore. Indonesian people have reached out to generations of
Australians as friends and neighbours.
They felt our great pain that night, and we felt theirs.
This beautiful monument represents family, friends and community.
Its three parts are bowed in sorrow, but they hold each other because in unity
we find strength and hope and love.
We find each other.
And that is how we come together, our hearts filled with everyone who never came home.
Everyone who never came home the same.
Everyone who still carries the loss.
And every survivor we have lost since.
We hold on to their names and faces. And we will never let them fade.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
And on behalf of the Australian Labor Government that I am proud to lead, I re-commit to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full.
Including a constitutionally-enshrined Voice to our National Parliament.
****
Delegate Albanese, New South Wales Administrative Committee.
Thank you all very much for that warm welcome.
I have to say, I didn’t always get that sort of universal reception here.
There was a time which coincided with a Saturday morning contribution from myself where the microphone mysteriously failed to work.
But not today. Not with the Communications Minister in charge.
Delegates.
Parliamentary colleagues.
Proud representatives of the trade union movement.
True believers, one and all.
I first came to this great conference as a delegate back in 1983.
I never dreamed I’d be standing on this stage as leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party - let alone as Australia’s 31st Prime Minister.
On this beautiful Sydney day, I know all of us are thinking of our friends and fellow Australians facing rising flood-waters.
To everyone in Western NSW, in Victoria and in Tassie, you are in our thoughts.
And our government stands ready to do whatever we can to help, wherever it is needed.
Being here brings back a lot of memories. It is a very emotional entry for me this morning.
As you know, across the Saturday and Sunday mornings we hear from the Federal and State leaders.
That’s when my Mum used to come along – she’d sit just up there.
She was never a delegate.
She never sought – or held – a position in our party.
She never asked for anything.
In that, she was just like tens of thousands of other branch members over the years.
The people who hand out on pre-poll, sell raffle tickets, make phone calls, they talk to their neighbours, organise, volunteer, do their bit, give their time and keep the faith.
They don’t do it for personal gain - but because they trust in the power and the value and the necessity of reforming Labor Governments.&nbsp;
I want to thank all the true believers of New South Wales Branch for the work you did to help Labor win the Federal Election in May…
…I want to thank you for the work you are doing to help Labor win the State Election in March and make Chris Minns the Premier of New South Wales..
And I want to salute all the life members being honoured this weekend.&nbsp;
My Mum’s beaming smile lit up this stage when she was made a life member back in the year 2000.
And I like to think her light is shining down on me this morning.
I’ll never forget where I come from – and I’ll never take for granted that for over 130 years, the Parliamentary Labor Party has stood on the shoulders of rank and file party members and the trade unionists who want every Australian to share in opportunities for a better life and a more sustainable future.
****
This mighty colosseum of political engagement - a bit like the Roman colosseum - has seen the occasional mauling at the hands of a political lion, particularly on a Saturday morning.
It’s understandable that over the years the theatre and the drama, the internal issues and the intrigue, have grabbed the headlines.
But the commentators who don’t look deeper than this, miss what really matters.
They miss the great strength of the mighty New South Wales Branch of the Australian Labor Party.
That strength is that our passion, our energy, our focus is not on ourselves –it’s always in the service of the Australian people.
And the arguments and debates we have here matter, the ideas we grapple with, the resolutions we move – shape the future of our nation.
Passions run high because we know the stakes are high, because millions of Australians count on Labor Governments – State and Federal - to get it right, to fight for them:
To stand up for fair pay and secure work.
To invest in reliable and affordable services
And to deliver the social and economic reforms that will open the doors of opportunity for people in every part of our great nation.
To create an economy and a nation where no-one is held back and no-one is left behind.
This is victory’s heavy responsibility - but also its great reward.
This is why Chris Minns and his team are seeking government in March.
It’s why Prue Car has come back to the fight.
Friends, this is why Labor always seeks government.
For the chance to change the nation for the better, to build for the future.
To implement the reforms that transform lives.
To pass-on a better deal and greater opportunity to the next generation.
Our government takes up this task in a time of significant global uncertainty.

Military conflict in Europe
Economic turmoil in the UK
The risk of recession in the United States
And ongoing security challenges here in our region.

Inflation is biting economies around the world – and central banks everywhere are responding with the sharpest, most synchronised episode of monetary policy tightening in recent decades.
And – amidst all this - our government has also inherited a home-grown mess nine long years in the making:

A trillion dollars of debt
A decade of wages kept deliberately low
Denial about climate change
Chaos and dysfunction in energy policy
Cuts to schools and TAFE and apprenticeships
Extraordinary pressure on hospitals and health care workers
And a vendetta against local manufacturing that has left Australia vulnerable, the last link in too many global supply chains.

When we look at this legacy, when we sift through the wreckage of these wasted years, let us be clear:
Never again can the Liberals pretend to be the party of fiscal responsibility or good economic management.
Never again can the Liberals pretend they support aspiration, when all they do is promote insecurity at work.
And never again can the Liberals claim to be Conservatives, when all they do is trash our institutions and undermine our democracy.
It’s still beyond belief that the last Prime Minister, a man addicted to saying “that’s not my job” was going around secretly swearing himself into other jobs.
Delegates
Unlike the last occupant, I have a great team, a team that I trust.
My colleagues and I never underestimated the size or scale or severity of the economic challenges facing us.
And after five months in government, untangling all the shady deals, reviewing every buried report, running the ruler over every rort, dragging the true state of the national books into the light, we can now see the problems and pressures are even greater than we imagined.
But we are not daunted – we are determined.
We are galvanised, above all, by our faith in the people of Australia.
Through pandemic and disaster, hardship and heartache, Australians have shown – time and time again – they are brave enough and smart enough to meet any challenge.
And just as the pandemic proved that our Labor values of fairness, security, looking after each other and the power of government to change lives are the right values in a crisis.
We know they are also the right values for our recovery.
Working together we can build a stronger, fairer, more productive and more competitive economy.
An economy where working hard means you can pay your bills, support your family, plan for the future and achieve your aspirations.&nbsp;
An economy that works for people, not the other way around.
And for 131 years now, our movement has understood this begins with a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work.&nbsp;
Some of you might remember that day in Melbourne when I was asked during the campaign if I supported a $1 an hour rise in the minimum wage - my answer was: “Absolutely”.
And I’m so proud we have delivered for the heroes of the frontline.
We have also committed to funding a meaningful - and long overdue - pay rise for the aged care workers of Australia.
At the end of this month, the Parliament will vote on our plan to make ten days paid family and domestic violence leave part of the National Employment Standards.
And because we believe a fair go at work means a safe workplace, free from sexual harassment, we are implementing all 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report.
In the months ahead we will make job security and gender pay equity objectives of the Fair Work Act.
We will close the loopholes that have allowed labour hire to be used as a tool to drive down wages, rather than as a source of specialist skills.
Put simply: Same Job, Same Pay.
And I reiterate this commitment: our Labor Government will make wage theft a crime.
We will achieve these changes by bringing people together.
Because just as Australian workers have lost a decade of pay rises to a Liberal Government that deployed low wages as a ‘deliberate design feature’ of their economic policy.
Australian businesses have also been denied a decade of opportunities in productivity and participation and innovation and competition because the last government never stopped attacking unions, and they never stopped goading local manufacturing offshore and cutting TAFE.
We are determined to do better – for workers, for business, for the economy.
That’s why we brought together the National Jobs and Skills Summit in September.
Not just to demonstrate we are serious about creating a new culture of co-operation – but to prove that when we listen to each other and work together on solutions, the outcomes will be better.
A billion dollar training blitz, with 180,000 new fee-free places in public TAFE next year.
Helping pensioners and veterans who want to work more, earn more without being penalised
Genuine reform to the immigration system - so we stop the revolving door of temporary labour and give skilled migrants the opportunity to put down roots, join our community and follow a pathway to permanent citizenship.
And fixing the broken workplace bargaining system.
Big employers, small business and unions all agree that the current bargaining framework is failing to deliver productivity gains or wage rises.
Not good for business. Not good for workers.
And it’s failing women worst of all.
Because whichever way you look at it, the workforces with the most women have the least bargaining power and the lowest pay.
We’re talking about people working in Aged care. Child care. Disability care.
Looking after our parents, teaching our children, fulfilling the great promise of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
These Australians deserve more than our thanks: they deserve better conditions, better support, and better pay.
Delegates
Far and away the most significant personnel change I see when I look around the Sydney Town Hall today, compared to my first conference as a delegate is the number of women.
Our party had the foresight to adopt affirmative action provisions and to put in place rules and structures to make us truly representative of the nation we seek to serve.
I remember there was debate about which decade and what year we would achieve equal representation of men and women in our Federal Caucus.
Well friends, now we know the answer: 2022.
Because I am proud to lead a federal caucus, 103 strong of whom a majority – 54 – are women.
Labor at our best: setting a target, having an objective and getting it done.
Our party is better and smarter and stronger because we have made a real and substantive commitment to equal representation and equal opportunity for women.
And – friends – the same will be true for our economy and our nation.
Equality for women is at the heart of our vision for a fair go at work.
And equality for women will be at the centre of our first Budget in a fortnight’s time.
The full and equal and respectful participation of women in our economy is our nation’s greatest untapped resource.
Today, I am proud to announce that the first Budget of our Labor Government will deliver the biggest boost to Paid Parental Leave since it was created by the former Labor Government in 2011.
We will expand Paid Parental Leave to 26 weeks. A full six months.
By 2026, every family with a new baby will be able to access a total of 6 months paid leave, shared between the two parents.
And single parents will be able to access all 26 weeks.
We will give families more leave – and more flexibility, to ensure the system works in a way that’s best for them.
Our plan will mean more families take-up this leave, share in that precious time – and share the caring responsibilities more equally.
This plan will support dads who want to take time off work to be more involved in those early months.
It’s a modern policy, for modern families.
It delivers more choice, it offers greater security – and it rewards aspiration.
And just like the cheaper childcare that we are delivering- this is economic reform.
This was one of the strongest points of consensus and one of the clearest calls for action from our Jobs and Skills Summit.
Businesses, unions, experts and economists all understand that one of the best ways to boost productivity and participation across the economy is to provide more choice and more support for families – and more opportunity for women.
And let me be very clear: the government views this as the foundation, the baseline, a national minimum standard.
And we are encouraged that there are already enlightened employers across Australia competing to offer working parents the best possible deal.
And we want to see more of it.
Because a parental leave system that empowers the full and equal participation of women will be good for business, good for families and good for our economy.
Delegates
Ten days from now, the Treasurer Jim Chalmers will deliver the first Labor Budget in a decade.
It will be a true Labor Budget: responsible, fair and reforming.
And it will be a Budget that closes the book on a wasted decade that has weakened our economy and held back our nation.
Of course, we understand that not every problem can be solved in one Budget, or even one term of government.
We all know that progress demands patience, change can be painstaking.
Building to last always takes time.
But this is not an excuse to delay, it is the reason we must begin.
After a wasted decade, my team and I are determined not to waste a day.
After 9 years of division and denial and dysfunction on energy policy, we are lifting Australia’s ambitions on climate change.
After 9 years of wage suppression, we’re getting wages moving again.
After 9 years of shameful neglect in aged care, we’re taking action to fix the crisis.
After 9 years of attacks on the national broadcaster, we’re restoring funding certainty to the ABC.
After 9 years of Australia’s international reputation being trashed, we’re rebuilding our relationships in the region and restoring our credibility in the world.
After 9 years of sordid scandals that shook people’s faith in democracy, we are restoring integrity to politics with a National Anti-Corruption Commission.
After 9 years of government attacking unions, sidelining business, marginalising women, targeting minorities and dividing the nation we are working to bring Australians together.
And after all those years, of acting like an opposition-in-exile.
What have the Liberals learned from their defeat? Absolutely nothing.
They take no responsibility for the mess they have left.
And they show no interest in helping clean it up.
Indeed, in a rare moment of clarity, one of them recently declared:
“We don’t have policies, we’re the Opposition.”
The only suggestion they’ve put forward is the extraordinary idea that we should move to the most expensive form of new energy…and embrace nuclear power.
Delegates: we’ve got the light on the hill – they want to glow in the dark!
****
Delegates
Our government’s first Budget will signal that the era of policy chaos and shameless, reckless pork-barrelling is over.
Our Budget will be a strong foundation for the next decade – not a cynical short-term giveaway for the next election.
Cheaper child care, cheaper medicine, rescuing bulk-billing with our new Urgent Care Clinics - taking pressure off the cost-of-living without adding to inflation.
Investing in cleaner, cheaper energy and funding infrastructure on the basis of productivity gains and community benefit – not National Party Politics.
Restoring humanity and dignity and security to aged care.
Beginning the generational reform of universal, affordable child care - in the great Labor tradition of universal Medicare and universal superannuation.
And expanding Paid Parental Leave to 6 months.
These are the building blocks for a better future.
They are at the heart of our plan for an economy that repays hard work, rewards aspiration and provides certainty and security for families.
An economy true to our Labor values: no-one held back, no-one left behind.
Delegates
There are no easy choices in uncertain times.
There is no smooth sailing in a global storm.
But none of us joined the Labor Party for a cruisy ride or a quiet life.
Just as we don’t come to government to occupy the space, or pass the time.
We don’t seek government for its own sake, for the opportunity to change the name on the door.
In May, we asked the Australian people for a mandate to deliver a better future – and we are.&nbsp;
We are delivering on our commitment to the Uluru Statement from the Heart – and we will hold a referendum on a constitutionally-enshrined Voice to Parliament in the next financial year.
Now, I know some commentators have said this is a risk.
But no team ever won a grand final by not running on the field and forfeiting.
The Uluru Statement was five years in the making. It has been five years since that generous statement was made.
If not now – when?
The Constitution is our nation’s birth certificate.
Constitutional recognition will give respect to First Nations people.
It will give all Australians a greater sense of who we are, of the privilege we have to share this continent with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
We should all be proud that our history goes back 65,000 years.
It will send a message to the world, that we are a mature, confident nation on the road to reconciliation.
Delegates
In May, Australians across the nation voted for action on climate change – and we are delivering.
Families everywhere voted for cheaper child care – and we are delivering.
Australians voted for cheaper medicine –the first cut in the cost of prescription medicine since Curtin and Chifley created the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme – and we are delivering.
People voted for decency, to safely return the Nadesalingam family to Bilo – and that is exactly where they are right now.
Australians in our cities and our suburbs and our regions voted to revive local manufacturing, to make things here again – and we are delivering.
Australians voted for our promise to back a real increase in the minimum wage – and we delivered.
Australians voted to abolish the discrimination of the Cashless Debit Card – and it is gone.
Australians voted for us to rebuild Australia’s reputation on the world stage – as an ally, as a trading partner, as a neighbour and a leader – and we are delivering.
And, friends, Australians in every state and territory voted for us, trusted in us, not just because we promised to be a different government – but because we promised to be a better government.
A government that treats people with respect.
At a time when democracy is under challenge, when disinformation is rife and disillusionment with institutions is rising, we are seeking to rebuild trust and faith and hope in the purpose and value of government.
To prove that a government with vision, with patience and with determination can change lives for the better.&nbsp;
There is no higher calling.
No greater responsibility.
And nowhere else we would rather be.
We promised a Better Future.
And that is precisely what we will deliver.
Thank you very much.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Can I welcome very much Prime Minister Kishida and his delegation here today.
You are a great friend of Australia.
There are some state premiers around the country who will wonder why it is that we've met more often than I've met them in my five months as Prime Minister.
This is our fourth meeting. I, of course, have visited Japan twice.
Today, we had an important discussion and signed some significant agreements going forward.
And we did it here in the great global city of Perth.
It was a very conscious decision to invite the Prime Minister to have our bilateral meeting here in Perth, Western Australia. Because Western Australia is, of course, such an important state for the trading relationship with Japan, in resources, in energy, and also in further economic cooperation that we will have going forward as well.
It was very fitting that Tokyo was my first destination as Prime Minister.
As you know, I was elected on the 21st of May. And by the 23rd of May, I was in Tokyo.
The fastest ever swearing in of any Prime Minister since Federation here in Australia. But also, I think it's fair to say, the fastest ever international engagement when I attended the Quad Leaders' meeting.
But it was important that we hit the ground running and not waste a day. And my Government has hit the ground running.
One of the things that we have done is to ensure that our international relations are advanced, that we become even closer with our close friends, but that we reengage in the Indo-Pacific.
And today, in the discussions that we had, we talked about the closeness of our relationship based not just upon our economic relations and the fact that our economies are complementary. We have a lot of what Japan needs, which benefits both Australia and Japan. But it's also a relationship based upon our shared values.
The values of democracy, the values of security, the values of the rule of law. Values that have developed since 1958, I think, when we first did the agreement between Australia and Japan about an economic relationship. The values of human rights.
And the Quad Leaders' meeting is an important one.
And next year, Australia will be the host of Quad. And I can only hope that we do as good a job as Japan did earlier this year in hosting the Quad meeting in Tokyo.
But it's also the case that Prime Minister Kishida and myself will be seeing a lot of each other next month at the meetings of the East Asia Summit, the G20 and APEC.
And at those meetings, we will be cooperating. We'll be talking about what our common interests are and how we spread that commonality throughout the region.
Because both countries hope to provide leadership in security and peace and stability in the region.
And that means defence issues.
And we advanced our defence cooperation agreements today.
But it also means support for free markets and proper trade. It means support for movement in terms of our skills and labour and cooperation.
It also means that when we talk about the Indo-Pacific, we know that we live in an era of strategic competition in our region.
And that is the context for Australia's engagement with Japan, and increased cooperation across the board.
We know that, historically, we've been important providers of LNG, coal and other resources. We remain a secure partner.
Australia can be relied upon to always honour contracts and honour agreements.
We believe that this is just the way that we do business.
And we're also open to investment. And I know INPEX is here. And other businesses have been such important investors here in Australia for common and mutual interest.
But of course, we are moving forward in a changing global economy.
And what that means is how do we put into practice our shared commitment to move to net zero by 2050?
And one of the things that we talked about today was, and we signed an agreement for critical minerals going forward as well, Australia has everything that goes into the battery, we have everything that goes into a whole lot of the technology of which there'll be more demand for in the future.
And when we talk about national security issues, we have to look beyond these days in 2022, beyond tanks and weaponry. We have to look at climate change and the threat that it represents to national security. We have to look at how resilient our economy is.
Because one of the things that happened during the global pandemic was that it exposed some of Australia's vulnerabilities. We need to make more things here.
Japan needs to make more things in Japan. They have been great.
We can cooperate in areas so that we aren't reliant upon resources and technologies that leaves us very vulnerable, potentially, for future shocks.
And we know that those shocks can represent many things.
It could be another pandemic, it can be cyber issues, as we have been talking about in the last fortnight in Australia, but it could also be, of course, tragically, it could be also issues relating to the strategic competition that we're seeing in our region.
So, we need to be vigilant.
We need to make sure that the vision that our Government has, you'll see reflected in the Budget next Tuesday night, is one of a country that continues to export and be a reliable partner, is one that invests appropriately in our defence and security issues, is one that takes the challenge of climate change seriously, but sees it as an opportunity.
An opportunity to build more things here, to take advantage of becoming a renewable energy superpower for the world.
And engagement with new industries like hydrogen and others that are emerging is important as well.
After this lunch, we'll be going down to BHP's Nickel West Refinery in Kwinana, where I've visited before.
We'll see some of the cooperation that is already underway between Australian and Japanese companies to support the renewable energy supply chain.
The refinery makes nickel sulphate for EV batteries, including for Toyota. It's just one example of what's going on here in WA.
And I want to finish by thanking Mark McGowan, my friend, the Premier of WA, for jointly hosting this luncheon for his Ministers who are here.
I believe that it was appropriate, when we came up with the idea of where we're going to have the bilateral, instead of doing everything in Canberra and Sydney and Melbourne, guess what?
You've got a Prime Minister who knows where Perth is.
I had my campaign launch here, not by accident.
I'll bring other world leaders here, not by accident.
Because this is an engine room of the Australian economy.
And if you're going to represent the entire nation, as I intend to do, you've got to visit it, you've got to be engaged in it, you've got to participate in and you've got to have a presence here.
Hence, this occasion here over what is a four-day visit on this occasion to coincide with the Telethon as well that will be held, of course, tonight.
And I know Kerry Stokes and others who are here who are playing such an important role in that.
It gives you a sense of what a great community it is here in WA as well.
I always feel very welcomed here, Prime Minister.
And I assure you, Prime Minister, you are such a welcomed guest here.
I look forward to welcoming you back next year.
I look forward to you at the Quad Leaders' meeting that I'll be hosting.
And I look forward to our continued engagement and building on, not just the relationship between our two countries, but a friendship between its two leaders.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: I begin, as we do in Australia, by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging. I'm absolutely delighted to welcome you, Prime Minister, to Australia for our bilateral meeting. Indeed, this is our fourth meeting. And I've only been Prime Minister for five months. But not only are we becoming friends, but today you have become friends with some furry Australians. And it is particularly good to welcome you here to the great city of Perth in the great state of Western Australia, which is the centre of so much of our economic interaction that's so important for both our nations. The level of interaction which we have reflects very much the special strategic partnership that Australia and Japan have. We two countries really matter to each other now more than ever. And it was quite a remarkable beginning to my prime ministership to be able to travel to Tokyo less than 48 hours after our election, and on the very day in which I became Prime Minister. Our relationship is built on mutual trust, mutual respect and mutual interest. It is an economic relationship based upon the fact that Australia remains a reliable and secure partner when it comes to the export of energy to Japan that has been so important for Japan's post-war development. But the relationship is much deeper than an economic one. Because its foundation is on our values of democracy, of human rights and a free and open Indo-Pacific. And that is reflected in the work that we have done through the Quad, which I will be very proud to host in Australia next year. And I hope it is as successful as your hosting of the Quad Meeting was in Tokyo just a few months ago. Those values are reflected in our signatures today to the upgraded and renewed Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation, to upgrade this partnership over the coming decade. We are important security partners, but we're also important energy partners. And it is now 65 years ago since we signed the Commerce Agreement in Hakone, in the shadows of Mount Fuji. And ever since then, our resources trade has helped both of our countries to prosper. And I thank you for accepting the invitation to meet, particularly in Perth, which has played such an absolutely critical role in that economic relationship and on the export of resources to Japan. But the changing nature of the global economy and dealing with the challenge of climate change means that some of the shift in that economic relationship will go to new opportunities, particularly in the area of critical minerals, which will be so important for achieving the goal that we share of net zero emissions by 2050. So, this afternoon we will visit the BHP Nickel Refinery in my Resources Minister's electorate down in Rockingham here just south of Perth. As we discussed, it isn't just nickel and cobalt and lithium. It's hydrogen and the other exciting opportunities that we can work together on to achieve our common objectives So, I look forward to today's meeting that is the next step in an even deeper friendship between our two countries. One that I think was underlined by my attendance along with three former Prime Ministers at the memorial service to Shinzo Abe, who was such a great friend of Australia. And on behalf of my country, once again, I pass on our condolences to yourself as Prime Minister, and a dear friend of Abe-san, but also to the people of Japan on the loss due to how it occurred as well, just really underline how tragic that was. Thank you so much, my friend.
HIS EXELLENCY FUMIO KISHIDA, PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN: Thank you, Anthony, for your very warm words of welcome. I'd like to express my heartfelt appreciation. In the outset, I would like to express my heartfelt condolences to the damage caused by large-scale flooding that are happening in the East Coast, including Melbourne. You also touched upon your attendance at the state funeral for former Prime Minister Abe. The fact that, Anthony, you visited Japan together with three former Prime Ministers really symbolises the strong relationship between Japan and Australia for which I extend my heartfelt appreciation. I also appreciate the fact that you've welcomed me here in Perth despite that this is taking place on the weekend. Here in Perth, it really symbolises the post-war history of the Japan-Australia partnership in the field of natural resources and energy. Japan and Australia share strategic interests and fundamental values. Under the increasingly severe strategic environment, we have been working together to achieve a free and open Indo-Pacific. Through this experience, the bonds that tie Japan and Australia together have become much stronger. And our two countries have become the central pillar of cooperation among like-minded countries, Anthony, as you pointed out, Anthony and I have held meetings almost every month. Based on such a foundation, today, I look forward to deepening our discussions, including on security and defence cooperation, free and open Indo-Pacific and cooperation in the field of natural resources and energy. Through such a discussion, I would like to elevate our special strategic partnership to a new level.
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Thank you very much.


Thank you very much. As if to underline, if you needed any reminder of the difference between the current Government and the past, the division we just voted on, if it was carried would have stopped the cheaper child care legislation. So way back at the Jobs and Skills Summit in September, the economist Danielle Wood made the observation that if untapped women's workforce participation were iron ore, we'd be falling over ourselves to dig it up. The message from the Budget handed down by the Treasurer last night was simply this: we’re digging. We are digging to make sure that we take advantage of the fact, for all of us, that women's economic participation is something that doesn't just benefit individual women. It doesn't just benefit families. It benefits the entire nation.
And that's why I'm very proud to lead a Government that has 54 members of the Caucus who are women out of a Caucus of 103. More women cabinet ministers than ever before. More women ministers than ever before. More women in senior positions across the Parliament than ever before. And it makes the Government function better because it is more representative of the population, just as our ethnic and religious diversity helps our Government not just project a much a better image, but better results and better outcomes.
What this Budget and this Women's Budget Statement emphasises is what a difference a change in government makes. Australians voted for change in May and women’s voting patterns were a large part of that change. They wanted a Government that was responsive to the entire population, not just to a segment of it. And that's what they have got. This is a Budget that puts equality for women at its centre. Cheaper child care and early childhood education was the first major commitment I made as Leader of the Labor Party in my first Budget Reply, and we delivered it. The legislation that's just passed the House of Representatives, we'll deliver it when it goes through the Senate soon, $4.6 billion over four years. Good for families, good for children, but also good for the economy by boosting women's workforce participation and boosting productivity.
The biggest expansion to Paid Parental Leave since it was introduced, of course, by a Labor Government in 2011, designed to encourage parents to share caring responsibilities more equally. Record funding for women's safety, $1.7 billion over six years. It includes investing in an additional 500 frontline community workers. Ensuring that the returns of the $10 billion Housing Australia Future Fund can help deliver 4,000 new homes to put a roof over their heads of women fleeing violence and older women at risk of homelessness. We know that every night in this country, women, and sometimes women with their children, are turned away from shelters, because there's simply nowhere for them to go. We are a wealthy enough country to do so much better than that. And the Government's determined to do that, with an addition to that commitment for a permanent roof over people's head through social housing, $100 million additional for crisis and transitional housing options for women and children fleeing violence. We also will fully implement the Respect@Work report, including the funding, properly, of working women centres in every state and every territory.
In addition to that, we've had our attitude towards wages. Now you'll hear a bit about industrial relations in the coming weeks. The truth is that if you look at the feminised sections of the workforce, they are the lowest paid sections of the workforce. They're also the sections of the workforce that got Australia through the pandemic, that we relied upon, that we should never, ever take for granted. And we should do more than just say thanks – thanks to the aged care workers, thanks to the cleaners, thanks to the child care workers – we should actually deliver.
My favourite moment of the election campaign was when I was asked would I support a Fair Work Commission decision to keep the minimum wage at a level that was the same as the inflation rate. And I answered in one word. Absolutely. That was seen as controversial, somehow. I was very pleased that it was perceived as controversial for 24 or 48 hours. But it enabled me to walk around with $1 coin in my pocket for the last couple of weeks of the campaign. And say that yes, absolutely that was a conscious decision. And of course, the first thing in Government was put in that position to the Fair Work Commission, which resulted in a 5.2 per cent increase that flowed through to 2.7 million workers, the overwhelming majority of whom were women.
And, of course, we have put in a submission to the Fair Work Commission about aged care workers as well, the majority of whom are women. We won't have an aged care sector if we continue to say that you can earn more for packing shelves than you can for working with vulnerable old people with all have the physical stress and hard work that that entails, but also the emotional stress of literally being family in the type of relationship that aged care workers have with those that they care for. Now they don't do it for the money. But surely, if we're going to have a sector that is able to look after the aging population which we are facing, we need to do much better than that.
So, this week our legislation we're dealing with is with all of those matters. Respect@Work, cheaper child care. And last night and then finalised today in the House of Representatives, the Family and Domestic Violence Leave legislation has now passed both Chambers of Parliament.
So, we have a big agenda. But we are just getting started. And I want to particularly pay tribute to Jim and Katy for the work that they did, Katy, as well, with the Minister for the Status of Women platform. I assure you that when we went through the ERV process, all of our Budget items had a gender lens, a gender lens that hasn't been looked at for the last decade, which began with the absurdity, frankly, of one woman in the Cabinet and Tony Abbott as the Minister for the Status of Women. To be fair to Tony, at least they announced it unlike other Prime Ministers. I certainly feel no need to have other titles or secret jobs, not least on the issue of the status of women when we have such an extraordinary and extraordinary array of policies right across the board.
I pay tribute to Katy. I pay tribute to Sharon and the work that she's done on the Committee. I pay tribute to Tanya Plibersek and the work that she did as a Shadow Minister, and before her Julie Collins. But this is a whole-of-government approach. And it's a whole-of-government approach which makes me very proud to be the Prime Minister of this extraordinary team full of talent that is much more representative than any government we have seen before by definition. So, thanks everyone and congratulations.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It’s fantastic to be in Griffith today to open this magnificent new sports complex.
I know it’s been in the works for a long time, so today’s a proud day – and I’m delighted to be sharing it with you.
This new complex offers so much.
Brand new basketball and netball courts.
A new athletics track, grandstand, hockey pitch and Olympic-size pool.
State-of-the-art facilities – for budding sports stars, as well as social players.
For locals to use every week, and for the wider region to flock to for big events.
For everyone in and around Griffith to join in what’s being called the ‘Green and Gold Decade’ – the 10 years of major sporting events that Australia will host between now and the Brisbane Olympics and Paralympics.
So many kids who play sport will be dreaming about Brisbane 2032.
I hope we see some of them up on the podium in 10 years’ time.
And I can see this new sports complex being a stepping stone on some of those journeys, and a hub for this community.
This Government knows how important community infrastructure is, particularly in regional Australia.
That’s why in our Budget this week we announced $1 billion for two new programs.
Our Growing Regions Program will support community infrastructure like this one that enhances liveability and supports prosperity.
And through our Regional Precincts and Partnerships Program, we’ll work with states and local councils to invest in larger scale place-based projects aimed at transforming regional and rural centres.
We’re doing this because we want to drive regional economic prosperity by providing equitable and fair access to funding for capital works for community and economic infrastructure.
And we are doing this because we want to improve quality of life for all Australians.
Sport can play a big part in that.
I love that you’ve made today a ‘come-and-try’ day.
Have a go on the court.
Get out on the pitch.
Jump in the pool.
Come and get involved.
That, to me, is the essence of community sport.
Everyone pitching in – on and off the field.
Everyone feeling like they belong, and they’re part of something bigger.
Sport teaches us the value of practice and persistence.
Team sport teaches the power of working together.
We grow through heartbreaking losses and euphoric wins.
I’m so proud of Australia’s sportspeople and coaches.
People like Evonne Goolagong Cawley – who was born right here in Griffith and grew up in Barellan.
Evonne didn’t start with much – just a homemade racquet and a second-hand ball.
The attitudes of the day meant that as a young Wirudjuri girl, she couldn’t play in the club with the other kids.
But she overcame, and went on to win 14 Grand Slam titles – at the Australian Open, the French Open, and Wimbledon.
All her life, she’s set an example of extraordinary sportsmanship, and worked tirelessly to create opportunities for Indigenous people.
Our Australian of the Year, Dylan Alcott, is another tremendous example of a sportsman who gives his all, and also gives back to the community.
As are all the sporting stars who are here today – from the GWS Giants, the Sydney Kings, the Sydney Flames, the Hockeyroos, and the Kookaburras – who are fresh from their 7th consecutive Commonwealth Games gold medal!
Congratulations to everyone who’s worked hard to make this vision a reality.
It's my very great pleasure to officially open the Griffith Regional Sports Complex.
I know it will be home to big dreams and wonderful memories.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I’m proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full, including a constitutionally-enshrined Voice to Parliament.
It’s great to be back in Melbourne for the conference that stops the nation and to have the chance to reflect on the generational Labor mission I referred to in my speech on election night:
Opening the doors of opportunity – and widening them.
That ambition is at the heart of our vision for Australia and it’s the foundation of our first Budget.
We’d always said that if we were successful at the election, our government would deliver our own Budget this year.
First, because we wanted to move quickly to deliver on the commitments we took to the Australian people.
To put the plan Australians voted for into action.
Getting our investments in cheaper child care, cheaper medicine, fee-free TAFE, local manufacturing and affordable housing on the books and underway, as soon as possible.
And second, because we knew that the best time to strip-away the waste and rorts of your predecessors is early on.
But it became very clear, very quickly there was a third compelling reason for our government to deliver a new Budget in October, following the Liberal one in March.
That is the significant and rapid change we’ve seen in the global economic environment in recent months:
The IMF has downgraded its global growth projections – and is warning of ‘stormy waters’ ahead.
The consequences of Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine are driving up fuel costs and energy bills around the world.
And the impact of that here in Australia is magnified by a decade of ideological opposition to renewables and the neglect of key energy infrastructure – leaving us more vulnerable to global shocks.&nbsp;
Rising inflation is biting here and overseas - and central banks are responding with the sharpest and most synchronised tightening of monetary policy for decades.
And while the long tail of COVID continues to impact supply chains and construction costs, the new economic downturn we are facing is very different to the recession brought on by the pandemic.
We can’t close our borders and wait it out, we have to reform our way through.
Our Budget was framed in recognition of this global uncertainty – as well as the intensifying fiscal challenges here at home.&nbsp;
Alongside the terrible and tragic human cost of the floods that are battering our nation, there will be severe economic consequences for our farmers and producers.
And then there are the obvious, standout structural spends:

Growing pressure on health care.&nbsp;
A crisis in aged care
New investments in our defence and national security, critical in this time of regional instability.
And cost pressures on the NDIS.

At Budget time, we can all occasionally fall into the trap of talking about these four things simply as a set of figures.&nbsp;
But that’s not right.
National Security. Medicare. Aged Care. The NDIS.
These programs are essential to the safety of our people, fundamental to the health and strength and fairness of our society.
Our national security is a national asset.
Investing in our capability helps keep Australians safe. It is also part of our contribution as an ally and a partner and a neighbour and a leader.
And – at their best – reliable, affordable services are economic assets too.
One of the crystal-clear lessons of the pandemic is that a healthy economy depends on healthy people.
Making sure people can see a doctor when they’re feeling sick and afford the medicine to make them better means less time off work and less risk of adding pressure to the hospital system.&nbsp;
When people with disability are at the centre of decision-making – not only is the care more efficient and better targeted, the opportunities for economic participation are greater too.
It’s why Labor created the NDIS, it’s the same reason we created Medicare - because we know affordable, universal services give people greater confidence.
They reward aspiration, they make sure the doors of opportunity are open to all.
So, yes, of course we always want to see value for every dollar.
And we must ensure these programs are sustainable, for the long term.
But we also have a clear understanding of the value of these investments, as well as their cost.&nbsp;
Recognising also there is a clear difference between those four major areas of spending growth – and the fifth, which is the cost of repayments on a trillion dollars of debt, when interest rates are rising.
Our government has inherited the highest level of debt as a share of GDP in over 70 years.
And we face higher borrowing costs to service this debt.
At $12 billion, the increase in the interest bill over the next four years is not just the largest payment variation in the Budget, it is also the fastest growing cost.
And this interest bill is forecast to rise at more than 14 per cent a year over the next decade.
This is why Jim Chalmers and Katy Gallagher went through every program, line by line, to identify $22 billion in savings.&nbsp;
And it’s why we purposefully returned the revenue upgrades to the bottom line.
99 cents in every dollar for the first two years.
92 cents in the dollar over the forward estimates.
For perspective, the previous government averaged 40 cents in the dollar.
Howard and Costello went at 30 cents.
We are serious about the work of Budget repair, because we know how important it is to build a fiscal buffer against international uncertainty.
To plan and prepare for the unknown, for the global shocks that expose a domestic weakness.
Just as the pandemic revealed the grievous risk of goading manufacturers offshore and stranding Australia at the end of the global supply chain.
Just as the impact of Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine on global energy prices has put a spotlight on the catastrophic consequences of ten years of denial and delay and neglect here at home.
Of course, as a Labor Government, my colleagues and I understand there are many people feeling the pain of rising prices, especially off the back of a decade of stagnant wages.
And the easy option would have been for us to funnel these savings straight into a cash-splash, a one-off giveaway to buy a headline.
Cheap politics and hugely expensive economics.&nbsp;
Not just because of the dollar cost.
Not just because that’s exactly the sort of short-term approach that got Australia into this situation.
But because the untargeted spending would make the problem worse.
Instead of helping households, it would only add to the inflationary pressures that are eating-away at family budgets and devaluing wages.
What’s more it would put the independent Reserve Bank in a position where it would likely raise interest rates higher than it otherwise would.
Fiscal policy needs to work with monetary policy, not contradict it.
The moment demands a different mindset and a different model.
And a critical part of that is getting wages moving again:

Delivering a real increase in the minimum wage
Supporting a meaningful, long overdue pay rise for aged care workers
Closing labour hire loopholes that drive down pay and undermine security
Fixing the broken bargaining system – helping more workers in low-paid sectors like disability care and early childhood education negotiate with their employers for a better deal.
And fee-free TAFE courses, more uni places, more apprenticeships – skilling people up for higher-paying jobs

It’s also about creating new jobs and investing in the resilience of our economy:

Backing local manufacturing, so we make things here again
Upgrading the NBN, so businesses and workers can have greater flexibility.

And our plans for Powering Australia and Rewiring the Nation – bringing tens of thousands of new jobs to regional Australia.
Our National Reconstruction Fund is central to transforming existing businesses but also supporting the creation of new industries for the future.
We’re also focused on providing cost-of-living relief that delivers an economic benefit - taking pressure off family budgets without putting pressure on inflation.
Making child care more affordable is the perfect example of this.
It’s cost-of-living relief that can save families thousands of dollars a year in fees.
And it’s economic reform that makes available over a million more hours of paid work for parents every week.
Raising incomes and boosting retirement savings, helping to address the terrible disparity in the wages and retirement incomes of men and women.
Investing in cheaper child care also delivers on the three Ps: participation, productivity and population.
So not only will it remove a structural barrier to economic equality for women.
It will also add the equivalent of 37,000 full-time workers a year to our economy.
These are not entry-level jobs either: we’re talking about women who are already on a career path, able to return to work and fulfil their aspirations for a promotion.
And all the economic principles behind our investment in child care hold true for our expansion of Paid Parental Leave to 6 months.
Providing more support and greater flexibility helps Mums and Dads with a new baby share those precious early days together – and it empowers parents to share the caring responsibilities more equally, in a way that works best for them.
I am proud to say our Budget’s commitment to Cheaper Child Care and the expansion of Paid Parental Leave represent Australia’s biggest-ever investment in women’s economic equality.
Because we understand economic equality for women is Australia’s biggest-ever untapped resource.
And talking of the doors of opportunity - the hard truth is too many times, the women of Australia have had to kick those doors down in pursuit of the respect, safety, support and opportunity they deserve.&nbsp;
These two measures speak for our commitment to help with the cost of living.
To champion equality for women.
To boost productivity and participation.
And they also reflect our commitment to economic reform driven by co-operation.
Because investing in Cheaper Child Care and expanding Paid Parental Leave were two of the clearest points of consensus from the Jobs and Skills Summit we brought together in September.
Economists, industry, unions, small business, State Governments, early childhood experts are all on the same page when it comes to these policies.
And that’s how we’re going to bed change down - and lock reform in, for the long term.
We’re taking the same approach with our new National Housing Accord and its aspiration of building one million new homes.
Bringing together:

State and territory and local governments
Institutional investors like superannuation
And the construction sector

To build more affordable housing, where it’s needed most.
Not crowding-out private investment, or competing with it - but bringing everyone together.
Incentivising some of the national savings pool, to help with a great national challenge.
Our National Housing Accord will work alongside:

Our Housing Australia Future Fund
Our Help to Buy program
Our Regional First Home Buyer Guarantee&nbsp;

So more Australians can grow up knowing the security of a roof over their head, so more families aspire to a home of their own.
I know this will change lives. It changed mine.
And that’s the final thing I would say about the doors of opportunity.
When a door is opened for you, you have a responsibility not just to hold it open for those who come after you, but to widen it.
To make sure it is easier for future generations to fulfil their potential, to achieve their aspirations, to enjoy a higher standard of living and greater economic security.
That’s not the work of one Budget, or one term of government - it is the responsibility one generation owes to the next.
It is the better future we campaigned on.
It is the better future people voted for.
It is the better future we are determined to deliver, for all Australians.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead an Australian Labor Government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, including a constitutionally-enshrined Voice to Parliament.
Thank you everyone for that warm welcome and thank you, Jim, for your generous introduction.
I know you’re a proud Queenslander – and you can be very proud of the Budget you delivered two weeks ago.
It was a Labor Budget, through and through: responsible in tough times, fairness at its core and focused on the future.
It’s a pleasure to be in Queensland again and it’s a special treat to be here on the Sunshine Coast.
Over the years I’ve spent so much time in this great state, building infrastructure which has boosted productivity, created jobs and made roads safer.
Just north of here, the Cooroy to Curra upgrade: a project which was ignored by Liberal-National Governments for so long.
And if you go further north - unlike the current leader of the Opposition – I know my Yeppen from my Yeppoon.
Can I acknowledge the outstanding Premier of your great state, Annastacia Palaszczuk.
Annastacia, you are a Labor legend – and a true friend.
As Opposition Leader, I could always count on your wisdom and support.
And I’m lucky to work with you as Prime Minister, as an important voice in the National Cabinet and a powerful champion for your state.
I also want to give a big shout-out to all the rank and file members and trade union representatives and true believers gathered here this morning.
I was reminiscing with a couple of my colleagues earlier about that rally we had in Brisbane on the last Sunday of the federal campaign.
I’ll never forget the energy in that room, the lift it gave to all of us in our final sprint to the line.
I want to thank all the members of the Queensland branch for the work you did to deliver a Federal Labor victory in May.
Never underestimate the difference your efforts made, not just to the success of the campaign but to the direction of the nation.
Because of what you did, because you gave your time and energy, because you made calls and knocked on doors and engaged with your fellow Queenslanders:

Australia has a Treasurer from Logan
Murray Watt is leading our support for disaster recovery around the nation.
Anika Wells is working to fix the crisis in Aged Care and – as Minister for Sport, getting a phone call every day from the Premier about the Brisbane Olympics.
Nita Green is protecting the Great Barrier Reef.
Anthony Chisholm is working on two great Queensland Labor priorities – education and regional development
Graham Perrett and Shayne Neumann are delivering for their communities
And as Speaker, Milton Dick has helped make parliament a place where things get done again.

We are lucky to have all these talented and passionate Queensland Ministers and Members and Senators in our Federal Caucus.
But we want more!
We know the work of building a better future takes more than one Budget, indeed more than one term of government.
And we know that there are more communities in Queensland who need and deserve Labor representation in the federal Parliament.
This is where I look to Annastacia’s example and the long-term success of her government.
The lesson and the inspiration I take from the Queensland branch is this:
Queenslanders pay on results.
Queenslanders respect straight talk.
Queenslanders back leaders who show up, who step up, who take responsibility.&nbsp;
And Queenslanders back governments who match their words with actions.
So the important task for Federal Labor here in Queensland is the same fundamental responsibility my colleagues and I take on everywhere, every day.&nbsp;

clean up the mess and chaos of a wasted decade
restore trust in government – by treating people with respect and being upfront about the challenges our nation is facing.
And deliver the plan for a better future that the Australian people voted for

And that’s why it’s so important that we can tell families in Corinda and Ipswich and Innisfail and Emerald they will save thousands every year under the Cheaper Child Care Plan we are delivering.
Good for their family budget.
Good for our national economy.
Good for our children’s early education.
And good for women’s economic equality.&nbsp;
Our government, the first government in Australian history where the majority of the Caucus are women, 54 out of 103.
We recognise that the full, equal and respectful participation of women in the economy is Australia’s greatest untapped resource.
That’s why we are delivering cheaper child care.
Implementing all 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report.
Making Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave part of the National Employment Standards, enshrined in law.
And expanding Paid Parental Leave to 26 weeks, a full six months.
Giving parents more time, more support and more choice – so Mums and Dads can share the caring responsibilities more equally.
Delegates, up and down the Bruce Highway, from the south east corner to Cairns, I’ve had the privilege of meeting with members of our amazing health care work force.
Heroes of the pandemic, heroes every day of the year.
We know more needs to be done to take pressure off our health system – and we believe every Australian, wherever they live, has the right to world-class, affordable health care.
That’s why our first Budget makes new investments in primary care and hospitals across Queensland and provides $26 million to support Mental Health and Suicide Prevention.&nbsp;
We’re restoring rural and regional psychiatric telehealth services too, so people don’t have to drive for hours to talk to someone who can help.&nbsp;
We are funding new Urgent Care Clinics, to take pressure off Emergency Departments and ensure more Queenslanders can see a bulk-billing doctor.
And we are working together with the Palaszczuk Government to build a new, nation-leading Comprehensive Cancer Centre in Brisbane.
And speaking of the Bruce Highway, I’m really pleased to say our Budget is funding a major upgrade in Brisbane’s outer northern suburbs.
As well as Stage 3 of the Gold Coast Light Rail - and Stage 1 of the Coomera Connector to Nerang.
We’re backing bang-for-buck projects that are ready to go - not LNP pork-barrel fantasies like commuter carparks at train stations that don’t exist.
Friends
One of my favourite days of the election campaign, was when I was asked if I supported a pay rise of a dollar an hour for workers on the minimum wage.
I said: absolutely.
And one of my proudest days in government was when we secured a real increase in the minimum wage for the heroes of the frontline.
The Liberals said it was ‘loose’, they said it was ‘irresponsible’.
I’ll tell you what’s irresponsible – and immoral - a decade of forcing down wages for working people.
A decade of low wages being used as a ‘deliberate design feature’.&nbsp;
We’re getting wages moving again.
Yesterday the Fair Work Commission granted aged care workers a 15% wage rise.
Do I welcome it? Absolutely!
These workers are the heroes of the pandemic.
This is the difference a Labor Government can make
Real wage justice for workers, mainly women, working hard, caring for older Australians.
Our Government is restoring the fair go at work.
Just like your Queensland Government - we’re going to make wage theft a crime.
And, friends, two weeks ago, we brought legislation into the parliament:

To protect workers from sexual harassment.
To make gender equity an objective of the fair work act.
To stop companies advertising jobs for rates of pay below the minimum wage.
And to fix the broken bargaining system, so workers in low-paid industries – nurses, carers, early childhood educators, disability care workers - can negotiate for a better deal.

At our Jobs and Skills Summit, big business, small business and unions all agreed that the current bargaining system isn’t delivering productivity gains or pay rises.
And it’s failing women worst of all, because it’s the workforces with the most women who currently have the least bargaining power and the lowest pay.
Our changes will mean the people who look after our loved ones when they are sick, who care for our parents when they get old, who educate our youngest Australians, who keep the promise at the heart of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Our changes will mean these Australians can hope for more than our thanks, they can seek the better conditions and better pay they deserve.
And the Coalition have already declared they’re against it.
Why?
Because, in the words of the Shadow Treasurer, ‘it will push wages up’.
I seriously doubt they even bothered to read the bill.
I bet they took one look at the title: ‘Secure Jobs and Better Pay’ and that was it, their reactionary gut instinct took over.
They went back to their WorkChoices happy place.
The fact is, whether it’s stagnant wages or denial over climate change or a Budget weighed down by a trillion dollars of debt - the LNP have learned nothing from their defeat.
They take no responsibility for the mess they have left behind.
And they show no interest in helping clean it up.
Let us be very clear, after the wasted decade they inflicted on Australia:
Never again can the Liberals pretend to be the party of fiscal responsibility or good economic management.
Never again can the Liberals pretend they support aspiration, when all they do is promote insecurity at work.
And never again can the Liberals claim to be conservatives, when all they do is trash our institutions and undermine our democracy.
Delegates, you can trace our movement’s fight for fair pay all the way back to the roots of the tree of knowledge.
But getting wages moving again is also fundamental to helping families with the cost-of-living pressures we are confronting right now.
So is our plan for cheaper childcare.
So is our action on cheaper medicine, the first cut in the cost of prescription medicines on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme since the Chifley Government created it.
And so is our new National Housing Accord that Jim announced on Budget night.
I am so pleased that the Queensland Government have joined with us and with the construction industry and with big institutional investors like superannuation funds, to commit to building one million new affordable homes.
It will work alongside our new Housing Future Fund, our Help to Buy Plan, and our Regional First Homebuyers Guarantee.
Because we believe every Australian deserves the right to a secure roof over their head.
And we understand that a home is more than just a place to sleep, it’s about connection and community and quality of life.
That’s why we want to put the Great Australian Dream in reach for the next generation, without forcing people to raid their retirement savings.
Of course, whenever we talk about cost-of-living, we recognise that power bills are front-of-mind for families.
A big factor in rising power prices is Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine and the pressure it’s putting on global energy supply.&nbsp;
But Australians are also paying the price for a decade of denial and delay and dysfunction in energy policy that has left us vulnerable to this international uncertainty.
A wasted decade in which the LNP actively opposed adding cleaner and cheaper power into the national grid, even while traditional energy sources were going offline.
4 gigawatts of energy went out of the system while the Liberals were in power - and only 1 gigawatt came in.
They fought for power among themselves, while the capacity to generate power for Australians drained away.
And now they criticise us for moving too fast to put it back in.
We all know the most affordable and most available form of new energy is renewable energy.
And that energy will power a new generation of Australian manufacturing, so instead of us being left as the last link in the global supply chain, we make things here again.
Friends, your Queensland Labor Government understands this – what’s more, you are acting on it.
Annastacia, the Queensland Energy and Jobs plan you announced last month is an act of leadership that will shape the future of this state – and our nation.
It’s classic Queensland – going for the biggest and the best.
The biggest pumped hydro scheme in the world.
Massive uptake in rooftop solar and battery storage.
A new Super Grid, connecting solar, wind battery and hydrogen generation across the state.
And bringing thousands of new jobs and billions in new investment to regional communities across this great decentralised state.
Putting Gladstone and Townsville and Mackay and Cairns at the forefront of this new wave of economic growth.
You’re doing it the Queensland way – and you’re doing it the Labor way, with a Jobs Security Guarantee, backing the energy workers whose efforts have powered this state’s prosperity for generations.
And – friends – for the first time in a decade, Queenslanders have a Federal Government in their corner on this, a partner in the work ahead.
Annastacia, we want to work with you and your government to bring the new jobs of clean energy to every corner of Queensland.
And we’ll take up this challenge and seize these opportunities by bringing people together.
Working with your government – and every state and territory government – Labor and Liberal.
Because this isn’t State of Origin, it’s not north against south, or east coast against west coast, it’s not the city against the regions.
We are all Australians and we can all seize this opportunity together.
Mind you, there is one exception. There’s always one.&nbsp;
The Federal Opposition just can’t seem to get it through their heads.
They want to turn their back on cheaper, cleaner energy and more jobs and – instead - invest in the most expensive form of energy, nuclear power.
Only Peter Dutton could look at this beautiful part of the Sunshine Coast and say:
‘What a great spot for a nuclear reactor!’. 
We believe in the light on the hill.
The LNP want us to glow in the dark!
Our government has begun the long-term work of bringing new renewable energy online.
And we are looking at everything we can do to get energy prices under control for families and businesses.
That’s how we operate.
Responsible. Fair. And focused on delivering for people.
Friends, we have come to government in challenging times - but the truth is government always brings challenges.
It asks tough questions. It demands hard decisions.
Yet the great reward – the cause and the calling that brought us to the labour movement – is the opportunity to change people’s lives for the better.
To deliver the change Australians voted for.
I reflected earlier on my happy memories of that Brisbane campaign rally.
Back then, in Opposition, you can only talk about things you will do.
Five months later, I am so pleased to stand here as the Leader of a Labor Government and talk about what we have done – and what we are doing.
We are delivering cheaper child care – and cheaper medicine.
We are fixing the crisis in Aged Care – and putting nurses back into nursing homes.
We are creating more Fee-Free TAFE courses – and more uni places for young people in the regions.
We are rebuilding trust in politics - creating a powerful, transparent and independent National Anti-Corruption Commission.
We are investing $1.2 billion to protect the environmental treasure of the Great Barrier Reef.
We are rebuilding Australia’s international reputation as a respected leader in our region and a trusted partner in the world.&nbsp;
And we are answering the gracious, generous, patient call of the Uluru Statement from the Heart.&nbsp;
Advancing recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our nation’s birth certificate, our constitution, giving respect to First Nations people.
Giving all of us a greater sense of who we are and a greater appreciation of the privilege we have, to share the wonders of this ancient continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
And sending a message to the world about modern Australia, that we are a mature and confident nation, on the road to reconciliation.
Friends, my team and I are proud of what we’re delivering.
And we are proud of what we have already delivered.
After a wasted decade of trailing the world, we have lifted Australia’s ambitions on climate change.
We have abolished the discrimination of the cashless debit card.
We have restored funding certainty to the ABC.
We have secured a boost in the minimum wage.
We have launched a Royal Commission to make sure the cruelty of RoboDebt never happens again.
We have brought the Nadesalingam family home to the embrace of Bilo, to a Queensland community that opened its heart


Mr Speaker, there are some basic yardsticks by which any civilised society should measure itself.
One of them is that everyone has the right to a safe and respectful workplace.
And yet here we are, nearly a quarter of the way through the 21st century, still working towards this goal.
The fact that workplaces have not been safe or respectful for so many Australians is unacceptable.
As is the fact that the previous government dismissed this goal as impractical, not worth striving for. That what we had was somehow good enough.
That is why Labor campaigned on a promise to implement – in full – every single one of the recommendations of the Respect@Work report into sexual harassment in Australian workplaces.
And that is why, shortly after I was sworn in as Prime Minister, I reiterated that this election promise was now a key part of the agenda of the new Government.
We owe a great debt of gratitude to everyone who stepped up to share their experiences with Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins, especially the survivors who did so at great emotional expense.
It can’t have been easy reliving some of those moments and putting difficult memories into words, but because of their courage, we now have a map to a better future.
Mr Speaker, we promised to follow that map.
The Australian people can be confident that they now have a Government that will stick to its plans.
The Australian people put their faith in us. We will deliver.
And indeed, Mr Speaker, we already are.
Mr Speaker, since the election, we have not wasted a day.
We have fulfilled our promise to establish paid family and domestic violence leave, because no woman should have to choose between her job and her safety.
We are acting on our commitments to build more affordable housing for women and children fleeing violence, and to fund new frontline workers to support women as they make these courageous and often difficult transitions.
We are acting on our commitment to introduce cheaper child care and early education.
And, we fulfilled another election commitment with the introduction of the Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights Legislation Amendment (Respect at Work) Bill 2022.
In short, this Bill will strengthen laws to help prevent sexual harassment.
Why do we need to do it? Let me repeat:
Everyone has a right to a safe and respectful workplace.
The Government is acting to help put an end to sexual harassment in Australian workplaces.
Let’s take a look at some uncomfortable facts.
Over the past five years, one in three people experienced sexual harassment at work, with women experiencing higher rates of harassment than men.
Time and time again, it’s women who bear the brunt.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, people with a disability and members of the LGBTQ+ community are also, on average, more likely to experience workplace sexual harassment.
No one should have to suffer stress or anxiety because they feel uncomfortable or unsafe at work.
No one should have to leave their job and lose their income or disrupt their career because they’re being harassed.
And along with all the human costs in terms of physical and mental health, there is also an economic cost of sexual harassment of close to $4 billion every year.
Mr Speaker, the former government sat on the Jenkins report for almost a year without responding then refused to implement key recommendations.
The Liberals voted against Labor’s amendments to introduce a positive duty on employers to eliminate sexual harassment in 2021.
Dwell on that for a moment. A positive duty to eliminate sexual harassment was a step too far for them, and they voted against it.
They voted against:

Prohibiting sexual harassment under our workplace laws;
Protecting victims against massive legal bills when they try to seek justice;
Making substantive equality between women and men an objective of the Sex Discrimination Act; and
Allowing unions and other organisations to bring legal action on behalf of victims.

And nothing exemplified the former Government’s failure as clearly as its response to the women’s March for Justice.
All those courageous women, speaking truth just out there on the lawn in front of Parliament House. Truth that we all needed to hear.
The then Prime Minister, the member for Cook, had the outrageous temerity to suggest we all give ourselves a pat on the back as a nation because the protest was not met with bullets.
As I said at the time, the Government had not so much a tin ear as a wall of concrete.
But that was the standard that was good enough for those opposite.
Is it any wonder then that during a decade of Liberal Government, Australia fell to 70th in the world for women’s economic participation and opportunity?
Or that we went from being the 24th most equal country in the world for women and men, to the 50th?
Across the country, too many working women are under-appreciated, under-paid and disrespected.
And that was a status quo those opposite decided they could live with.
Mr Speaker, on 21 May, Australia voted to move forward.
The Government has introduced this Bill to implement key recommendations of the Respect@Work Report.
We’re continuing to work across Government, with business and others to ensure all 55 recommendations are implemented.
The bill we have introduced will implement key legislative changes recommended by Commissioner Jenkins, left unfinished by the former government.
The bill will:

Place a positive duty on employers to take reasonable and proportionate measures to eliminate sex discrimination, sexual harassment and victimisation, as far as possible;
Give the Australian Human Rights Commission new powers to enforce the positive duty, to help make sure employers are meeting their obligations;
Expressly prohibit conduct that results in a hostile workplace environment on the basis of sex; and
Ensure Commonwealth public sector organisations are also required to report to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency on its gender equality indicators.

In addition, the Government has introduced amendments to the Fair Work Act in the Secure Jobs, Better Pay bill to prohibit sexual harassment under our workplace relations laws – making clear that sexual harassment is a serious workplace issue.
The amendments to the Fair Work Act also include an additional pathway for affected workers to obtain quick and effective assistance from the Fair Work Commission.
Those changes along with the bill before us today are a key part of our mission to progress gender equality across all our work as a Government.
Its passage will move Australia forward in our efforts to prevent workplace sexual harassment from happening in the first place.
Our October budget – with its investments in child care and paid parental leave – represented Australia’s biggest-ever investment in women’s economic equality.
With this bill, we recognise that achieving women’s economic equality includes making sure women are safe at work.
Mr Speaker, we must never accept sexual harassment as either inevitable or u/navoidable.
It is anything but.
Nor should we be tempted by the dangerous fiction that we are somehow incapable of improvement. That we have come this far as a society, and that’s it.
Let’s make these changes and move forward with our national story.
Mr Speaker, we live in the greatest nation on earth.
But there is an even greater nation within our reach.
Thanks to the courage of every victim-survivor who stepped forward, we have no reason not to reach it.
They have shown the way.
And it is something we should all embrace as part of the determination we share to shape Australia into the very best version it can be – a nation that reflects our highest ideals.
I know that together, we can build a better future, one with equality and respect at its core.


I would like to thank Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia for his generous hospitality and leadership of ASEAN.&nbsp;
I commend your efforts in delivering on the theme – ‘Addressing Challenges Together’.
I also thank Prime Minister Phankham of Laos for his partnership as Australia’s ASEAN Country Coordinator.
We come together as neighbours and steadfast partners and friends.
We are united not only by geography but by our determination to advance common interests and principles.&nbsp;
Australia is proud to be ASEAN’s oldest Dialogue Partner.
For close to five decades, our partnership has stood for mutual respect and cooperation among sovereign nations.
And has promoted, in the words of the ASEAN Declaration, “the cherished ideals of peace, freedom, social justice and economic well-being”.
The urgent task we face today is to uphold these cherished ideals as we confront a complex and changing world.
I come here to reaffirm Australia’s commitment to this effort.
And bring a renewed vision for what we can achieve together for our shared region.
We were honoured to become your Comprehensive Strategic Partner last year.
Through the flagship ‘Australia for ASEAN Futures’ Initiative we’re delivering against shared priorities like driving economic growth.
Realising the potential of digital economies.
Developing smart, sustainable cities.
Advancing science, technology and innovation projects.
And furthering the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP).
I look forward to adopting our Joint Statement on Cooperation on the AOIP.
A statement that affirms shared principles, and commits to concrete implementation under the AOIP.
We understand that the AOIP embodies your aspirations for our region, and today we stand with you and declare they are our aspirations too.
We are also committed to doing more with you to seize the opportunities of the net-zero transition, so necessary to avoid dangerous climate change.
All of these initiatives are essential to our security and prosperity.
And they present a vivid example that nations can better advance their interests by working together.
My Government is committed to deepening Australia’s engagement with Southeast Asia which is why my first bilateral overseas visit as Prime Minister was to Indonesia, where I met with President Widodo as well as Secretary-General, Dato’ Lim Jock Hoi.
Why we’re appointing an eminent business leader, Nicholas Moore, Special Envoy to Southeast Asia to drive delivery of a comprehensive Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040
It is why we’ve committed $470 million of additional development assistance.
Australia welcomes ASEAN Leaders’ in-principle agreement to admit Timor-Leste to be the eleventh member of ASEAN.
As Timor-Leste’s largest development partner, Australia is committed to providing capacity building to support its full ASEAN membership.
Australia remains committed to a rules-based regional order with ASEAN at the centre.&nbsp;
And to the "spirit of equality and partnership" expressed in the ASEAN Declaration.
Working in close cooperation, we can forge a more secure and sustainable future.
Where international law and norms are upheld.
And disputes are resolved amicably through diplomacy and dialogue.&nbsp;
With confidence in our cause, let us affirm the great founding vision of this institution.
And carry it forward into a new era of peace and possibility.
Thank you.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much. Well, Mr President, it is wonderful to be here on my second visit as Prime Minister of Australia, but my seventh actual visit to Indonesia. I’m very pleased that my Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, who has just brought down our first Budget of the new Government has been able to join us here. And I’m deeply pleased that we were here together in Jakarta and then in Makassar in June where we announced the scholars program, and to be able to meet so soon the ten scholars who studied everything from engineering to medical science to climate change and the need to make the investment in the transition to clean energy.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much. It's very good to meet both of you again. And it's been a very constructive discussion that we've been having at the G20 informally and it's good to now have a formal bilateral meeting between us. Australia has such strong ties with Europe. Indeed, we have a Prime Minister with a name like Albanese, and we have a large diaspora in Australia from throughout Europe. So we remain very strong friends. I hope that today we're able to progress the discussion that we've been having about an Australian-EU Free Trade Agreement. It will be very important for Europe and important for Australia in expanding the economic opportunities which are there.
Can I also comment on the tragic news that we have had from Poland. Russia's missile attacks on Ukraine overnight are deeply concerning. Russia's reckless and dangerous use of force promote danger for the entire region, and we've seen that overnight. I send my condolences to Poland on the loss of life. As Secretary General Stoltenberg and President Biden have said, we need to have a full investigation as to how this has occurred and the circumstances. That must take place, and then we should consider what as an international community is an appropriate response.


I’m so pleased to be back home in Australia and delighted to be with all of you this morning, here in the great city of Melbourne.
Not far from this room, just across the road from the mighty Victorian Trades Hall, stands a humble monument honouring the 8 hours movement.
In 1856, stonemasons working on the new Melbourne University downed tools and marched alongside fellow construction workers to the steps of Victorian Parliament to demand an 8 hour working day.
A struggle that would see them become one of the first workforces in the world to win this right.
Melbourne is a fitting place to bring together unions and workers’ representatives from all over the world.
But the truth is, in modern Australia, there are monuments to trade unions everywhere you look.
They stand as an essential part of people’s everyday lives:

A strong minimum wage
Equal pay for women
Sick leave and annual leave and parental leave
Compensation for workplace injuries – and protection against injury with stronger health and safety laws
Universal retirement savings, through superannuation
Universal health care
Penalty rates for weekend work
Indeed, the weekend itself

All of these rights and protections, all of these improvements in people’s lives and living standards are ongoing tribute to the power and the value of union advocacy.
And these reforms also speak for the success of unions in negotiating with governments, working in existing structures and systems to drive change.
Working constructively with reforming governments to build a better future.
I am proud to lead an Australian Labor Government that respects and celebrates the extraordinary contribution the trade union movement has made to the strength of our modern economy and the health of our social democracy.
Since we were elected, six months ago, we’ve already worked alongside the union movement:

To secure a real increase in the minimum wage for the heroes of the pandemic
And to back a 15% pay rise for our undervalued and underpaid aged care workforce.

I also recognise that one of the great strengths of the union movement is that it’s always looked outwards.
Australian unions have looked beyond these shores for inspiration, for wisdom, for examples, for guidance on the next steps.
And looked out across the world to help people in other nations in need of strength and solidarity.&nbsp;
At their best, unions have always been prepared to stand up for the principle that union values should be universal values.
That fairness and equality and dignity and safety should be the right of workers everywhere.
That’s the global solidarity, the common respect, the shared humanity that binds us all.
It’s why unions around the world have stood up for democracy – and continue to do so.
It’s why you have helped lead the campaign to improve conditions and rights in Qatar.
And it’s the principle that underpins the ongoing importance of the work you do to raise the ambitions of the International Labour Organisation.&nbsp;
I want to congratulate you on the work you did to enshrine Occupational Health and Safety as the ILO’s fifth fundamental principle.
I’m very pleased the Australian Government could contribute to those negotiations and that Michele O’Neil was one of the workers’ representatives…
…standing up for the rights of every worker, everywhere, to come home safe at the end of the day.
I also applaud the leadership role of the ITUC in driving ILO Convention 190, a zero-tolerance approach to violence and harassment.
And I want to particularly acknowledge the efforts of the ACTU and their advocacy for this Convention to be adopted here in Australia.
I’m proud to say our government has made action on equality at work and protection from harassment a national priority, from day one.
We are implementing new protections against sexual harassment, including a positive duty for employers to protect their staff.
And last month, parliament&nbsp; passed our laws to make 10 days’ Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave part of the National Employment Standards.
Because no woman should ever have to choose between her job and her safety.
And today, I am pleased to announce that the Labor Government I lead will table in the Parliament of Australia, ILO Convention 190: preventing harassment and violence in the workplace.&nbsp;
This is the first formal step towards Australia ratifying this important Convention.
A statement from our nation affirming the right of every person to a work culture based on ‘mutual respect and dignity’.
And the right to a work environment, free from the threat of violence or harassment.
Because whenever we talk about safety in the workplace, that must include the right of every worker to be safe from sexual harassment.&nbsp;&nbsp;
Our government views this as a commitment to equality, to safety – and to economic reform.
Because we know the full and equal participation of women in the economy is our nation’s greatest untapped resource.
Australia is signatory to 58 ILO Conventions.
Last month, as Prime Minister, I had the honour of ratifying the most recent one, ILO Convention 138: preventing the use of child labour.
For Australia, being a signatory is always an act of substance, not symbolism.
Because the Fair Work Act - the legislative foundation of our industrial relations framework - takes as one of its aims, giving effect to Australia’s international labour obligations.
So when you embark on those advocacy campaigns, you should know that your efforts make a real and lasting difference to improving working conditions for all Australians.
Friends,
This Congress gives us an opportunity to celebrate a tradition of fairness and social justice and representing the best interests of the working people who power our nations’ economic success.&nbsp;
And in doing so, we recognise that these rights, these protections and these opportunities are never down to good luck, or happy accident or a spontaneous act of generosity.
Every centimetre of progress, every degree of every improvement, has been earned and fought for, through generations of solidarity and sacrifice.
And while we will always remember those historic victories, the best and most fitting way to honour the contribution of those who have gone before us, is to continue their work.
Not just defending ground already gained - but carrying the task of progress forward.
Because there is always more to do.
In a rapidly-globalising economy, in a world of work transformed by trade and technology, there are new opportunities for growth and prosperity and flexibility.&nbsp;
But there are also new challenges to the rights and dignity and security of working people.
And tackling those is the task we’re taking up in the Australian parliament right now.
In the past month, our government has introduced:

New protections against sexual harassment.
New measures to improve job security.
New initiatives to revitalise bargaining, enhance productivity and get wages moving again.
And a new focus on closing the gender pay gap

Now, of course, there are those who oppose these changes.
Those who want to stand in the way of this progress.
Those who have an ingrained ideological objection to workers being paid fairly for their contribution…
…who somehow believe that the only way to grow the economy is to limit opportunity and diminish security.
We know there are always those who say that any improvement in workers’ pay, any improvement in the status quo, will see the sky fall in.
They say it every time, and they are wrong every time.
And we will push ahead like we do, every time.
We know fairness has to be fought for, we know progress has to be earned.
Most of all we know it’s worth it – we know the difference that it makes to people’s lives is worth it.
Friends,
The final thing I wanted to say today is that this 5th World Congress is significant not just because of the important issues that you will discuss and debate…
…but because it is the last Congress with Sharan Burrow as the leader of this organisation.
Sharan Burrow is a great Australian, she is a trailblazer and a lifelong champion for working people.&nbsp;
Sharan has also been my friend for more than three decades.
Sharan, Australians are deeply grateful and enormously proud of the contribution you have made to the international trade union movement and to the lives of workers everywhere.
Congratulations on all you have achieved.
Thank you very much, have a great Congress.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
These awards have been running for a few years, but it's the first time I've had the honour to present them as your Prime Minister.
And I am delighted to celebrate with you this evening.
Our veterans have so very much to offer.
But I am always struck when I hear that our veterans aren't confident that civilian employers recognise that.
After all they've given to their nation, and the huge skillset they've built along the way, they have no certainty that it will be recognised.
As if a chasm stands between the Australian economy, and the Australian Defence Force that protects it.
This has to change.
Thankfully, it's a change that everyone in this room is part of.
All of us here recognise the fundamental truth: that veterans have extraordinary capacity and potential, and they bring the kind of lived experience that's a gift to any workplace.
They bring skills as leaders, planners, thinkers, and communicators.
Veterans see the bigger picture, and devote themselves to realising it.
And they're steeped in the values of the Australian Defence Force: service, courage, respect, integrity and excellence.
So tonight, we celebrate veterans - and the qualities that make them great employees.
And we celebrate employers who recognise these qualities.
You've got great vision – you know a good thing when you see it.
Since 2018, these awards have showcased veteran employment in a huge range of professions, representing the diverse work that veterans are doing across our nation.
They're developing user-friendly technology.
And fine-tuning details in project management roles.
They're managing complex financial accounts.
And safeguarding our data.
They're looking after our children.
And producing high-quality boutique foods.
You name it, veterans are out there doing it.
And this year, I'm delighted that, for the first time, these awards will honour the partners of veterans too.
They are there, standing in solidarity during the years of service, through the upheaval of transition, and beyond.
They are the strength that sustains.
They make enormous personal sacrifices that shape family and work life – moving across the country and overseas, supporting families and running households solo when their loved one is deployed.
For partners, this can have an impact on their careers, and their wellbeing.
Too often, we don't recognise their sacrifice. But we should.
Because 'they also serve'.
The inaugural Awards for Partner Employee and Partner Entrepreneur are an important celebration of their achievements.
This Government wants to see more and more veterans flourish and thrive in workplaces right around Australia.
In our recent Federal Budget we committed:

$24 million for the Veteran Employment Program
And more than $46 million to establish eight new hubs to connect veterans and families with services in support of better health, well-being and employment outcomes.

This means opening the doors of opportunity – and widening them – to lead to a better future for veterans, their families and their communities.
You've stepped up for us. Now we're stepping up for you.
Before I present tonight's first awards, please allow me to thank all the veteran and partner nominees.
You gave a great gift to our nation in service and, in civilian life, you continue in the same generous spirit.
Just as you've strengthened our nation in the past, you are already part of building our future.


Thank you so much. I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to their elders, past, present and emerging. And on behalf of the government that I'm proud to lead, I recommit to the implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full, including a constitutionally enshrined Voice to this Parliament.
Can I acknowledge my ministerial colleagues who are here. Linda Burney, the Minister for Indigenous Australians, Anika Wells, the Minister for Sport, particular acknowledgement to Oshy and Dash, sitting there, great sportspeople of the future I have no doubt. I see Matt Keogh and Tim Watts and Ged Kearney and lots of other ministers who are here, so at the risk of missing someone I'll just say parliamentarians, one and all, thank you for attending. Josh Burns, thank you for attending.
Some of whom are here, of course, because they are just complete basketball tragics. And there are games held on the court down here. And Aaron was telling us that there was a bit of coaching went on down there today, and they need it, let me say that. So thank you for your assistance. To all of our distinguished guests, welcome to Parliament House, thank you for being here and giving us the opportunity to be part of launching the NBL's Indigenous Round for this season.
Indigenous Round celebrates the extraordinary contribution that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people make to basketball in Australia and to the sporting life of our nation. From trailblazers like Nate Jawai, icons like Patty Mils, and future stars like William Hickey, Indigenous Round also sends a powerful message to the next generation of young Australians dreaming of playing NBL.
To First Nations kids practising their free throws at school, playing half court at the local park or getting excited for their first game at the local PCYC or sporting centre, there is a place for you at the highest level. And it's great that the NBL is backing up this round with the indigenous players rule, the first of any code of such serious incentives, and I congratulate the NBL on its leadership encouraging clubs to recruit more First Nations talent. And I did want to take this opportunity to say a few words about the Uluru Statement from the Heart. Particularly given there's been a bit of a debate again in the last couple of days.
The Uluru Statement from the Heart is a hand outstretched. It is a generous and gracious offer of reconciliation. It doesn't ask for anything more than two things. One, that First Nations people be recognised in our nation's birth certificate, our Constitution. That the history of this great island continent did not begin in 1788.
It should be a source of extraordinary national pride that our history includes on this island continent that we share with the oldest continuous culture on earth. It's an asset for our nation. The second thing that it will do is not usurp the role of this Parliament. It will simply be that where matters directly affect Indigenous Australians, we should consult them. We should ask them what they think.
I don't know about others, but I was raised to give consideration to people if one of my actions was going to impact someone else. And if you know that that is the case, then you should do that. And what that will result in is to get rid of the very false dichotomy that somehow it is an act of symbolism versus a practical measure.
The truth is that our experience knows that when people who are directly affected are consulted and have a sense of ownership over the solution, they will be more engaged. So the solutions to close the gap on education, on health, on housing, on life expectancy, on incarceration rates, on all of those measures where there is a gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians will be closed.
Unless you engage with people directly impacted you will continue to have what we have had, which is with some of the best will in the world, we haven't achieved the outcomes that we would like. And we know that on issues like park rangers, on justice reinvestment, when indigenous people are directly involved you get better practical outcomes. That is why the Uluru Statement from the Heart is so important.
Now, in the same spirit of celebration as the Indigenous Round, that is what the Uluru Statement from the Heart and its adoption will be. Imagine being able to celebrate, imagine being able to celebrate our country coming together in that way.
People will get the opportunity to have their say, each and every Australian, with one vote in the next financial year. And I guarantee that there are tens of thousands of people who will be voting in that referendum, who will spend more time watching the NBL next year than they do watching Question Time. And that's probably a very healthy thing for them. So your engagement, your advocacy, your leadership on this question will carry a lot of weight around this nation. Referendums are hard to win. There's no certainty of success. In fact, the history of this country shows that it is less likely.
But if you don't walk out on the court, you're certain to lose. And if you don't take the shot, you don't score. We're going to take the shot next year, in the next financial year. And together with your help and your support we’ll nail it. We’ll nail it and the country will cheer as if it was a three pointer taken in the last second of the game, when we were two points behind. So be a part of it.
I thank the NBL very much for joining other sporting organisations that have endorsed this campaign. And I thank you as well for the fact that there's a symbolism, I think, because you are doing that, but at the same time you are making the practical steps to encourage First Nations people to be able to participate at the highest level of the game. And that's a fantastic thing as well. Congratulations.


It’s an honour to be here with all of you this evening to celebrate the hard work and success of the Australian job-creators, employers and entrepreneurs you represent.
I’m grateful for this chance to reflect on the last six months of co-operation and collaboration between our government and the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Working together, here and overseas.
ACCI were key representatives of Australian business at the B20 in Indonesia.
A forum that brought together influential business leaders from the G20 economies.
President Widodo very generously invited me to address that gathering, which gave me a chance to discuss the shared economic challenges the global economy is facing.
If the Global Financial Crisis was principally a global demand shock, the economic challenge we are dealing with now is primarily a global supply shock.
The long tail of the pandemic is constricting supply chains and stretching workforces.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is inflicting severe, ongoing disruption to food, fuel and energy markets.
And central banks around the world are responding to rising inflation with the most severe and synchronised tightening of monetary policy in decades.
By and large, this is the difficult set of circumstances every advanced economy is grappling with.
But what I took away from the B20 and G20 discussions – and indeed the bilateral conversations – was a shared sense of genuine optimism.
A common determination to find solutions and seek out opportunities.
It was fitting that Australian business brought the largest delegation to Indonesia, because in a very real sense, we have some of the biggest opportunities in front of us here in our region in the years ahead.
Now more than ever, Australia’s international engagement matters to our national prosperity:

1 in 4 Australian jobs are related to international trade.
Jobs in export industries pay above the national average income
And our APEC economy partners make up more than 75 per cent of Australia’s total trade in goods and services.

This is why our government has worked hard to rehabilitate our reputation in the region, to engage constructively in multilateral forums…
…and to rebuild our national credibility on the entry ticket for modern international dialogue: a commitment to act on climate change.
Because if you want to be taken seriously on the world stage, you need to show you take climate change seriously.
All of this is central to our government’s efforts to bring down tariff walls and build trade bridges.
Including, last week, passing two significant trade agreements with India and the United Kingdom.
And the initial steps we have taken to stabilise our relationship with China, with the first leader-level meeting for six years.
I went into that meeting with President Xi with no preconditions, taking the attitude that dialogue is always good.
And that it’s always better – for security in our region as well as trade between our nations - if we can talk directly to each other.
I’ve said before, it’s clearly in Australia’s best interests to export our high-quality products to China.
Our barley, our wine, our meat, our seafood, our mineral resources, lots more.
It is also in China’s best interests to receive these products.
So, there’s a win-win available.
Our government will continue to take a mature and responsible approach to Australia’s relationship with China.
We will co-operate where we can, disagree where we must and engage – always – in Australia’s national interest.

This commitment to co-operation and dialogue and good faith collaboration holds true at home as well.
In the last six months, ACCI’s constructive engagement has played a key part in the delivery of our government’s commitments to the Australian people.&nbsp;
You’ve helped lift the nation’s ambitions on climate change and you understand we need to seize the opportunities of clean energy.
You were there, representing Australian industry and Australian jobs, when we updated our Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
And you backed that same target when we wrote it into legislation.
Your credibility and your advocacy helped move past a decade of denial and delay and dysfunction in climate and energy policy that have held Australia back.
Of course, its legacy lingers.
The impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on energy bills is magnified here in Australia because a decade of government opposing investment in renewables and neglecting key energy infrastructure has left us more exposed.
I fully appreciate that rising energy costs are putting significant pressure on your businesses, as well as family budgets around Australia.
I can assure you that while our government didn’t create this problem – we are working around the clock to deliver a solution.
And just as we brought state and territory governments together to take urgent action to keep the lights on in our first month in office…
…I’m confident we will be able to reach agreement on a plan that delivers for every part of Australia.
At the same time, the government I lead is determined to take Australia’s national energy market and our national energy grid beyond this pattern of crisis and intervention.&nbsp;
That’s why our October Budget delivered $24 billion in funding for cleaner, cheaper energy, including the first of our Rewiring the Nation projects.
The Marinus Link between Tasmania and Victoria - talked about for 6 years, funded in our first 6 months in office.
As well as the Battery of the Nation hydro project, an offshore wind industry and new renewable energy zones across Victoria.
This will work alongside our Powering Australia plan:

To create jobs in regional Australia
To secure affordable and reliable energy for existing manufacturers
And to open the way for a new generation of value-adding in industry, including in battery and storage technology.

Exporting resources will always be a key part of our national economic success.
But there is a transformational opportunity before us to do more, here, with the critical minerals that will help power the world’s transition to net zero.
This is a fundamental part of our Future Made in Australia plan and the vision we took to the Australian people – for this to be a country that makes things.&nbsp;
Of course, this also depends on a workforce with the right skills and the right training.
We want to keep working with you and the employers you represent, to create more opportunities for more Australians to upskill and reskill.
Your leadership and advocacy on this issue at the Jobs and Skills Summit helped deliver an agreement between every state and territory government and the Commonwealth to create 180,000 fee-free TAFE places for 2023, in areas of national priority.
More broadly, I know that a key point that ACCI and others have often made is that there needs to be better co-ordination between the vocational education system and industry – and better forward planning as well.
That’s the core mission of Jobs and Skills Australia – the agency we created with the first piece of legislation we brought into parliament.
Preventing future shortages by looking ahead, identifying growth areas and potential pressure points&nbsp; - and prioritising training opportunities in those sectors.
So employers like you can have greater confidence to build and invest, knowing you have access to a national talent pool suited to your needs.
Of course, migration also has an important role to play in broadening and strengthening our national skills base and resolving staff shortages.
I understand that many of you in this room have suffered the consequences of the decision of the previous government to effectively tell an entire cohort of people on skills visas to ‘go home’ in the early days of the pandemic.
What’s more, one of the really shocking things we found on coming to government was that there were nearly one million visa applications waiting to be processed.
We are working to right these wrongs.
We’ve hired 300 more staff to process visas and cut the backlog.
As well as upping the permanent migration intake to 195,000 this financial year.
Getting away from the revolving door approach, where a worker comes in on a skills visa, the company puts time into their induction and workplace training, they build relationships and really start to click in the role…and then the visa expires and the whole process starts again.
I guarantee, in any room like this, full of succesful Australian businesses, employers, wealth-creators - there are first and second generation migrants.
People whose work ethic, determination and aspiration has enriched our entire nation.
Our skilled migration system should encourage a new generation of migrants to build a career - and to put down roots, to join the community, to own a stake in the success of our nation.

Another really clear point of consensus at that Jobs and Skills Summit was that the enterprise bargaining system is not working.
It’s a one-size-fits-all system – that is no longer fit for purpose.
It’s not attuned to the way we work in Australia in 2022.
It’s not delivering the productivity gains employers need.
It’s not delivering the wage rises that workers deserve.
We are modernising the system, so that it reflects the reality of work in Australia in the 2020s.&nbsp;
And – just as importantly – building a relevant and practical framework that enables employers and employees to negotiate in good faith, to agree on win-win outcomes.
It’s the same principle behind the changes we’re making to the Better Off Overall Test, where we are removing red tape relating to the approval of enterprise agreements.
Rather than weighing every hypothetical scenario under which a new agreement might adversely affect a hypothetical employee…
…the Commission will now be able to base its decision on realistic scenarios, giving particular weight to the views of the bargaining representatives.
In other words, we are trusting in the capacity of employers and the employees to find common ground.
And there are a whole host of other important initiatives in the legislation:

Making gender pay equity an objective of the Fair Work Act
Boosting pay transparency
Establishing Expert Panels to better support the Community and Care sector
And, in line with the Respect@Work Report, creating a new positive duty for employers to prevent sexual harassment.

It’s fair to say I’m aware that there are elements of our plan with which you disagree.
No significant economic reform has ever enjoyed 100 per cent support.
And I’ve always said that while I believe in the value of consensus, I certainly don’t expect every one to agree on every single element of every single issue.
More broadly, I don’t think one point of disagreement needs to define our every interaction.
Our relationship is bigger than that, more important than that.
Consensus, in the end, depends on a common goal.
And the last six months have proved to me that we share common goals.
If I go back to the joint ‘statement of ambition’ that ACCI, the BCA and AiG released at the Jobs and Skills Summit.
It spoke about:
The interrelated objectives of strong employment growth, higher incomes growth, improved productivity and enhanced social inclusion
The Government I lead shares your ambition for a growing, fair, productive and inclusive economy.
And we agree on so many of the key drivers to achieve this goal:

Better vocational education
Cheaper child care
Backing Australian manufacturing
Deeper trade links with our region
And Cleaner and Cheaper Energy.

Already, by engaging in dialogue, by working together, we have achieved substantial progress in all these areas.
We will continue to seek your co-operation, your insights and your expertise as we confront emerging challenges.
In particular, I think there is more that the private sector and every level of government need to do to guard against cybersecurity threats.
Clearly, our national capacity isn’t where it needs to be – and that’s a serious issue for any business or government that holds people’s private information.
I think the more we can do to co-ordinate and co-operate on that, the better.
Whether it’s cybersecurity or energy or skills or infrastructure or international trade, I know there is so much we can achieve if we work together.
I’m proud of what we’ve delivered over the past six months – and I’m looking forward to what the future holds.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Labor Government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full, including a constitutionally-enshrined Voice to Parliament.
I welcome Nicholas Whitlam, Catherine Dovey and your families
Federal and state colleagues, members of local government.
Distinguished guests
A great nation such as ours preserves its treasures.
Honours our legends.
Celebrates our history.
And commemorates the places where that history was made.
Fifty years ago, people all over Australia voted to change the direction of our nation.
After 23 years of torpor, drift and decay, Australians voted for a Program of transformation, modernisation and reform.
A vision to renew our sense of fairness, purpose and progress: in education, health care and justice.
To re-imagine our place in the world and our role in our region.
To reconcile with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
To assert the equality of women, in our laws, our society and our economy.
To ‘liberate the talents and uplift the horizons’ of our nation.
In declaring: “It’s Time”, Australians rejected ‘the fears and habits of the past’ and embraced ‘the demands and opportunities of the future’.
And, fifty years ago, around 11 pm, this street was filled with cheering supporters, lit up by the flash of cameras, as Gough Whitlam returned to the humble home behind us.
Shaking hands with his friends, neighbours, campaign workers.
Margaret by his side, his partner in all things, knowing their lives would be changed forever.
Then Gough cleared a small space in the packed living room to address his country, as Prime Minister-elect.
Claiming a ‘very good mandate’ for the policies of his new government.
So, this is the place where Gough first took up the weight of history – and first knew the great privilege of office.
The responsibility and opportunity of government that Whitlam understood so well, the chance to change the nation for the better.
This may be the house Gough lived in – but all of us live in the Australia he helped to build.
I salute the efforts of all those who have worked to acquire and preserve this house to educate and inspire future generations:

Former NSW Premier Barrie Unsworth who led the Whitlam Heritage Home Group in the initial purchase
The Western Sydney University and The Whitlam Institute who are the current custodians of the house
And the $1.3 million grant made in 2021 for the purchase and restoration by the former Minister, Ben Morton.

It’s fitting that we gather here today to honour Gough Whitlam at a home in the suburbs.
Because Gough was the first great Prime Ministerial champion of the suburbs.
He was a passionate advocate for citizens in new and growing communities, for their right to enjoy the same opportunities and be served by the same amenities as Australians in the inner city.
And he understood the message a government sends to people when it invests in their housing, their infrastructure, their edducation and their quality of life: a statement of respect for their aspirations, a statement of belief in their potential.
It is a truth every Labor Government has honoured and held to since.
The understanding that government derives its power from the people – and proves its value by serving the people.
By converting the promises of a campaign, into the progress of a nation.
Friends
Today is the anniversary of a famous victory.
But what this day in Australian history marks – above all else – is the beginning of a new era.
Because when Gough Whitlam walked out the door of 32 Albert Street for the first time as Prime Minister-elect, he was taking the first steps on a journey of reform and change.
The beginning of delivering a legacy that lives around us - inspires us, guides us and teaches us.
It’s a true honour to share this moment with you today.
And I’m delighted all Australians will be able to share in this piece of our nation’s history, from this day forward.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full, including a constitutionally-enshrined Voice to Parliament.
The Bradfield Oration is a valuable opportunity to reflect on the legacy of a man who had a deep love for this city and boundless faith in the potential of this nation.
And it is a chance for all of us to draw new inspiration from his example, as we seek to plan and build a better future for all Australians.
John Bradfield gave every Sydneysider a timeless gift, admired all over Australia and famous throughout the world.
Ninety years after it opened, the Sydney Harbour Bridge stands as a monument to John Bradfield's genius.
And a tribute to the New South Wales Labor Government of the day that backed a project of such sweep and scale after decades of debate.
The Bridge wasn't built to the standard of 'good enough for now', it was not conceived or delivered as the bare minimum to meet the needs of the day.
It wasn't done on the cheap, even when the Great Depression tightened its grip.
It was built with ambition, with vision, built for the thriving global city that Sydney has become.
And it was built to bring people and communities together, to unify the city.
Indeed, at the opening ceremony in 1932, Premier Jack Lang spoke of two bridges.
"A material bridge" to unite the people of Sydney.
And the broader aspiration it represented:
"A bridge of common understanding that would serve the whole of the people of our great continent".
Nine decades later, Cheree Toka's campaign to fly the Aboriginal flag on the Sydney Harbour Bridge drew on that same spirit.
Seeing the red, yellow and black up there alongside the Australian flag is such a resonant and hopeful statement about reconciliation and our modern nation - because the bridge itself is such a powerful symbol of Sydney and Australia.
This Bradfield Oration is an invitation to reflect on a grand legacy.
In doing so, we must resist at all costs the self-defeating nostalgia that says, somehow, 'Oh we don't make 'em like that anymore'.
Because modern Australia is more than capable of building smart and sustainable infrastructure that inspires and unifies.
Construction that creates jobs, lifts productivity and builds a sense of civic pride.
Projects that set new global standards for sustainability and climate resilience while delivering local liveability.
The magnificent precinct we are gathered in today proves the truth of this.
Think of the way Barangaroo has transformed Sydney's skyline and its harbour.
The jobs and life it has brought to this once-neglected place.
The new parks and public space - on the water - it has created for families to enjoy.
Clearly, when we put our minds to it, Australia can design and deliver projects and precincts that unify our cities, grow our economies and serve our communities.
And not just on this grand scale.
The Marrickville Hospital had been empty for nearly 30 years when Mirvac redeveloped the site.
That project delivered new housing, including affordable housing, and also valuable community spaces: an internationally aclaimed new public library with meeting and study rooms.
A pavilion for parties, a café and generous outdoor spaces including a public lawn and seating, a junior playground, a dedicated youth area, all of it surrounded by specially-commissioned public art works.
Fundamentally, it showed respect for the culture of the community it was joining.
And the planners and designers worked alongside local council to make that development sustainable too:

27,000 recyled bricks
Recycled timbers from two disused bridges in Taree
And a design that maximises energy efficiency and reduces consumption.

A private firm, co-operating with governments, delivering public benefit and supporting sustainability.
We know it can be done, all over the nation.
It is those success stories which make the failures all the more inexcusable.
Because when suburbs are denied real public transport options, or deprived of proper parks and communal space.
When people are stranded on heat islands, or in child care deserts, or consigned to poorly-planned suburbs away from good jobs.
When communities are cut-off from decent internet and reliable services or developed without consideration of the threat of climate change and natural disasters.
This is not down to bad luck. It's because of bad decisions.
It reflects a failure to co-operate and consult.
A failure to plan for quality infrastructure – and a failure to plan for quality of life.
In 2022, developers, builders and governments – at every level – know better.
So we have to do better. And we can.
We have to respect the hierarchy that renowned global architect and urbanist Jan Gehl spoke of many years ago:
"First life, then spaces, then buildings – the other way around never works".

My dear friend and mentor, Tom Uren, thought the same way.
Tom was the Minister for Urban and Regional Development in the Whitlam Government.
It was a job he loved - and it was a title that spoke volumes: Urban and Regional Development.
Not an either-or proposition. Not a zero-sum game.
Not a choice or a competition among our cities and suburbs and regions, because all are vital to Australia's national growth and success and all Australians should share in the benefits.
As Tom used to say: 'We can't deal with things in boxes'.
Meaning we can't make plans or take decisions in isolation, because everything is interconnected.
That was insightful in the 1970s - it is inescapable now.
Growth and development in our cities and suburbs and regions ties into – and depends on - environment and water and NBN and housing and transport and employment and health and education and population.
This means it touches on every level of government.
So, getting the right outcomes will need the insights, planning expertise and perspective of local councils.
The service delivery and project management responsibilities of state government.
And investment and leadership at a federal level.
The Commonwealth Government has the reach, the resources and the responsibility to be engaged in cities policy.
I've always been passionate about this, indeed I spoke about it in my first speech as a Member of Parliament, back in 1996.
When you grow up in public housing, when you rely on public transport, when you count on public facilities for your recreation and education and health care, you learn the difference good infrastructure makes to people's lives.
And you learn the power of the message government sends when it funds and builds and plans these things well.
When it demonstrates care and pride in what it is delivering for the community, especially when it's for people who are not wealthy or influential.
It's a way of knowing you matter, understanding someone believes in you and your potential, your place in the Australian story.
This is why I am determined for the Labor Government I lead to be a constructive leader and a supportive partner in the task of building better cities and more liveable suburbs and stronger regional communities.
I am pleased to announce we will re-establish the Cities and Suburbs Unit, restoring national leadership to facilitating more sustainable urban development and settlement.
We will reconvene the Urban Policy Forum, so its best-practice expertise can inform the creation of a new Urban Policy Framework. The first comprehensive urban policy at the national level for a decade.
We will commission a State of Australian Cities report to put together an accurate and up-to-date picture of life in our big cities.
Because we know the way people live and work has dramatically changed in just the past two years.
Our government understands that the next decade represents a transformative opportunity for our regional cities to be home to tens of thousands of new jobs created by the opportunities of renewable energy and Australia's transition to net zero.
So we are delivering a new Precincts and Partnerships Program to provide transformative investment in regional and rural communities, which will also assist with the national transition to cleaner and cheaper energy.
And to ensure the level of government closest to the community has a stronger voice, we will revitalise the Australian Council of Local Government.
Ministers Catherine King and Kristy McBain will lead this work.
None of this is about dictating outcomes, or handing-down central planning decisions from Canberra.
This is about creating a framework that brings together expert advice and local perspectives, to support a more integrated approach to sustainable development.
So people have an informed say in the decisions which will shape their local services and care, their job opportunities, their children's education and their quality of life and wellbeing.
I would submit that nowhere is this more important - or more urgent - than in Greater Western Sydney.
Home to more Australians than Adelaide, Canberra, Hobart and Darwin combined.
And one of the fastest growing areas in Australia. The North West and South West, in particular, are at the forefront of this rapid population growth.
And we are approaching a vital moment for the future of these growing, young, multicultural and aspirational communities.
The planning and investment decisions we make about Western Sydney will not just affect families in those suburbs – they will shape the future growth and productivity and liveability of Sydney as a whole.
Take the new Western Sydney Airport, on track to open by late 2026 – 30 years after I backed it in my first speech as a Member of Parliament.
This is another great example of sustainable construction: almost no potable water used in the build and re-using 5 million tonnes of crushed sandstone from the Sydney Metro and WestConnex tunnelling projects.
The precinct itself is designed to use solar panels and be ultra-efficient in its use of electricity and liquid fuel.
There will be charging infrastructure for electric vehicles in the parking areas.
And we're looking into electric ground support vehicles too: baggage and catering trucks and aircraft tugs.
And when it's open, Western Sydney Airport will be a powerful catalyst for economic activity.
It will re-align the whole dynamic of Sydney.
For the first time, we won't all be turning in, towards the CBD and the harbour.
We'll be looking outward. We'll be looking to the West.
Not as a population centre, not as a congestion problem to be solved.
Not as drive-in, drive-out, drive-through suburbs – but as an economic powerhouse, driving national growth.
An airport – like a university – is a massive generator of economic activity for a region.
These are big, long-term construction projects.
But beyond that they deliver a significant multiplier effect for the local economy – creating a diverse range of secure, skilled, well-paid local jobs: including Western Sydney's rapidly-growing information and technology sector.
The Western Parkland City and the Aerotropolis will be home to new opportunities in innovation and research and technology.
But we can't deal with this in a box.
It can't be an enclave of economic opportunity, cut-off from the community.
Building the right surrounding infrastructure and public transport and freight links is absolutely critical.
The Sydney Metro – Western Sydney Airport rail line will help connect travellers with the city and locals with jobs.
We are investing $5.25 billion in the first stage of this transformative project, which will connect St Marys with the Western Sydney Airport and the Aerotropolis.
We are also investing a further $77.5 million towards a final business case looking at an extension of the Sydney Metro to Western Sydney Airport line.
For freight, the Moorebank Intermodal Terminal Precinct is global best practice.
A public-private partnership, designed to maximise productivity.
The Import-Export Terminal has been operating since 2019.
And we expect the Interstate Terminal to be complete in late 2024.
Moving more container freight by rail, will save around 3,000 truck journeys each day.
Freeing-up key arterial roads like the M5.
Saving around 110,000 tonnes of carbon emissions a year.
And boosting the security and resilience of local supply chains and delivering an economic benefit to Western Sydney of $120 million a year.
But it's not just that 'hard' infrastructure of roads and rail that drives an area's growth.
It's the green spaces, the parks, the community theatres and galleries.
Sports grounds and public pools.
Urban waterways and bike paths.
These are the amenities that knit-together a neighbourhood.
And fostering this sense of community pride and connection and inclusion depends on empowering local knowledge and innovation.
This is why, before the election, we said we would create an expert panel to assess Western Sydney's transport infrastructure needs and report back to the Australian Government ahead of the 2023-24 Federal Budget.
Today, I'm pleased to announce that this panel will be chaired by Sarah Hill, the CEO of the Western Parkland City Authority.
The Federal and New South Wales Governments will be represented by David Mackay, Deputy Secretary in the Department of Infrastructure and Kiersten Fishburn, Deputy Secretary of Transport for NSW.
Local Government – the level of government closest to community – will be represented by Kerry Robinson OAM, the CEO of Blacktown City Council and Lindy Deitz, the General Manager of Campbelltown City Council.
David Borger, the Executive Director of Business Western Sydney will represent employers and small business.
And Dr Awais Piracha from Western Sydney University, will contribute his expertise in urban planning.
And at a community level, we will have Dr Andy Marks, the Chair of the Western Sydney Community Forum.
And Sue Hunter Lawrence who is the President of the North West Business Chamber.
This expert panel is drawn from Western Sydney, for Western Sydney.
It will report to our government on gaps in transport infrastructure for the community – and prepare a priority list of projects to resolve these issues.
It will be a key source of advice as we make sure that Western Sydney grows in a way that benefits everyone who calls it home.

Every level of government has a responsibility to build and plan for the economic opportunities of future population growth.
And every level of government has a responsibility to build and plan for the environmental realities of climate change and extreme weather.
There's no escaping the fact that extreme weather events and natural disasters are becoming more damaging and more frequent.
We've seen the tragic human cost of this, through the spring.
Our first thoughts, always, are with those grieving for someone they loved.
We've seen the trail of destruction floodwaters leave in their wake.
The costs of the clean-up, the damage to businesses and homes, the loss of crops and livestock.
I've worked closely with the New South Wales Premier, as I have with the leaders of all states affected, to support the immediate work of response and recovery.
But governments have to do more than wait for the next disaster.
We have to work to manage the risks and minimise the damage.
The Productivity Commission estimates that 97% of all disaster funding is spent on recovery and clean-up while just 3% is spent on mitigation, preparedness and resilience.
Our new Disaster Ready Fund, which we took through the parliament last month, will change that.
It will invest $1 billion over five years in taking action now, to reduce the impacts of natural disasters in the future.
We will fund key infrastructure projects, such as upgrading flood levees and new firebreaks - but we know that the impacts of disasters and building resilience to them go far beyond just physical infrastructure.
This is why we will also fund projects to understand the risks communities face and deliver better planning, to support sustainable, resilient communities for the long term.
Because mitigation has to mean we go beyond repeating the same old mistakes.
That's the core of the $800 million program that the Premier of New South Wales and I announced in October to assist up to 2000 homeowners in the Northern Rivers that have been devastated by multiple flood events in the space of months.
Including $520 million to support voluntary home buy-backs and relocations to newly developed, flood free land.
We're talking about houses that were built on flood plains, where there is an ongoing risk to lives and severe damage to properties.
Many of them were never insured because it was too costly.
There are other homes that have been flooded, where retrofitting or raising homes will make all the difference - and together with the New South Wales Government, we've allocated $140 million for that work.
We are working to give people a path to start again, with far less risk of impacts from future flooding.
And co-operating with State and Local Government to prevent these mistakes being made again.
Because reckless development on flood plains only sets people up for heartbreak.
Mitigating against extreme weather is not just a matter of where we choose build – it's also how we choose to build.
In our cities and suburbs, as well as rural and regional Australia.
The National Housing Accord we announced in our first Budget in October brings together all levels of government, the construction sector and institutional investors like superannuation funds – to help tackle the nation's housing challenges. It sets a shared ambition of building 1 million new, well-located homes.
Under this Accord and our $10 billion Housing Australia Future Fund, our government will deliver 40,000 new social and affordable homes, including homes for women seeking to escape violent relationships and older women at risk of homelessness.
And we will invest in more housing and specialist services for our Veterans who are homeless, or at risk of homelessness.
Our Help to Buy scheme will assist Australians on low and moderate incomes to purchase a home with an equity contribution from the Government.
Helping more people achieve their aspirations for home ownership, sooner and with a smaller deposit, smaller mortgage and cheaper mortgage repayments.
Over 1,000 regional Australians have already taken advantage of our Regional First Home Buyer Guarantee, which supports regional first home buyers to purchase a home with a deposit of as little as five per cent.
I know the difference that a secure roof over your head makes to your life chances.
It's so much more than a place to live. It's about security and confidence and connection, a greater sense of hope and pride and belonging.
Governments should show that same pride, when we add to our national housing supply.
That's why, together with the states and territories, we've agreed on a new national construction code, which sets a 7-star standard for energy efficiency for new builds.
These homes will be cheaper to keep cool in summer – and cheaper to heat in winter.
They will also be ready for rooftop solar, ready for electric vehicles.
Because these are not luxuries they are utilities - and they should be available for more Australians.
We want homes that are more resilient to extreme weather, in communities that are better adapted to extreme weather.
Including action against 'the urban heat island effect' which exacerbates the toll heatwaves take on vulnerable Australians including the very young and the elderly.
This has to be a priority as Western Sydney grows.
And it can be as simple and practical as cleaning-up urban waterways, planting trees and strengthening green corridors.
This lowers surrounding temperatures and delivers the benefit of public space with shade and water for people to enjoy.

I began today by talking about this magnificent precinct – and the iconic harbour it looks out on.
Projects separated by nine decades, but united by their ambition.
Designed to enlarge our understanding of our city and to bring us together.
Infrastructure seeking to foster a sense of pride and inclusion and opportunity for all our citizens.
I conclude today by saying that should always be our aim.
As John Bradfield himself said:
"Future generations will judge our part in the upbuilding of Australia by our works."

This is the high standard to which we should always hold ourselves.
Not just for famous sites such as these, or transformational projects like Western Sydney Airport.
We should bring the same purpose and pride and planning to the infrastructure and housing and transport that touches people's daily lives.
Nation-building, from the ground up.
Every Federal Labor Government has left an enduring national infrastructure legacy in our cities and in Sydney.
The post-war housing build of Curtin and Chifley.
Whitlam's determination to see new and growing suburbs enjoy the same amenities and opportunities as the north shore.
Bob Hawke and Paul Keating's Building Better Cities, including the rejuvenation of Pyrmont and Ultimo.
And the Rudd and Gillard governments in which I served as Minister, creating Infrastructure Australia: a rigorous, expert, independent body that set the highest possible standards for the best possible projects.
I am determined for our Labor Government to leave a legacy for Sydney too.
Not one measured by the number of projects announced or opened.
But a legacy of ongoing improvements in liveability and living standards, in productivity growth and new economic activity.
A legacy where families and businesses and industry can seize the opportunities of renewable energy.
A legacy of more sustainable development and better preparation for the challenges of natural disasters and extreme weather.
This is the heart of the better future we campaigned on and the better future Australians voted for.
A future where, regardless of your postcode, you can get a good education and find a good job, close to your home.
Where you can count on reliable and affordable child care and Medicare and aged care in your local community and know the joy of art and sport and music and nature in your daily life.
A better future built on a sense of obligation to those who will follow us, to the cities and suburbs our children will grow up in and the natural environment they will inherit.
And a better future defined by stronger co-operation: public and private interests, federal and state and local governments, the will of the community and the best interests of the nation.
A better future where we all take our share of the responsibility and all own a share of the success.
All of this means aiming high. It demands we strive for the best.
But the best country in the world, deserves nothing less.

The Bradfield Oration was delivered on behalf of the Prime Minister by the Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, Catherine King. 


I want to thank Honourable Members and Senators for returning to Parliament today, to vote on our plan for Energy Price Relief for:

Australian industry and business
Australian manufacturing
Australian jobs
And Australian families.

This legislation is important - and it is urgent.
Because after a wasted decade of denial and delay…
After a wasted decade of neglecting the national energy grid and attacking renewables…
After a wasted decade:

That cost Australia jobs
Robbed us of investment
Damaged our international reputation
And left us vulnerable to global shocks

After this wasted decade, there is not a day to waste when it comes to securing more affordable and reliable energy for Australia.
Last Friday, at National Cabinet, every Premier and Chief Minister signed up to the four key measures in this plan, including the New South Wales Premier, Dominic Perrottet, and Premier Rockliff of Tasmania. And I thank all of the Premiers for their support. The four key measures are:
One: A temporary cap on the price of uncontracted gas at $12 a gigajoule for 12 months.
Two: a 12-month price ceiling on domestic coal of $125 per tonne in New South Wales and Queensland, which Premier Perrottet, when I spoke to him last night, indicated that New South Wales will recall their Parliament next week to legislate.
Three: $1.5 billion in targeted bill relief for businesses and households most in need.
Delivered through measures to reduce bills in order to put downward pressure on inflation.
And Four: long term action to secure our energy future, including the new Capacity Investment Scheme…
…and the continuing roll-out of projects under our Rewiring the Nation Fund.
Mr Speaker,
This plan is a combination of immediate action – but also future reform.
It recognises the challenge of the here and now, as a result of Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine.
We need to act now, though, to deal with this crisis, to keep Australians in work, to support families, but also to look to the medium-term to make sure we do secure our energy future.
And that is what we will be doing.
Making sure we get the cheapest and cleanest form of energy – renewable energy – to be able to power into the grid through the projects that we announced and will continue to announce around Rewiring the Nation.
Together with the National Reconstruction Fund, this is about also making sure we can makes things here again.
Mr Speaker,
Apparently, those opposite want us to have acted quicker, but also want us to be slower at the same time.
Having had 22 policies in Government, but not landing one of them, they now want us to have no policy also.
They were addicted to power – but hopeless on energy.
They rushed around passing legislation about strawberries – laws that have never been used – but did nothing to help people with their power bills.
The only time they acted with urgency was to cover-up the 20 per cent increase in power prices and to keep it a secret until after the election.
And now they are seeking to stand in the way of this urgent action because they imagine that somehow it serves their political agenda.
Well, the choice for this Parliament today is very clear.
Vote for this plan – and vote for lower prices.
Or vote against it – and vote for higher prices.
Vote for this plan – and stand up for jobs, industry and households.
Or vote against it – and stand with them, with companies banking record profits and sending them offshore.
That is the choice.
Vote for this plan – and be part of the solution.
Or vote against it - and be part of the problem.
The Opposition will be held to account for their decision.
We know where we stand.
We stand for Australian manufacturing.
And we stand for Australian households.
And this legislation will support both.
That's what this Bill will do.
Those opposite failed in Government over a decade to deliver a coherent energy policy.
We on this side of the House are acting with urgency to deal with the challenge which is there.
And that is why it has the support of every Premier and Chief Minister and why it has the support not just of the Labor Party, but I thank those in the Crossbench who are providing their support.


Mr Speaker, I move that the House record its deep regret at the death on December 12, 2022, of Constable Rachel McCrow, Constable Matthew Arnold and Mr Alan Dare.
Place on record its acknowledgement of their bravery and sacrifice in the line of duty, and tender our sympathy to their families in their bereavement.
Mr Speaker, Monday, 12 December should have been an ordinary summer's day on the Western Downs.
A day of warmth under that big blue sky.
A day of peace.
Instead, that quiet was shattered by the gunfire of an atrocity.
A vicious and deadly ambush that has stolen lives, broken hearts, devastated a community and shocked our nation.
On Monday afternoon, four Queensland police officers from the Tara Police Station all still just in their 20s, young people serving their community, a rich and full life ahead of them, were sent out on what was supposed to be a routine check.
Just an ordinary part of the job that they were so proud to do.
But the property they were visiting was no normal home or farm.
It was, unbeknown to them, a fortress and an armoury.
As the Queensland Police Commissioner Katarina Carroll, has said, they did not stand a chance.
Constables Matthew Arnold and Rachel McCrow were murdered.
Constable Randall Kirk was shot and wounded. And Constable Keely Brough assumed that she, too, would die. Either shot by her pursuers, or burned alive when they set the grass that she was sheltering in on fire to try to drive her out.
Constable Brough grabbed her phone to seek assistance for her colleagues.
And then, she texted her loved ones, what she imagined would be her final goodbyes.
Even then, surrounded by danger and death, her first thought was for her fellow officers.
It is a miracle that Keely survived.
Tragically, Alan Dare did not.
A neighbour, who came to the property's front gate, driven by that great Australian instinct to help.
An innocent Australian who paid for his kindness and concern with his life.
Mr Speaker,
Police officers in regional Australia are servants of the community and they're part of its fabric.
I've been speaking with the mayor, Paul McVeigh, and also, I had discussions with the local MP, the Leader of The Nationals, David Littleproud, about the nature of their communities.
Over 200 Tara residents gathered at their police station to observe a minute's silence for Matthew and Rachel.
The Queensland Police Union Chief Executive, Ian Leavers, said, 'In Chinchilla, they've run out of flowers. They are such a close-knit and caring community. And the loss of these lives has fallen hard on a great many people."
The community are gathering.
The community, tomorrow night, will hold events in both Tara and Chinchilla.
I'm advised by the Mayor that they are taking measures such as the local car wash is donating every dollar that goes through there to the families.
The community are donating everything from sausages and other food and beverages so that they can gather together to mourn together.
Locals have been saddened by these deaths and shocked by such a senseless atrocity.
An act of violence and bloodshed so sudden, so cruel, so alien to the community and country that they know.
And so far beyond rational comprehension.
Part of the responsibility that all of us have is not just a solemn duty of remembering and honouring those who were killed.
It is examining what drove their killers and finding a way to draw that poison out of our nation.
Our nation mourns with all those who loved Matthew Arnold, Rachel McCrow and Alan Dare.
We know that for their families, this Christmas, there will be a place at the table not taken.
An empty space of grief and loss that the years will never be able to fill.
To those families - we say, again, today, Australia mourns with you.
And we mourn also with the bigger community and the larger family to which all police officers past and present belong, including, I want to note, the Leader of the Opposition, who served as a Queensland police officer.
Because we understand that every death in the line of duty strikes in the heart of all those who serve, and casts a shadow over all of those who wait for their loved ones to come home from work.
Mr Speaker,
It is true that every police officer knows the risks that they face in their life of duty.
They are all too aware of the dangers.
And yet, they do their job each and every day, regardless.
They do it for us.
For our communities.
For our nation.
That is courage.
It is public service at the highest level.
And today, and every day, we pay tribute to each and every one of the police officers who serve us and protect us.
Last night, the Attorney-General and I went to the Police Memorial here in Canberra at that overshadows the lake to lay a wreath with, as well, the Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Ian McCartney, who is here with us today.
And I welcome you, Sir. And I thank you and all of your fellow officers for their service.
I also acknowledge today in the gallery, joining us, Acting Deputy Commissioner Lesa Gale and the Acting Assistant Commissioner, Stephen Dametto.
Mr Speaker,
We grieve for Alan Dare.
And we grieve for Matthew Arnold and Rachel McCrow, who have paid a price that no one who puts on the uniform should ever have to pay.
We can never count the true cost.
We can never repay the full debt.
All we can offer is the humble thanks of a grateful nation and the heartfelt condolences of the Australian people.
With honour they served.
May they rest in peace.


I'd like to begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I also want to reaffirm – proudly and clearly – my Government's determination to enshrine in the Australian Constitution an Indigenous Voice to our national Parliament.
We will heed the patient and generous call of the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
We will come together as a nation and take the hand that First Nations people have extended to us in an act of profound grace.
Because it will be when we join with our continent's mosaic of ancient nations that our modern nation will find our greatest strength.
That we will achieve our fullest potential.
And realise our truest self.
We live in the world's greatest nation, but an even greater Australia is so tantalisingly within our reach.
Together, I know, friends, that we can reach it.
And I want to acknowledge today Blanche d'Alpuget here representing the late, great Bob Hawke.
I acknowledge as well our Minister for Indigenous Affairs, the wonderful Linda Burney.
The Minister for the Arts, Tony Burke, is here also.

After a gap of two years, it's so good to have Woodford back in its full glory.
It's especially satisfying to be here with you in the grand capital of Woodfordia as Australia's 31st Prime Minister.
There were so many things we missed during COVID lockdowns, but one of those things that we missed was the engagement that comes, can only come, from being together in-person.
Yes - you can have contact online, through Zoom calls and all of that.
But nothing beats the coming together of a festival like that.
What a great, aching absence it was – along with so many of the forms we think of as the arts.
You don't need me to tell you that the arts suffered terribly during COVID, and so much of that suffering was the result of deliberate neglect.
One of the things that the previous government never understood is that the arts are not a luxury.
The arts are central to our very being.
Whether it's our stories being told, or our music being played, or our world being interpreted through paint, dance, textile, stone or clay, we cannot separate ourselves from the arts.
The arts are central to our culture. And it is through the arts that we build our identity as a nation and a people. The arts contain, nurture and indeed protect our very sense of self.
And it fills me with such happiness to see so many people here again, including all the young ones whose hearts and minds are being filled with the wonder and the magic of expression – and through that, the wonder and magic of life itself.
As many of you are probably aware, I am a bit of a music fan.
Music brings people together with an ease and a power that very little else can.
You'll be pleased to know I won't be trying to perform here. As a musician, I am a good politician.
But music does really bring us together.
It adds to life's great highs, and helps us get through the lows. It lets us celebrate what makes us different, and rejoice in what we share.
Put it all together and what you have is a spirit that was so perfectly embodied by one of the greatest Woodford fans of all time: Bob Hawke.
Bob left a great a legacy, and that's because he understood that for any legacy to have staying power requires a government that lasts the distance.
Last time I was here, I spoke about how the strength of Bob's personality sometimes obscured what lay beneath that twinkle-eyed, larrikin surface.
At the heart of Bob Hawke was a prodigious dedication to work and to detail, and an energy that he channelled into making life better for his fellow Australians.
An extraordinary leader who knew that no true leader stands alone. His ministry was one of depth and breadth, and each of those ministers was fully trusted with their portfolios.
Bob relied upon them for their expertise and for their judgement – and he didn't secretly help himself to any of their portfolios along the way.
Above all, Bob's ambition embraced the rest of us, and that's because he knew we were capable of better and he knew we could do it – together.
The words that characterised his leadership — reconciliation, accord, consensus — were all about us heading in the same direction as a nation.
Yes, there will always be times when gaps and cracks open between us, but Bob never sought to widen them in search of votes. Bob was about closing them.
The lessons Bob Hawke taught us are lessons well worth heeding. Not just in what we do, as crucial as that is – but, importantly, how to do it.
No-one's time in government is infinite. The clock is always ticking. But I firmly believe that a good way to make the best possible use of that time is to carry on with Bob's example.

On 21 May, the Australian people voted for change. Change for the better.
We promised the Australian people that after a lost decade, we would not waste a single day.
From Day 1, we have done the hard work of building a better future, delivering what Australians voted for.
The Labor Government has been focused on delivering an orderly implementation of our agenda.
And even our critics could not argue that sat back and rested on our laurels.
We have been working hard.
An agenda that deals with immediate and urgent issues but always giving consideration to how we both anticipate and create a better future. Restoring faith in politics by delivering on our commitments.
Inclusive economic growth, social justice, environmental sustainability, and constructive international relationships that enhance regional peace and security – these are the values that will continue to drive our agenda.
And we will continue to search for common ground across the Parliament and beyond wherever possible.
Collaboration is a strength, not a weakness.
Let me take you on a quick tour on what the Federal Labor Government has achieved so far. In the seven months and seven days since we were elected to office, we have:
Got an increase in the minimum wage.
Secured a pay rise for Aged Care workers.
Passed a Climate Change Bill and updated our climate targets.
Made child care cheaper, which works for children, works for families and most definitely works for the economy.
Established 10 days paid family and domestic violence leave, because no one should ever have to choose between their physical, emotional and economic security.
Extended Paid Parental Leave to six months, the biggest expansion to it since it was introduced by the last Labor Government.
And we have worked to expose and close the gender pay gap.
If you look across our achievements and our goals, you'll see a common theme is the drive to achieve gender equality.
It's underpinned by the Budget handed down by Treasurer Jim Chalmers in October, a budget that put the needs and aspirations of women front and centre.
And I am proud that these are the achievements of the first Australian government to have a majority of women.
Fifty-four of the 103 members of the Labor Caucus are women. A first. And it does make a difference.
The majority of Parliamentary Committee chairs are women. A first.
A record 10 members of the Cabinet are women.
Add to that the swiftly growing cultural diversity of the Labor Caucus that I lead, better reflecting the extraordinary diversity of Australia – new members with surnames including Mascarenhas, Sitou, Fernando, Lim and Ananda-Rajah mean we are much more representative than has ever occurred since Federation.
With the Leader in the House of Representatives called Albanese. And the Leader in the Senate called Wong.
We convened the Jobs and Skills Summit, bringing together a great cross section of business leaders, unions, employees and civil society.
We have established Jobs and Skills Australia.
We've made medicines cheaper from January 1. The first decrease in 75 years since the PBS was introduced.
We have created 180,000 new fee-free TAFE places.
We said we would abolish the the Cashless Debit Card and we have.
Expanded the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card.
Established the Royal Commission into Robodebt, because there are some things that must never be swept under the carpet and forgotten.
We have delivered the Regional First Home Buyers Guarantee.
We are advancing a Voice to Parliament, not just because it is the right thing to do but because it is the best thing to do.
We have repaired our international relations and got Australia out of the naughty corner.
Consider how much the mood has changed in just seven months of a Labor Government.
We've gone from a government that treated both climate change and the fate of our Pacific neighbours as a punchline to a bad joke.
We have restored our relations in the region, and we have restored respect.
And we've gone from a government that chose to not have a single conversation with China – our major trading partner – for the entire last term they were in power, to one that understands that dialogue is always a good thing.
Australia and China are talking again.
I have met with President Xi Jinping, which was constructive.
A week ago, Foreign Minister Penny Wong visited Beijing.
It doesn't mean we agree with China on everything. It doesn't mean we don't raise our concerns and our significant points of difference.
We will co-operate with China where we can, disagree where we must, and engage in Australia's national interest.
We are undoing so much of the damage done by the LNP government.
We are a mature nation. We're not afraid to act like one.
We have established a National Anti-Corruption Commission, because restoring integrity and trust to our politics is essential if we are to maintain the health of our democracy.
Those are qualities that went missing in action under the last government.
And in their defence of Scott Morrison's multiple ministries, the Coalition have rejected the opportunity to distance themselves from the abuse of power that characterised their government they were a part of.
I urge anyone who thinks our democracy is unassailable to have a look around the world.
Even some of the oldest, most stable democracies have come under attack from whole range of corrosive, insidious forces. No one is immune.
Our democracy is precious, something we have carefully grown and nurtured from one generation to the next. One of our core responsibilities is to make it stronger, and key to that strength is transparency and accountability.
The National Anti-Corruption Commission is a crucial step in this.
We have passed our Secure Jobs, Better Pay legislation, which will get wages moving again.
With the help of a special sitting day of Parliament earlier this month, we have delivered our Energy Price Relief Plan with caps on the price of gas and coal.
And now that we've had the legislation passed, we begin the work of putting it into practice.
We have done a lot in the past seven months.
It may sound like a lot – especially after the last decade – but to quote the great Deborah Conway, it's only the beginning.

We have established our momentum, and we're just going to keep building on it. As we move out of the upheaval of an election year, we will aim to keep delivering on the commitments that we made to the Australian people.
The commitments that the Australian people voted for, and that includes addressing the realities of climate change and protecting the extraordinary natural heritage of which we are the current custodians.
Unlike the inertia of the previous government, we are serious about cutting emissions. We are serious about tackling the challenges of climate change, and finding the opportunities that those challenges can present.
We know that the best possible version of Australia's future sees us taking our rightful place as a renewable energy superpower.
As a nation, we are blessed with so much sunshine and wind that it would be an act of perversity to not harness them.
They are there for the taking.
With them we can drive down emissions …
We can drive down power prices for households and for businesses …
And we can drive forward a renaissance in advanced manufacturing.
With our $20 billion Rewiring the Nation program, we will bring our power grid into the 21st century, creating the infrastructure for transmission that is essential if we are going to be able to transition.
Last week, we announced a major renewable energy partnership with the NSW Government, creating multiple renewable energy zones that will create jobs as we build for the future …
… and taking an important vital step the last federal government never quite got around to taking with Snowy 2.0 – plugging it in.
We are working on power in Tasmania with Marinus Link, Victoria with the offshore wind power and Queensland where in Central Queensland you have a massive expansion of hydro and renewable power going forward.
These are the hallmarks of our approach. Mutual respect, and a national cabinet actually worthy of the name.
And each and every decision guided by the national interest, not political self-interest.
There is a great future on the horizon, and it is so exciting. Australia can be a renewable energy superpower.
Along with all that solar and wind power to generate clean, cheap, reliable electricity, we have – with our great abundance of lithium – everything we need to build the batteries we need right here.
The batteries to store that power for our communities and our businesses …
… as well as the batteries to power the electric vehicles, which my Government has cut taxes on to make more affordable, just as we promised we would.
Cheaper, cleaner energy can drive advanced manufacturing and a future made here in Australia.
By using the National Reconstruction Fund, we will support existing industries to transform and new industries to emerge.
One of the lessons of the pandemic is we need to be more self-reliant. Put simply, we need to make more things right here.
Everything we do to drive down emissions strengthens our efforts to protect the unique natural environment, including the Great Barrier Reef.
Every step of the way, we will be guided by reality, by science, and by expertise – not ideology.
It will be shaped by our conviction that we owe the next generation – and every generation that follows – nothing less than the preservation of this magnificent land and these mighty seas.
We will continue to act on the urgent challenges facing Australia, while building for long-term opportunities.
This is why we have created Jobs and Skills Australia to ensure labour market planning maximises opportunities for Australians to secure well-paid jobs.
This will work with the 20,000 additional university places and 180,000 fee-free TAFE places that come into effect from next month.
A vision - cleaner, cheaper energy being driven to create new industries, and then training Australians for those jobs.
You can't change it with a slogan.
You need to change it with good policies that put in place those transitions.
And that is what my Government is doing.
When Woodford takes place next year, the referendum on the Voice to Parliament will have been held.
This is an opportunity for all of us to be a part of enriching our nation and being even stronger in the future.
There are some who argue that it is a risk holding a referendum.
I assure you that we understand that.
We understand there is a risk.
But I will tell you what is certain - you won't get constitutional change without putting it to a vote. That is what is certain.
That vote will achieve two important things.
It will recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our Constitution …
… and it will enshrine a Voice to Parliament to ensure consultation on matters that directly affect Indigenous Australians, such as education, health, housing, and justice issues.
We know we will get better outcomes if people have input into the decisions that affect them.
How do we know that?
By examining the progress that all the most successful programs - justice conferencing, Indigenous rangers - they all have something in commonv which is they directly empower Indigenous people.
It is not people in Canberra or in State Parliaments. It is made in consultation together. And we know that is what works.
A successful referendum will give respect to First Nations people, but it will also enhance both the way Australians see ourselves, and the way we are seen by the world.
Momentum is growing. Local government, community groups, churches, business, trade unions, and sporting codes have joined every single state and territory government in pledging support for a constitutionally enshrined Voice to our national Parliament.
This can indeed be an inclusive moment of national unity and reconciliation.
I respect everyone's right to make their own decision on the referendum, but I encourage Australians to consider the generous and gracious request from First Nations people themselves.
As the Uluru Statement itself says - to remove "the torment of our powerlessness", and to take up the invitation "to walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future".

Thank you for having us here today.
It is such an honour to come to this joyous event – one that, frankly, has one of the greatest soundtracks Australia has to offer – and stand before you as Prime Minister.
It is a great privilege, one that I will never ever take for granted.
I, and every single member of the Government I lead, will always be guided by the desire to do what is best for our country.
To change the lives of our fellow Australians for the better.
To do what is right and to do what matters.
And, without ever seeking to iron out the differences that make our nation so vibrant, strong and attractive, we will always seek out the common ground between us – because that will always be the most fertile place to plant our dreams.
My determination has always been that we will be a Government for all Australians.
It is how we are acting in the Parliament as well.
An orderly, methodical Government that does exactly what we said we would do, honouring all the commitments we have made to the Australian people.
A Government that once again stands firmly on a foundation of integrity, accountability and trust.
We will listen. We will consult. We will keep our doors open, along with our ears and our minds.
There is a wonderful journey ahead. But we can only travel it together.
I am very confident that we can.


Mr Speaker
Honourable Prime Minister, Honourable Leader of the Opposition, Honourable Members, Friends.
Gudpela monin olgeta 
[Good morning to you all]
Thank you for your warm and generous welcome.
I am delighted to be the first Australian Prime Minister to visit Papua New Guinea since 2018.
And I am deeply, deeply honoured to be the first foreign Head of Government to address your Parliament.
And what a magnificent Parliament this is.
A building rich with the art and culture and tradition of Papua New Guinea's proud history and identity.
And a chamber alive with optimism for the future of this nation and the progress of your people.
Australia and Papua New Guinea are the closest of neighbours, we are the greatest of friends.
For thousands of years, Torres Strait Islanders and the Indigenous traders of PNG shared culture and kinship, exchanging goods and ideas.
That thread runs unbroken through to today: to our modern trade links, our evolving business and investment ties, our migrants and expats, our expanding fields of cultural and educational exchange - even our shared passion for Rugby League.
We are friends. We are mates.
We are partners. We are equals.
We are neighbours who stand with each other and help each other in times of need.
Australians will never forget the heroism and humanity of the brave souls who – eight decades ago - came from all over this country to serve and fight alongside our soldiers in defence of this land and in defence of Australia's freedom too.
Or in recent times, the 100 members of Kumul Force deployed in Operation Bushfire Assist, to help Australia in the devastating Black Summer of 2019-20.
PNG was one of the very first countries to offer Australia assistance – and Kumul Force was the biggest international contingent deployed.
And on behalf of all Australians, I simply say: thank you. Tenk yu tru. 

Honourable Members
Over there on the table, I can see the ceremonial mace.
A gift from the Parliament and the people of Australia, to the first Papua New Guinea House of Assembly in 1964.
A crowned symbol of authority that dates back centuries, to the mother of parliaments in Westminster.
And yet – entwined with the gold leaf and silver plate – at the core of your mace, is something unique.
A polished stone ball, representing the head of a traditional club.
There is a profound truth bound up in that.
Australia gave your first Assembly a symbol of our support and respect and affection.
A demonstration of the precious value we place on our countries' deep and lasting friendship.
And a token of gratitude for the extraordinary service your people gave to ours, in the darkest days of the Second World War.
But the true weight, the real power and the great strength at the heart of that democratic symbol – comes from Papua New Guinea.
It comes from you: your people, your culture, your courage, your talent and intellect and ambition.
That was the truth at the core of the movement to independence, now nearly half a century ago.
Because independence was not Australia's gift to give, it was the people of Papua New Guinea's right to assert, it was your opportunity to seize.
In this land of extraordinary contrasts and variety in landscapes and traditions and languages, people united around a deep faith in democracy and a powerful commitment to family and community and care for their neighbours.
Independence was – as my great predecessor Gough Whitlam said on that day of celebration in 1975 – 'an idea whose time had come'.
And it arrived not as a contested act of revolution but rather as a considered statement of national maturity, of national unity - and also a national ambition for PNG to serve as a leader in this region.
As Grand Chief Sir Michael Somare said, at the first South Pacific Forum that PNG attended as a member state:
"We are not here to rock the boat, but to add another – in order that our voyage to that glorious destination may be reached"

Nearly half a century later, we are still on that voyage, together.
And yes, there have been rough seas and tough times.
But our friendship has held true.
And, now, on the horizon, a world of opportunity awaits us.
Because Australia and Papua New Guinea are bound not just by a shared past and a shared border but by a common determination to shape our own futures.
To seize the opportunities of this moment, in this region.
This can be a decisive decade for peace, prosperity, unity and security in the Indo-Pacific.
As two big Pacific Ocean states, Australia and PNG must work as equals with our fellow Pacific states to build a stronger, safer, more secure region.
All of us have a part to play in realising that vision.
And tied in with that, all of us who serve as parliamentarians have a unique opportunity and a particular responsibility to defend the democracy in which we serve.
And we fulfil that duty best by demonstrating the value of this place and the ideals it is built on.
By proving that the system we belong to has the power to change people's lives for the better.
This begins with ensuring that every girl and boy has the right to grow up happy and safe and with the opportunity to get a great education.
The government I lead is committed to strengthening Australia's education partnership with PNG.
Working with you on the important priorities you've identified: including the early years and vocational education and training.
And making sure that equality for women and girls goes far beyond the opportunity to attend school.
We know every nation can do better and do more to achieve this – from greater economic empowerment, to preventing domestic and family violence, to achieving equality in representation.
I am proud to lead the first Australian government in 122 years where the majority of members are women.
And I want to congratulate the two new women members elected to this place – you are representatives and you are trail blazers and I hope you inspire a new generation of women and girls to serve their country and their democracy.
Equality for women is fair, it is right and it is powerful economic reform.
It boosts productivity, participation and drives growth, because it means drawing on the talent and initiative and enterprise of the whole population, not just half of it.
Friends
Education is a mighty weapon against disadvantage and equality is a powerful lever for economic growth.
But recent years have provided the world with a vivid reminder that healthy economies depend – above all - on healthy people.
Australia will continue to provide support to PNG's health priorities, including in infectious diseases, such as TB, HIV, child and maternal health and malaria.
And we are proud that the Australian-funded Angau Hospital was completed last year in Lae.
This new facility will serve an area that is home to over one million people and make a major contribution to boosting access to health care in PNG.

Prime Minister Marape
As you know, it was a Pangu Government and an Australian Labor Government that worked together to usher-in a new era for Papua New Guinea, half a century ago.
In 2023 I want our two governments to work together to unlock a new generation of prosperity for your nation.
To boost our two-way trade in everything from coffee and cocoa to fisheries and tourism.
And to bolster the significant direct investment made by the Australian private sector in PNG, which already stands at $24 billion.
More than we invest in India, Indonesia or Malaysia.
I understand PNG is eager to expand your exports of more processed goods and varied agricultural products and I see these as areas where the Australian business community can play a key role.
Our government also stands ready to assist PNG to improve your bio-security regime to enable your farmers and producers to access international markets.
And as the world looks to a more sustainable model for growth, PNG has a tremendous opportunity to expand your Green Economy.
I know a number of Australian companies are keen to explore what can be done in this area, including in hydro and hydrogen production, for example.
Together, I am confident we can ensure that the rich natural resources of Papua New Guinea are made to deliver good jobs, lasting investment and sustainable development for your nation.
But our friendship is deeper than trade – and our partnership and co-operation and engagement should reach beyond it.
Infrastructure is a longstanding policy passion of mine and I am proud that Australia is working with PNG to deliver an ambitious program of nation-building projects.
Upgrading ports, to create jobs and clear-away bottlenecks, as well as opening the door for developing export industries.
Building and maintaining a better road network, to make it easier for farmers to get their product to market and to ensure communities have more reliable access to good services.
And here, on the threshold of the biggest markets and the fastest-growing economies in the world, digital and communications infrastructure is every bit as vital as roads and ports.
This is why Australia built the Coral Sea Cable and is helping to build a productive and competitive telecommunications market for PNG.
It's important and right that the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific has a strong pipeline of projects here in PNG – and I look forward to following their progress and celebrating their completion.
Friends
In the years ahead, Australia and Papua New Guinea have a chance to honour our shared history of service in the cause of peace – by adding to it.
Deepening our defence ties and enhancing our national security co-operation and achieving a swift conclusion to negotiations on a Bilateral Security Treaty.
A treaty that will underpin our work together to address PNG's priority needs including law and order challenges, strengthening the justice system and rule of law.
A treaty based on deep trust.
And a treaty that builds on the family-first approach to regional security.
An example to others and an investment in the future of our partnership.
In this same spirit of regionalism, we are expanding opportunities for PNG citizens to travel and work in Australia through the Working Holiday Visa, the Pacific Engagement Visa and - in particular - the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility Scheme.
Australian farmers and producers benefit from the expertise and industry of your people.
Just as importantly, the people of PNG earn good wages and develop new skills that they can use to support their families, educate their children and invest in opportunities that will deliver further prosperity for themselves and PNG.
And – Prime Minister Marape – my government backs your ambition to significantly increase the number of PNG workers who take part in this program in Australia and contribute to the future prosperity of both our nations.
Honourable Members
All of you appreciate that our region is on the frontline of the global fight against climate change.
Our Pacific neighbours are counting on PNG and Australia to support international co-operation, to show leadership and to take action.
There is not a moment to waste.
It is up to our generation to protect the precious and unique natural environment of our rainforests, reefs and coasts.
To build – and plan – our infrastructure so our communities are more resilient and better prepared for natural disasters.
It is the responsibility of our generation to ensure our farmers and producers do not suffer irreversible damage to their land and livelihoods.
And it is the great opportunity of our generation to grasp the transformative economic benefits of clean energy technology.
All of which is why I'm very pleased PNG will be joining the Indo-Pacific Carbon Offsets Scheme.
Friends
When Prime Minister Marape and I watched the State of Origin together in Suva last year, he said there are only three days your country stops.
Game 1, Game 2 and Game 3.
That's something I think a lot of Australians can relate to.
And it was great to see so many people getting off the Air Niugini flights in Brisbane to support the talent of the Kumuls and the Orchids in the Prime Minister's XIII matches.
And today I affirm my view that I want to see a PNG-based, Pacific Islander team compete in the National Rugby League competition.
Whether it is rugby league, or cricket with the Barras and the Lewas, or the work being done here by the AFL, sport is such a genuine and powerful way of building strong and lasting ties between our peoples, at a code and club and community and family level.
And the same is true for education and art and cultural exchange.
My government will continue to support programs that deepen understanding and strengthen connections between Australians and the people of Papua New Guinea.
Because at the heart of our two nations' friendship is that sense of respect and connection between equals.

Honourable Members
Tomorrow, I will travel to Wewak to pay my respects at the resting place of Grand Chief Sir Michael Somare.
Before I left for this visit I was shown a photo taken in 1974 at an event in Sydney.
The Grand Chief holding onto part of a two-pronged spear which he's just broken across his knee, into two pieces.
One was given to Gough Whitlam, the other to the great Motuan leader, Oala Oala Rarua of Pari village.
This gesture was a symbol of peace – but also the signifier of a pact, a promise.
A new path of friendship, mateship and common accord.
A bond between equals.
I am proud to say today that Australia is determined to continue to honour that promise.
We stand with you.
We hold true.
Our two nations are bound together – now let us build together.
A future of peace, prosperity and opportunity for all.
Tenk yu tru olgeta, lukim yu bihain.
[Thank you very much, everyone, see you again]


I would like to acknowledge the Indigenous landowners of the land on which we gather tonight. I pay my respects to the Motu Koitabu people.
 Prime Minister Marape, distinguished guests.
 Gutpela nait yupela olgeta 
  [Good evening to you all]
 Thank you very much for those kind words of welcome at the end of what has been a moving and memorable day. 
 To be the first foreign Head of Government invited to address your Parliament was a great honour. 
 And not just for me personally – but for the country I lead and the people I serve. 
 Australia and Papua New Guinea are more than near neighbours, we are the greatest of friends. 
 We can trace our friendship back through thousands of years of connection and culture between our peoples. 
 We remember and honour the shared service and sacrifice of wartime, the heroism and humanity of the members of that great generation. 
 We recall the joy and pride of independence, nearly half a century ago. 
 When the Australian flag was not torn down, but respectfully lowered - and the vibrant colours of your proud and independent nation rose to fly in its place. 
 But our partnership is about more than history or proximity. 

  It is a bond between equals. 
 It is a relationship of common values – and also shared interests. 
 Two Pacific Ocean states determined to preserve peace and security in our region, recognising the value and the importance of a family-first approach.
 And writing that principle of regionalism and that sense of deep trust into our new Bilateral Security Treaty.
 Our partnership is vital to regional security – and it also offers us tremendous opportunity for greater prosperity. 
 I look around the room tonight and see reminders everywhere of our strong and growing business and investment ties. 
 Businesses that enrich the PNG economy, employ thousands of local workers, and make the products the world wants and needs.
 If we work together, we can do even more.
 We can work together on your priorities for education: boosting skills and training to help more people find good jobs that lift their living standards. 
 Investing in hospitals and health services across the board, because we know a healthy economy depends on healthy people. 
 On the Renewable Energy Economy, there is a transformative opportunity to see your nation's rich natural resources help drive the world's transition to a low-carbon economy, while at the same time creating good, secure jobs and greater wealth, here in PNG.
 And together, we can unlock new areas of investment in these resources as well as agriculture and infrastructure. 
 Building the roads that help farmers and producers get their goods to market, upgrading the ports that make trade faster and more reliable and building the digital connectivity that will allow PNG to commercialise and export ideas, as well as products and resources. 
 And – I can't make a speech in the company of Prime Minister Marape, without mentioning that other great PNG export: brilliant rugby league players. 
 And, Prime Minister, like you, I want to see a PNG team in the NRL.
 Friends
 I finished my remarks earlier today talking about my trip to Wewak tomorrow. 
 That visit is about paying respect to the life and leadership of Grand Chief Sir Michael Somare. 
 It's also about honouring his dream for this land – a dream that did not begin and end with independence. 
 His vision was for a united PNG and a prosperous one. 
 A Papua New Guinea respected and recognised as a leader in the Indo-Pacific. 
 And a PNG working together with Australia, for the good of our two nations and the success and strength of our region.
 Two nations bound together, building together.
 That ambition endures.
 It is up to us to carry it forward. 
 And the Prime Minister and I are united on that. 
 Thank you all for your warm hospitality tonight.
 Tenk yu tru olgeta, lukim yu bihain. 
  [Thank you very much, everyone, see you again]


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It is a solemn honour to be with you today.&nbsp;Even with the passage of 46 years, the anniversary of the Granville Train Disaster sits so heavily in the soul of the nation.
Six years after the NSW Parliament made its apology to the victims, survivors and first responders, I am grateful to have this moment to extend my sorrow and regret to everyone whose life was changed utterly and tragically that day.
For the people boarding Train No. 108 on the morning of 18 January 1977, it was, of course, just another day — beautiful in its ordinariness.
That morning they walked out of their front doors, in all likelihood barely even giving a thought to how — like clockwork — they would return home that evening.
It wasn’t to be.
For so very many of them, so close to where we are gathered now, the clock stopped.
We can scarcely imagine what it was like in that awful moment.
The suddenness of it. The shock of it. The violence and the noise of it.
A moment in that bright January sunshine that brought the finality of darkness.
And for those who lived to see the light again, life would never be the same.
Like a terrible vibration, word went humming back along the line to Parramatta, Penrith, Blaxland, Warrimoo, Springwood, Katoomba, Blackheath, Mount Victoria …
… and spread through suburbs and towns.
Aftershocks leaving a grief from which so many have never recovered.
For most of us, what remains of Granville nearly half a century on is a collection of distressing images and written records.
Photographs of emergency workers, stretchers lining the railway tracks, and machinery shifting rubble.
Accounts from those who were there.
Footage of policemen walking away from the wreckage carrying bundles of brief cases and handbags, satchels and suitcases.
Bags packed for a destination they never reached, by people who never completed their journey.
For those who were there on the 18th of January — the survivors and the first responders, and for the family, friends and communities of the victims — the words and images that remain are precious artefacts of those who died.
Today is about those we lost, and those who live on with their memories.
The 84 who tragically died that day.
The hundreds broken in body and wounded in spirit.
The first responders and volunteers who worked in heat and dust and danger to assist the injured and comfort the dying.
Responders arrived to scenes that no-one should ever be subjected to.
But they were there, their compassion, their courage and the sheer power of their humanity driving them to do everything within their power to save life.
To save limb.
To help their fellow human beings in their moment of greatest need.
Fighting through exhaustion in the hope of being able to soften the horror.
In the darkness of that distant morning, they were shafts of light.
In 1977, my great friend and mentor Tom Uren lived and worked in Granville as the Federal Member for Reid.
A photo from the scene shows him grieving for his people — hands in pockets, head down.
Tom knew all too well that many of the passengers were the workers — secretaries, clerks and typists, bus drivers, nurses and bank tellers — upon whom our beloved city depends.
Nearly half a century on, we think of them still. The years not lived, the dreams not realised. And the great promise of those lives unfulfilled.
As we read through the names, we wonder what might have been. Many of them might have still been among us today, part of the great life of our city.
We think of the families and the loved ones and friends, whose own lives were changed forever. Grief may be softened by time, but it does not fade.
And we think of those who survived, and all they endured — in so many ways.
We hold them all in our hearts, and we carry them with us. They are part of us still, and always will be.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
Later this year, in a referendum, every Australian will have the opportunity to take up the generous and gracious invitation to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in our nations' birth certificate - our Constitution - and to support a voice to Parliament.
I believe – just like tonight – it will be an uplifting moment of national unity.
Every Australian can be proud that the society we have built together, down the generations, includes the world's oldest continuous culture.
My fellow Australians.
We gather tonight, on the eve of our national day, to honour and celebrate those who represent the very best of our national character.
Global stars and local heroes.
Young Australians and those rich in years.
People of all backgrounds and from every part of our continent.
A diverse group, united by a common quality: they inspire us.
They inspire us by living and serving and upholding our nation's values: our compassion and generosity, our courage and initiative, our ingrained sense of fairness and our deep belief in service to community.
To all our nominees: congratulations and thank you.
Thank you for everything you do for others, thank you for everything you do to make this a better country.
And to our outgoing Australians of the Year: Valmai Dempsey, Daniel Nour, Shanna Whan and - of course – Dylan Alcott.
You have brought tremendous passion, great decency and endless good humour to your roles.
And in doing so, you have set an incredibly high bar for those who will follow you and offered a powerful example to us all.
Australia thanks you.

Tomorrow, at ceremonies around our nation, people born under every flag and drawn from every faith and tradition will pledge their loyalty to our nation, our people and the democratic beliefs we share.
In choosing Australia as their home, our newest citizens are embracing our belief in opportunity for all, sharing in the respect we have for hard work, joining in the optimism that drives our aspiration and the compassion that guides us to look after each other.
Australians live those qualities every day.
Especially, when times are tough.
And tonight all of us are thinking of people around our nation battling the aftermath of devastating floods.
Those mourning lost loved ones, those seeking to repair or rebuild their homes and every one of the emergency services personnel, the ADF and the volunteers who continue to work so bravely and tirelessly to help their fellow Australians in their hour of need.
Time and time again, the worst of nature reveals the best of our people and their character.
As the saying goes, "kindness in another's trouble - and courage in our own".
And whatever challenges the future brings, we know Australians will rise to meet them.
Friends
On Australia Day, we celebrate how fortunate we are to live in the greatest country on earth.
And each of us knows it can be greater still: more fair, more prosperous, more equal.
A nation where the doors of opportunity are truly open to all.
Together, this year, let us dedicate ourselves to the pursuit of that ambition.
To our nominees, our winners and to all Australians: I wish you a Happy Australia Day and a safe and happy year ahead.
Thank you very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full.
And I am optimistic that in 2023, Australians will embrace the democratic opportunity to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our nation's birth certificate, our Constitution.
Jodie and I are delighted to welcome you all to The Lodge this morning.
A big thank you to Danielle Roche and her outstanding team at the National Australia Day Council who have worked so hard to bring together another great program of celebrations.
To Valmai Dempsey, Daniel Nour, Shanna Whan and - of course - Dylan Alcott, here celebrating your final day as our reigning Australians of the Year…
…can I say on behalf of all Australians, thank you for the service and inspiration you gave to our nation in your roles.
It's a funny thing, when you win an Australian of the Year Award, it's given in recognition of everything you have achieved and everything you have given in the years leading-up to that moment.
And yet as soon as you win we ask you to work harder and do more.
It's an honour and a challenge. A reward and a responsibility.
And it's to your eternal credit that each of you answered that call with such passion and enthusiasm and endless good humour.
It's been a genuine pleasure getting to know you and having the chance to work with you.
I hope that continues long into the future.
You have set a very high bar – and provided a remarkable and inspirational example for those who will follow.
Which brings me to our 2023 nominees.
Congratulations on being chosen by your states and territories, your communities and your fellow citizens as finalists.
Reading through your biographies, I was struck by two things.
First, the remarkable diversity of backgrounds, passions, causes and achievements that have brought you here today.
Right across the categories: Senior Australians, Young Australians, Local Heroes – celebrating the 20th year of that very important award - and Australians of the Year.
You are a vivid snapshot of the greatness of our modern nation.
And second, for all the variety of your endeavours, you are united by a common determination to use your talents to work for the good of others.
Whether that's taking-on big challenges in sustainability, in the environment, in medicine, maternal and mental health.
Speaking-up for people who have been driven to the margins – by poverty, disadvantage or discrimination.
Or using your platform and profile to inspire others to believe in their potential, and chase their dreams.
Yours is that deep love of country, that true and enduring patriotism - a determination to make Australia a better place.
Every one of you would be a worthy winner.
Because you are, already, great Australians.
Enjoy the morning – and good luck tonight.
Thank you very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full.
And today, as we gather to celebrate the next chapter in the success story of our great and diverse society, let us all recognise the unique privilege we have to share this continent with the world's oldest continuous culture.
Your Excellency, distinguished guests.
My fellow Australians – and those only a few minutes away from being our fellow Australians.
I'm delighted to be with you this morning, to join you for the greatest of Australia Day traditions.
Today, all over our nation, over 19,000 people from every part of the world, drawn from every faith and background will be pledging their loyalty to their new home, to Australia, our democratic beliefs, our laws, our values and our people.
Joining our Australian family.
Joining us as proud citizens of the greatest country on earth.
And joining us as partners in the ongoing task of making it greater still: more fair, more prosperous, more equal.
I'm honoured to have this chance to personally welcome all of you here to take the pledge of citizenship.
Hailing from Nigeria, Mexico, Thailand.
Brazil, the United Kingdom and Iran.
Egypt, Malaysia and the USA.
You bring us the world.
And you bring us your drive, your passion, your talent and aspiration.
Looking through the list of occupations represented here today, it's a roll-call of skills Australia wants and needs.
Disability, community and mental health support workers.
Scientists, pharmacists.
A mechanical estimator. Administrators, cleaners.
Accountants and customer service professionals.
And two astronomers!
If anyone can help our nation reach for the stars, it's you.
Speaking of stars, it's so special to see the children here today as well.
To you, our young Australians, so full of energy and potential.
I want you to know that you are now becoming citizens of a country where no matter where you live, or who you worship, no matter who you love or what your last name is, you can write your own future.
Friends.
My great predecessor Ben Chifley attended the very first Australian citizenship ceremony, held in 1949, just over the lake at Albert Hall.
Seven migrants took the pledge that day to become the first 'naturalised' Australians.
The very first person to have their name called was a 34-year old called Jan Jandura-Pucek
He'd come to Australia a decade earlier from what was then Czechoslovakia, working as a eucalyptus oil distiller in Tidbinbilla.
The plan was to earn and save for a couple of years before returning home to his wife and family.
But the devastation of the Second World War and the uncertainty of the encroaching Iron Curtain meant he decided to stay in Australia and try and have his wife join him.
Through those long hard years, he exchanged only a few letters with his family.
And the first time his wife would see her husband's face again was when she was on the boat from Melbourne to Sydney, newly arrived in Australia, looking at the newspaper.
There it was: a photograph of her husband at that first citizenship ceremony.
The two were reunited, they built a life together.
Raised a family.
The first of 5.7 million people who have taken-up citizenship since.
All with their own story, their own dreams, their own moments of joy and love, sadness and adversity too.
Each and every migrant generation has broadened our horizons, deepened our identity and enriched our nation with their hard work, their sense of community and their driving aspiration for their children to enjoy a better life.
Their story is ours. And today a new chapter begins.
For all of you receiving your Australian citizenship - and for all of us — for all Australians - who welcome you with open arms and an open heart: congratulations!
Happy Australia Day.
Welcome home.


Ni hao, Box Hill.
Gong Xi Fa Cai.
Could I thank firstly, Bihong Wang and the Asian Business Association of Whitehorse.
Can I thank as well and acknowledge the major sponsor here Golden Age for their support for this event.
Can I importantly acknowledge the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are the traditional owners of this land and pay my respects to their elders, past, present and emerging.
And say to the people here gathered, that just as today we are celebrating multicultural Australia, later this year you will have an opportunity to honour the traditional owners of this land by recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our nation's birth certificate, our Constitution, and I urge you, multicultural Australia to vote yes to that referendum.
Can I acknowledge my friend, Minister Andrew Giles, the Minister for Multicultural Affairs. The local Federal Member here Carina Garland, who's doing such a fantastic job of recognising this community.
The local state member Paul Hamer, the Member for Box Hill.
The local Mayor, Mark Lane, and all of the federal, state and local government representatives who are gathered here today, I welcome you all, one and all.
Can I say Happy Year of the Rabbit.
I'm very pleased that it's the Year of the Rabbit, I was born in the Year of the Rabbit.
I'm told this is very auspicious, so I have my red tie with lots of little bunnies on it, lots of rabbits.
And I told that that will bring a great deal of good luck.
I want to thank this community for sharing your culture with us.
The great benefit and the great promise of Australia is that we can be a microcosm for the entire world.
We can show that people of different faiths, language, food, culture, dance, can come together and be enriched by our diversity.
And there is no more important community going back over the last more than 200 years than the Chinese community, who in increasing numbers have gathered to make Australia your home.
Lastly can I acknowledge as well, the Consul General of the People's Republic of China who has joined us here today.
Lunar New Year is a time to celebrate, but it's also a time to reflect.
To acknowledge the generations that have come before us.
We thank them and we honour them with our personal success, but also our building of a better future in this country for all.
Every Lunar New Year is a new beginning.
And it is a good sign that for the year ahead it is the Year of the Rabbit.
For the Vietnamese community for their Zodiac, it is the Year of the Cat and I wish a Happy New Year of the Cat to all members of the Vietnamese community, whether they gather with us here today or wherever they are.
I sincerely wish that you have a year that is happy, that is prosperous, that is peaceful and that is secure.
I thank you for the very warm welcome to this magnificent part of Melbourne here.
This is a great part of multicultural Australia.
I'm very proud to be here for the first time as the Prime Minister of Australia and I thank this community for giving me that great honour.
Xie xie.
Have a great day.


I pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging and I recommit, on behalf of the government that I'm proud to lead, the implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full.
Later this year, Australians will have the choice of voting Yes in a referendum that will advance reconciliation, that is about just two things: recognition and consultation.
Nothing more, but absolutely nothing less.
And showing respect for the fact that we share this continent with the oldest continuous culture on Earth and that that should be a source of great pride for all of us.
But it's also about how Australia sees ourselves - whether we have the confidence to acknowledge the fullness of our history.
It's also about how the world sees Australia as well - whether we're a mature nation that's able to reconcile and move forward.
It is a generous, modest and gracious offer from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
And I would ask the arts community to join with me in urging us to take forward those steps together later this year by joining the campaign for Yes to reconciliation, Yes to constitutional recognition, and Yes to a Voice to our Parliament.
And it is appropriate to talk about those issues at the beginning of the launch of Australia's new cultural policy for the next five years – Revive.
Because for tens of thousands of years this land has been alive with stories, with song, with dance, with art.
Through the great immensity of time, First Nations people have mapped this landscape with songlines.
They are at the heart of this cultural roadmap.
This document stands as a powerful reaffirmation of the government's commitment to our culture and the arts through which it finds its great expression, and we have so much.
Every year when I vote in Triple J's Hottest 100 I'm struck by how much talent there is in Australia, how difficult it is to narrow it down to those ten songs that you're able to nominate.
And then you get excited about all the up and comers - it helps having a 22 year old son.
And all the talent that's about to be discovered - and that's just in music.
Today is a bright moment for that sector, but it's also an overdue one.
You have endured a decade in which opportunity wasn’t so much missed as thrown away, capped by the years of the pandemic, in which the loss of opportunity was exacerbated by calculated neglect.
Fittingly, our cultural policy for the next five years is called Revive.
Drawing on the pillars of Creative Australia – the work of the Gillard Government, which understood the power and value of culture, and I acknowledge my friend, Simon Crean, who launched that policy, who's here with us today – Revive puts the arts back where they are meant to be: at the heart of our national life.
Revive is structured around five interconnected pillars:

First Nations First, because we recognise and respect the crucial place of First Nations stories at the centre of Australia’s arts and culture.
A Place for Every Story, which reflects the breadth of our stories and the contribution of Australians as the creators of culture.
Centrality of the Artist, which supports the artist as worker and celebrates artists as creators.
Strong Cultural Infrastructure, which provides support across the spectrum of institutions that sustain our arts, our culture and our heritage.
And the fifth pillar, Engaging the Audience, to ensure our stories reach people at home and abroad.

Then there’s the establishment of Creative Australia – a reimagined and properly-funded Australia Council that will encompass new functions including:

Music Australia, to support the Australian music industry;
Writers Australia, which will provide direct support to the literature sector from 2025, and the establishment of a Poet Laureate for Australia;
A dedicated First Nations governance body within Creative Australia to invest in, create and produce First Nations works and with priorities and funding decisions determined by First Nations leaders; and, importantly
A Centre for Arts and Entertainment Workplaces, within Creative Australia, to provide advice on issues of pay, safety and welfare in the arts and culture sector.

And we will walk the talk, mandating minimum remuneration for professional artists contracted by government entities to perform at Australian Government events and functions.
Because as important as talent and inspiration are to creation and performance, so are the hundreds and thousands of hours that go into it.
The arts cannot be left simply to those who can afford to do it.
Arts jobs are real jobs.
I compete with Josh, with my electorate of Grayndler in the inner-west of Sydney, for the highest number of people, as a percentage of the population, of people in the creative sector.
It is an important part of our economy and that is important to recognise that. But it is also important to lift ourselves above the usual economic debate.
This is about our soul. This is about our identity.
It is so important, because it's about who we are and being able to express ourselves, and about our quality of life.
During the pandemic, perhaps more so than any era certainly in my lifetime, how many of us, when we were unable to get out and about, missed, so much, going to live music or the theatre?
But we engaged in different ways. We read more books than we did before. We watched more programs in isolation with the people we were in iso with. We talked and engaged about cultural issues as well.
It was a real reminder, though, of the important role that the arts play just in our human interaction, in bringing our society together, in engaging with people.
If you're of my vintage, the great thing about bands still playing so many years later is that you run into people that you met at the Oils or the Sunny Boys or whoever 30 years ago and you had that connection of experience that enriches all of our lives.
It is literally through the arts that we build our identity as a nation and a people.
And that's why First Nations art has been put as the first pillar.
Because just as we can learn about caring for our country, for our land and our waterways, from those who looked after this island continent for 65,000 years at least, we can learn, as well, from the way that they told their stories through verbal communication, through the arts, through the world's oldest art galleries, through the songlines that are through their relationship with country that is so important.
As our nation evolves, it is vital our cultural policies evolve, too. Doors must be opened so we can hear the great diversity of voices that have struggled to find an outlet.
The arts tell us stories. The arts ask question, sometimes uncomfortable for those of us in public life. But it's a good thing.
In the arts we feel joy and celebration. We deal with pain, and we reflect on truths that aren’t always easily told.
What the arts add up to is a never-ending journey of discovery. That is how the arts can bring us together. It is how they create shared understanding and common purpose.
Without ever seeking to iron out the differences that make our nation so vibrant, strong and attractive, we will always seek out the common ground between us – because that will always be the most fertile place to plant our dreams.
That is the spirit that guides me.
It's the nature of the change in the culture of government that my Government is trying to bring: bringing people together, not looking for division.
That's what the vote later this year is about as well.
I am very proud to lead a government that follows in the footsteps of Labor governments that recognised and respected the centrality of culture and the arts.
It is my privilege to continue this Labor tradition, and I would like to express my deep gratitude to every organisation and every artist who has contributed to Revive.
Like other best policy practice, this hasn't come from people sitting around a room in Canberra.
This has come from people in this room and people from around the country who have made a contribution.
This is a framework that empowers our arts, entertainment and cultural sectors wherever you encounter them – from the gallery to the moshpit to your favourite reading chair.
Or, indeed, as many of you will, here at the Espy. Thank you.
So thank you very much and it's my great honour to particularly to single out as well the work that Tony Burke has done.
You won't be surprised some people pitch up to get particular jobs. And the Labor Party is a strange beast sometimes. We have the caucus processes and all of that, but I get to appoint the portfolios. Something I remind them of occasionally.
Burkey was the person who was so passionate about the arts portfolio and he's brought that passion into a realisation with this policy.
So I congratulate him on the work and I acknowledge the work that Michelle Rowland is playing as the Communications Minister in the art sector as well which is so vital, including properly funding the ABC and the SBS.
So thank you very much. Launched.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respect to their elders, past, present and emerging.
I want to acknowledge my colleagues here who have worked so hard to make this a reality. Katy Gallagher, the Minister for Women, but also the Finance Minister. There’s a good bit and a bad bit of that job, one she says yes, one she says no. Amanda Rishworth, who’s the Minister for Social Services, Tony Burke, who is the Minister for Workplace Relations.
I want to also acknowledge the members of the trade union movement who are here, who campaigned so strongly, through Michelle as the President of the ACTU, the figurehead, I will just single out one, but an enormous effort over a long period of time. But also the frontline workers who have done such an extraordinary job in advocating for the people that you look after. Day after day, you see the impact of family and domestic violence on the frontline, all the time, tragically. And your advocacy is quite extraordinary.
This is a day, frankly, which we didn't wish we had to have. But we do. And from tomorrow, right across Australia, access to Family and Domestic Violence Leave becomes a reality. It will be such an important day and an overdue one.
No woman should ever have to choose between her job and her safety. No woman should ever have to pick between her financial security and the physical and emotional wellbeing of herself or of her children.
It is truly remarkable that until now these have been very real choices, choices that a shocking number of Australian women have had to face. It’s 2023, we're nearly a quarter of the way through this century, we ought to have been so better than that. Well, as of tomorrow, we will have become that crucial, little bit better.
Tomorrow, and everything that it represents is the culmination of an extraordinary and sustained effort by so many people. I would say tireless effort, but we all know that’s not true, all of us are human. And yet so many people of conviction, determination and patience have pushed through exhaustion to make sure that today has become a reality.
Advocates, survivors, families, workers, unions, extraordinary individuals, and persuasive groups. And a Labor Party that vowed that the moment the Australian people gave us the extraordinary privilege of forming government, this is something that we would get done. And I am very proud to lead a government that fulfils the commitments that we made.
Our goal can never be anything short of true equality. We do need, of course, to make sure that this change, and I think it will, it will also raise the issue of why it has to be there, and that to me is obviously the preference.
So let us hope that in putting in place this measure, it is used less and less in the future, as we go on. Part of tackling domestic violence, of course, is bringing it out into the open, is talking about it, is changing that dynamic, where women and families felt reluctant to talk about what was happening in their lives, but still have to front up to work because they’ve got to pay the bills and put food on the table for their kids.
But we know as well that we’ve got to break the cycle, because we know that all of the research tells us, that is indeed a cycle, that those children often, who are having to watch these tragedies occur in their home, then go on to be traumatised by it and to have difficulty having what are respectful relations going forward as well.
So this is a policy that is about women and their children, but it’s also about men. It's about changing behaviours, it’s about sending that message that this is a right that has been fought for, that should be there.
So we know that the quest to eliminate family and domestic violence goes on. In addition to this, we committed at the election campaign, and put into the budget, an additional 500 community service workers, and in addition to this, we put in the budget the commitment that we had for $100 million for emergency accommodation, because for so many, it's not just a matter of what happens in the workplace as well. It's hard to leave a violent situation if your choice is sleeping in a car, or sleeping in a park and you’ve got nowhere to go, where you can feel safe is so important as well.
In addition to that, our Housing Australia Future Fund has allocated 4,000 of the social housing units that we will build on a permanent basis to give somewhere permanently to go as well, and we’ll allocate at least that number for women and children escaping domestic violence.
So this requires not a whole of government response, it requires a whole of society response. And I want to pay tribute to the familiar faces, I look out at this room of people who provide services, people who I have known in this building since I was the parliamentary secretary responsible for family and community services, last century, literally.
So this is an issue that has been long-term. It will require ongoing solutions, but we are advancing in the way that it’s perceived by society as well. And I pay tribute to you here today and others who of course won’t be here who are providing services, providing support, whether that be formally or whether that be just through friends.
This Saturday, I’m going to a funeral of someone who I called my aunty, who we weren't related to at all. I grew up with my mum and when I first came along, with my grandparents, and one of the people who I grow up being an aunty, she fled a violent situation and came to stay at our place and was there when I was a little toddler, so it was way back in the 1960s. But then it wasn’t spoken about, she literally was there to be safe and my grandparents took her in.
That's the sort of thing that people are doing around Australia, last night, it’ll happen tonight, people will intervene to make a difference, and I’d say today as well that this is the government playing catch up with where people have been for a long period of time.
And I pay tribute to all of those who’ve achieved this result. This is your victory, not a victory of any parliamentary party or politician. This is people on the ground, this is the best example I can ever think of of bottom-up change.


Can I say thank you, for the third time I've been able to meet with this working group, and thank you for the extraordinary work that you are doing.
Importantly, thank you for your patience with the process.
I'm very hopeful and optimistic about an outcome later this year.
The Government is determined to hold a referendum in accordance with the wishes arising from the Uluru Statement from the Heart. And in spite of some of the misinformation, I congratulate you on your advocacy around the country.
I know that Marcia and Marcus were at a forum last night in Melbourne and there is momentum building around the country.
There are public meetings. I've had meetings with church organisations, with sporting organisations, with businesses, including in Western Australia yesterday, reaffirming that they are strongly supportive of a constitutionally enshrined Voice to our Parliament.
And we know that as we get down to the campaign end, there are two clear messages of what it's about: recognition and consultation. Simple as that. Recognising First Nations people in our nation's birth certificate, and then enshrining consultation about matters that impact on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island peoples.
We know that that is the way to get better outcomes and to close the gap, which is there in too many areas.
So my government is very committed to this. We'll continue to put everything into this campaign. And I know that, increasingly, this will be an opportunity to bring the nation together.
And one of the things that strikes me, that I say to people, is that when I was growing up,&nbsp;not too far from Redfern where there was a substantial urban Indigenous community, there was no such thing as an Acknowledgement&nbsp;or Welcome to Country. I never heard that. Never heard that.
And now whenever you go, when my local church, whether it's a sporting event, whether it be any national event, it's just a matter of course. Any child care centre, including the early learning centre downstairs here. It's fantastic to hear quite often the youngest Australians learn some Indigenous language as well and to pay respects to the traditional owners.
Schools went back in the last week. Most schools in the country, public and private, will have had a smoking ceremony or an Acknowledgement or a Welcome to Country, something that acknowledges the fullness and richness of our history.
The opportunity that we have is to show respect for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, but also to, I think, uplift non-Indigenous Australians, to give us a more confident sense of self and who we are as Australians, whether we are the newest arrivals who got their citizenship last week or whether it be Indigenous Australians.
And also, as well, the way that Australia is perceived in the region and in the world, whether we are a mature nation that can indicate that we don't hide from the fullness of our history is, I think, a really important moment for the country.
I want to thank all of the Referendum Working Group for the hard work that you're doing.
I know you'll be hearing from the Leader of the Opposition later this afternoon. That's a good thing. I've encouraged him and Julian Leeser to engage.
I want everyone possible to be a part of this journey towards reconciliation, this important next step. And my door has been open the whole way through.
I do note that since I put forward draft wording in the Constitution, very clear draft wording, in recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders as Australia's first peoples. And then the three points: one, there shall be a Voice; two, it shall be consulted on matters which affect Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples; and three, the Parliament shall determine the structure, et cetera.
No one yet in this Parliament, across the spectrum, has come up with an alternative word or sentence. But I'm up for it.
This is something that has come, as you know, from the bottom up. It has come from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people - yourselves.
And that is why it's so important that this is successful. And I assure you of my personal commitment as well as the Government's commitment going forward.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
And I recommit, on behalf of the government I lead, to the implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full, including constitutional recognition for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
Can I particularly acknowledge the members of the Abdallah, Sakr and Kassas families who are here with us today.
Can I acknowledge the former Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, my federal colleague, Andrew Charlton, the Premier of New South Wales, Dominic Perrottet, the Leader of the Labor Party in New South Wales, Chris Minns.
Can I acknowledge also Donna Davis and other members of council who are here and Members of Parliament who are here.
I am deeply honoured to be with you all here today at the first i4Give Festival for the third year of i4Give.
And I congratulate Parramatta Council on the leadership as well in hosting this event.
But particularly to Danny and Leila, your leadership is inspirational. And frankly, you are just remarkable Australians.
It was my great honour to go to London for the funeral of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth with Danny at the end of last year.
Danny, of course, represented his nation with the distinction and dignity that you would expect and he was a great member of the delegation.
Today brings together family and community - joined in sorrow and grief, united by love and by hope. &nbsp;
On the 1st of February 2020, four beautiful children were cruelly snatched away from the world: Antony, Angelina, Sienna and Veronique.
Their bright, beautiful lives, full of promise and possibility, brought to a sudden and a tragic end.&nbsp;
We remember today all the joy and laughter they brought into the lives of those who knew and loved them. The pride. The delight that comes with a child.
And we embrace in our hearts those still living with the pain and loss. Theirs is a grief that may soften with time, but it will never truly fade.&nbsp;
Yet in the midst of this sadness, there is something quite beautiful here today as well – and so powerful.&nbsp;
Danny and Leila Abdallah have done something quite extraordinary.&nbsp;
They have chosen to forgive.&nbsp;
Instead of raging at the injustice of their loss, they found the strength, the courage and, above all, the humanity to choose a path of grace.&nbsp;
Danny put it this way: ‘[My family] would either be stuck in the valley of pain and grief or I could lead them to the high ground.’
Danny, with this movement, you and Leila have led and inspired so many others.&nbsp;
In Australia and around the world, your story and your example has helped people look into their hearts and find forgiveness.&nbsp;
I had the privilege of travelling with Danny last year. He was among those chosen to represent Australia - ten distinguished Australians.
Not long before that, the Abdallahs were invited by Pope Francis to address The World Meeting of Families in the Vatican.&nbsp;
Their story of forgiveness is straight from the heart of their Catholic faith.&nbsp;
A faith that says: Love your enemies. Forgive others as you have been forgiven.&nbsp;
Thank you, Danny and Leila, and Liana, Alex, Michael, and baby Selina, for sharing this day with us. And the three children did so well up on stage before.
Thank you for sharing your story and with it, your sorrow and your joy, your grace and, importantly, your absolute courage.
I hope on i4Give day all of us can search our hearts, and find what you’ve found in yours: the strength to forgive, and the peace and healing that forgiveness brings.
I wish everyone a fantastic day today.
ENDS
&nbsp;


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
And I look forward to talking more today about how we can deliver on that commitment in 2023.
It’s great to be part of this important Chifley Research Centre Conference.
And I acknowledge all my colleagues who are here today participating.
Back in December 2019, the Chifley Research Centre was kind enough to host the third of my Vision Statements as Opposition Leader on Labor and Democracy.
Back then, I spoke about the rolling fury of culture war and the way it undermines civil and rational debate, our capacity to disagree respectfully.
The increasing polarisation and misinformation that can be fuelled and spread by social media.
In the year that followed, so much of this was turbocharged by the pandemic.
And then, of course, came January 6 in the US Capitol.
That iconic seat of democracy under attack - not from a foreign power but from its own citizens.
People who had fallen headlong into poisonous conspiracy theories, into a worldview of grievance and suspicion and betrayal where there are no political opponents - only mortal enemies.
People who would rather believe that an election was stolen, than accept that their preferred candidate was defeated.
And you could not miss the similarities between those shocking scenes and the events in Brazil just a few weeks ago.
We can condemn those events – but we must also heed the warning they carry.
Our democracy is a great and enduring national achievement, a marker of what it means to be an Australian.
Indeed, the citizenship pledge that thousands of people took for the first time in January speaks of the ‘democratic beliefs’ we share.
But democracy can never be taken for granted.
It needs to be nourished, protected, cared for, treated with respect.
I am proud that our Labor Government has already honoured our commitment to legislate for a powerful, transparent and independent National Anti-Corruption Commission.
I’m glad that we have made the Parliament a place where things get done again.
Where, instead of the extraordinary 224 gag motions moved by the Liberals in just the previous term of Parliament to shut down debate there is now room and time for genuine discussion, for legislation to be amended and improved and passed.
We respect the Parliament and its role.
That’s why the censure of the former Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, over the bizarre revelations surrounding his multiple secret ministries mattered.
It was a statement about the importance of transparency and accountability to the House of Representatives, the people’s house.
I’ve always believed that the strongest antidote to the corrosive forces of cynicism and division and the most compelling argument in favour of democracy, is not an abstract or a theoretical one.
It’s much more along the theme of this conference: governing through purpose.
Demonstrating the capacity of government to improve lives.
Delivering for people.
Repaying their faith.
Proving worthy of their trust.
Living up to our shared values.
Finding common ground amid differences.
And implementing the reforms that change our nation for the better - the programs and policies that open the doors of opportunity, that invest in our national resilience and self-reliance, that enhance our shared security and prosperity.
Achieving this, delivering those long-term changes depends on people understanding where you are coming from.
And it means bringing people with you, empowering and including Australians in the work of progress.
Recognising that trust in democracy needs to travel both ways.
And that governments need to be prepared to put their faith in the judgment of the Australian people.
To trust in the capacity of Australians to engage with complexity, to look to the long-term.
The people who drafted our Constitution showed that trust.
They believed in the Constitution’s pivotal role in our democracy.
But they didn’t imagine it was perfect, complete, the final word set in stone.
That’s why they included specific and detailed provision for altering it.
Yes, they set the bar high: a majority of voters and a majority of states.
But the architects of our Federation understood that democracy is dynamic, not static.
And that change driven by the people is not a threat to the system – it is a vital and necessary part of it.
This is why the Australian people have been trusted with the power to improve and modernise their Constitution.
And that’s just what we did in 1967.
Nine out of ten people voted to strike out two provisions that excluded their fellow Australians.
Including the provision which said:
In reckoning the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth, or of a State or other part of the Commonwealth, aboriginal natives shall not be counted.
Think about that.
That sentence was in the Constitution in my lifetime. In some of yours.
It excluded the now Minister for Indigenous Australians, Linda Burney and her predecessor, Ken Wyatt - in their lifetimes.
In 1967, ninety percent of Australians voted to remove it.
They saw it for what it was: a harmful, discriminatory relic that didn’t speak for the Australia they believed in.
In 2023 our generation can go one better.
Instead of removing a provision that no longer speaks for who we are.
We can make a change that speaks for the future we seek to build.
We can vote not to remove something negative but to add something positive.
To recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our nation’s birth certificate.
And I say this:
If not now, when.
6 years after the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
56 years after the 1967 referendum.
122 years after Federation.
If not now, when.
The 2023 referendum is about two things: recognition and consultation.
First, recognition.
If you go to any big sporting event - a Test Match, State of Origin, the footy finals – there will be a welcome to country.
Or a barefoot circle. Or a smoking ceremony.
We begin sittings of Parliament with one each day, The Project open their show with it every night.
More importantly, it’s embraced by community: in schools and child care centres, local councils and sporting clubs.
It’s a simple, humble, very Australian way of paying respect that has become part of our daily lives.
And it’s a reminder of the unique privilege that all of us have.
Because only in Australia do we share a continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
And every year of my life, more and more Australians, from all faiths and backgrounds and traditions have come to hold this up as a source of pride.
Celebrating the 60,000 years and more of our shared history.
Our Constitution, our nation’s birth certificate, should embrace this – not stand apart from it.
The draft words I used at Garma to introduce the proposed constitutional alterations were:
“In recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders as the First Peoples of Australia”
Not a long preamble, not poetry.
Because the recognition that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders are seeking is the empowerment to achieve practical outcomes.
And that’s the second element – consultation.
In asking Australians to support an alteration to the Constitution that establishes an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice we are asking people to say yes to a modest but meaningful change.
Not a radical proposition - a sensible one.
A simple, vital and practical principle: that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have a say in the policies and decisions that affect their lives.
Not just because – as I’ve said before – it is common courtesy to consult people when you’re taking a decision that affects them.
But because the practical outcomes will be better.
Take the Justice Reinvestment model in Bourke.
Where, instead of sending young offenders to jail, the community takes responsibility for their rehabilitation.
Co-designed by Aboriginal people, driven and run by the locals.
The New South Wales Government – to their credit – backed it.
And guess what happened:

Juvenile offences went down
Year 12 retention rates went up
Family violence fell
And re-offending reduced too

The community used their voice to break a vicious cycle.
The community’s voice was heard - and that saved lives.
This should not be a remarkable exception, it should be the default approach.
That’s why I went to Alice Springs, to hear directly from the people on the ground.
And as we roll out our commitments to provide more local services and support measures to make communities safer, we will act in partnership with locals.
We will listen to those in the heart of it, including women and children who have the right to be safe at home and in their community.
Because we know that when governments listen to the people on the frontline, when we build from the ground up, when we trust in the wisdom and experience and earned knowledge of country and culture and kinship, we get better results.
And better results are desperately needed.
Every Closing the Gap report confronts us with the reality that many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people lead lives of lesser opportunity.
In health, in justice and community safety, in education and employment.
A life expectancy a decade shorter.
A suicide rate twice as high.
A massive over-representation in the prison population – and in the number of children sent to out-of-home care.
And these are not failures borne of a shortage of goodwill, or good intentions.
Rarely even is it a lack of investment or resources.
Governments on both sides have invested billions.
But by and large, we have been repeating the same process and expecting a different outcome.
Imposing decisions from Canberra.
Mostly, with the best of intentions.
But assuming that one size will fit all.
And ignoring the wisdom of community.
Enshrining a Voice in the Constitution is our best chance to change that, because it has come from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
The draft Constitutional alterations I put forward at Garma - over six months ago now - are clear.
Three clauses, to follow Recognition:

There shall be a body, to be called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice may make representations to Parliament and the Executive Government on matters relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples.
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to the composition, functions, powers and procedures of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.

I’ve said right the way along this is our draft proposal, for discussion.
We haven’t seen any suggested changes to the wording yet but we are open to improvements or alterations.
But the substance – the principles of recognition and consultation - will not change.
This is about strengthening the Parliament’s understanding, not supplanting its authority.
Not special power. Not a third chamber.
An advisory body that will help drive better decisions and better outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Linda Burney and Patrick Dodson and Tom Calma and Marcia Langton and Megan Davis and Noel Pearson and Ken Wyatt and many, many others have explained what a Voice will and won’t do.
The Referendum Working Group haave already outlined some clear fundamentals.
The Voice won’t administer funding. It will not deliver programs.
It will not have any kind of veto power over decision-making.
And in the course of the year, there will be more information for people to examine.
But the mechanics of the Voice won’t be written into the Constitution.
That’s not how it works.
For example, the Constitution says the Commonwealth Parliament will have power to make laws for the ‘naval and military defence of the Commonwealth’.
It doesn’t spell-out the size of the ADF, or where it should be based or what sort of defence hardware we should have.
And just as well – that section of the Constitution doesn’t even mention the air force, for the very good reason that it became law before the first powered flight.
The authors of Federation understood – as servants of democracy – that it was for government, parliament and the people to deal with the detail and the implementation, through legislation.
The Constitution contains the power and then Parliament uses its democratic authority to build the institution and renovate it as needed.
At this year’s referendum - Australians will be voting on the principle.
The principle of recognition and consultation, the principle of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people having a say when it comes to the decisions that affect them.
The Parliament can show its respect for that principle too – by co-operating and uniting to make it a reality.
By rejecting the false choice between constitutional recognition and practical outcomes – and embracing the fact that we need constitutional recognition to improve practical outcomes.
Embracing the Voice as a vehicle for Closing the Gap and improving lives.
I will continue to seek the co-operation and support of all members, from all parties.
And I welcome any constructive contribution to the legislative process, to the shape of the campaign, to the success of the outcome.
I see this as an opportunity to build national unity, to show the best of our politics, to demonstrate our Parliament is committed to reconciliation, Closing the Gap and delivering greater opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
And to those who say: why not take the easy option, why not just legislate a Voice instead.
I make three simple points.
Firstly, the Uluru Statement from the Heart was the product of five years of consultation and dialogue and deliberation among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
From the cities and the regions to remote communities, ‘from every point under the Southern Sky’.
And in 2017 they produced a very clear request for recognition and a voice in the Constitution.
Second, the Calma-Langton report makes it clear that Aboriginal people have endured far more than their share of new advisory bodies and committees and taskforces and councils created with good intentions and great fanfare only to be discarded or ignored when there’s a change in policy or Prime Minister or government.
So a key argument for enshrining the principle of the Voice into the Constitution – through a vote of the people - is that it sends a message about the strength and substance of the body.
Not just to the government of the day or the parliament of the moment but also to the people we want the Voice to serve, the people we want engaging with it.
It sends a message to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people: we’re serious about making this work, over the long-term.
Not as a project of one government – but as an enduring national priority.
And the third point brings me back to democracy – and my faith in the Australian people.
Yes, there are already people out there pushing misinformation on social media.
Drumming up outrage, trying to start a culture war.
That’s an inevitable consequence of trying to achieve change.
There are always those who want to create confusion and provoke division, to try and stall progress.
But moments of national decision, such as this referendum, are also an opportunity for our people to show their best qualities: their generosity, their sense of fairness, their optimism for the future.
That’s why I’m optimistic for the success of the referendum – because I’ve always been optimistic about the character of the Australian people.
The Voice will be a national achievement in which every Australian can share.
To campaign for it, to vote for it, to celebrate its success.
To play their part in an historic step forward for our country.
To embrace a better and fairer and more respectful future.
To add their vote and their voice to the message we send to the world about our modern nation, our maturity, our unity, our commitment to Reconciliation.
Just as our forebears did in 1967.
I keep the Uluru Statement from the Heart on the wall of my office.
Such an economy of words, yet such generosity of spirit.
So rare for a document drafted by thousands of conversations, to speak with such clarity and unity.
I have always loved the concluding connection it makes between that Referendum of 1967 and the task ahead.
In 1967 we were counted. Now we seek to be heard.
That’s what the Voice is.
A generous, patient, gracious call to be heard. To be listened to. To have a say.
This year’s referendum is our chance to answer the call.
All of us.
It has the support of every State and Territory Government.
The vote will give every Australian the chance to be counted and to be heard on the side of progress, on the side of fairness, on the side of a stronger and more equal and more reconciled nation.
It will be a great democratic moment.
And a great Australian moment.
The Uluru Statement from the Heart is a hand outstretched.
This year, let us all vote to grasp it.
ENDS


The light of this day will soon yield to darkness. Just as sound will yield to silence. Just as life will – ultimately – yield to death.
And as that darkness falls, we will think of them. All of them who now belong to the great silence.
Look about you. All around us in this secular temple are the names of the dead, and the places they fell.
Try to imagine the face that belonged to every name.&nbsp;
The voice.&nbsp;
Maybe the laugh, or the light in their eyes, maybe the distinctive footstep along country street or city lane.
Imagine the promise of every one of those lives. Everything they might have been, everything they might have done.
Then imagine every shockwave from that death. Every wave of grief that swept through a family, a community.
To look at those names is, in its way, a sombre astronomy.&nbsp;
We see these names before us, blazing brightly like stars arrayed in their constellations. But in order to truly see, we have to look harder – with our eyes, with our hearts – and imagine everybody in that star’s orbit.
The loved ones. The spouses. The children. The parents.&nbsp;
The ones who learned by telegram that the great light in their lives had been extinguished.
The ones who heard that knock on the door.
The ones who were left to write words for a gravestone they knew they would never see.
Expressions of loss and heartache.
Sometimes an entire universe of loss held within just a few words, such as the message from William Henry O’Bree’s parents for his headstone at Gallipoli.&nbsp;
It reads simply: “We miss him at home.”&nbsp;
Then think of all the ones who never found out, who never knew with absolute certainty. The ones who were left haunted by an absence, but were never granted that one small consolation of closure.
Just as we think of those who fell and were delivered into that final silence, and those they left behind, we think of those who came home.
Those who came back from war and thrived.
Those who came back from war, but couldn’t.
Those who came back changed, their old selves left forever on some distant shore or upon the turbulent sea.
We must also acknowledge those we sent to war in our name, who did their duty in our name, but whose names we did not hold up so proudly.
Fifty years after the role of Australian troops in the hostilities in Vietnam came to an end, let us again acknowledge them.
Let us say to every one of our Vietnam veterans: We honour you. We thank you. And we are so sorry it took us so long as a nation to do so.
And we say that just as we say it to all who served but did not feel the gratitude of the nation or have their honour proudly recorded in the history books.
We say it to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander soldiers who fought for their homeland overseas.&nbsp;
Just as we honour those who fell, we honour the veterans who stand amongst us.
Just as they stepped up for us, and just as all serving members of the Australian Defence Force step up for us now, we must step up for them.
We offer gratitude and respect to all who serve or have served in our name.&nbsp;
We honour you with the Last Post in its simplicity and power.
We honour you with The Flowers of the Forest, a lament that – even with the weight of its sorrow – soars towards the dead.
And within those notes – in all their grace, in all their ache and all their yearning – we listen for your voices.
Lest we forget.
ENDS
&nbsp;


Welcome back.
It feels like we never left. Well I didn’t.
It is good to be back here and it’s good to be back here on this side of the partyroom meetings.
In 2022, since May, we’ve certainly hit the ground running.
But 2023 will be the year of further delivery on our commitments for a better future.
If you look at what we put in place in 2022, we have already extensively carried legislation which is already making a difference.
On the 1st of January, cheaper medicines began, the first decrease in 75 years.
Last week, 10 days paid domestic and family violence leave.
We are already delivering right across the board.
Our climate change policy is meaning that we're seeing the investment flow through in renewables and that transition occur that will be so important for our long-term future.
But it's important as well for how we reset for the world.
Because that's the entry fee into the international forums in which in today's interdependent world we need to engage.
And that's why in the last week, you've seen the benefit of Penny and Richard attending meetings with their French counterparts, in the United kingdom, in the United States.
It's why you've seen the increased engagement with the Pacific Island Forum, with ASEAN, and yesterday as well we saw some positive developments again towards a stabilisation of our relationship with our largest trading partner China, with the meeting that Don had with his counterpart there, following on from Penny Wong's visit on December 21.
These are all important measures as well.
This year already we're seeing 180,000 fee-free TAFE places put in place to address the skills shortage.
And you've seen as well the alternative down the road there.
That have taken the message of the 2022 election to be ‘we're not right-wing enough’, ‘we're not conservative enough’, ‘we're not divisive enough’.
Last night they made a decision, that I did ask to check and see a direct quote this morning when I was told about it, they are going to oppose the National Reconstruction Fund.
Now, the National Reconstruction Fund is about making more things here - it's that simple.
It's about revitalising Australian manufacturing and Australian jobs.
It's about stopping our vulnerability to global supply chain issues which were shown and highlighted by the pandemic.
Now, they can't say we didn't have a mandate for it.
This was included in my budget reply speech, when budget reply speeches had policy announcements, which ours all did.
And we spoke about it, day in, day out, during the election campaign and we've spoken about it ever since.
But in this, they show how out of touch they are.
And there is another issue in which they've shown how out of touch they are as well.
With the revelations last week that we know they're prepared to put a political frame on absolutely everything, including the way that taxpayer funds are used.
But the reprehensible action of rorting bushfire funds based upon electoral boundaries is just extraordinary.
The Nats certainly show no bounds whatsoever.
This week we will have some important legislation.
The National Reconstruction Fund, the creation of the Housing Australia Future Fund, that is about increasing the supply of social housing.
It's about making sure that, as well as the work that we've done with the Housing Accord, to encourage private sector investment.
The increased investment that we had for emergency housing in last October's budget.
That we have the increase in social and community housing, and some of that quarantined specifically for those people who are escaping, women and children escaping family and domestic violence as well.
An important initiative that we do.
That legislation will be before the House and the Senate during this fortnight, as well as the legislation arising from the Bell Inquiry.
I can assure the Caucus that I have not appointed myself to any other ministries.
But we need to make sure that no-one else can do that in the future.
And that is why the legislation will be debated in the Parliament.
It will be interesting to see what they do with it, given that when we had the censure motion of the former Prime Minister, they all not only - with a couple of exceptions - voted against that resolution, but went up to make sure that they shook Mr Morrison's hand and say, "job well done". Or jobs well done, indeed.
I've got to say, we clearly didn't know about it, otherwise throughout the last term I wouldn't have said that the Prime Minister had just two jobs, because clearly he had many more than that.
But that, of course, will be dealt with.
But we know there are consequences behind that as well with some of the legal processes that have taken place.
Now what matters just as much as what we do, is how we do it.
Last week I met for the third time with the Referendum Working Group on the constitutional change that we will put to the Australian people in the second half of this year.
A constitutional change that is about two things.
It's about recognition - recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our Constitution.
And it's about consultation - that they should be consulted on matters that affect them.
That's what it's about.
And all of the misinformation that we're seeing out here there won't distract from that great task.
Yesterday morning, at the ecumenical service, we received a reminder with a magnificent sermon of why this was something that was so important for Australia as well as being important for showing respect for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
So we will continue to engage in a respectful way and encourage people to come on board with this journey to reconciliation that is so critical going forward.
We’ll continue to engage with business, with unions, with civil society, because we want to be a consultative government that continues to engage, and we engage where people are as well.
Already this year I've been right around the country, including to regions.
I've also had a very successful visit to Papua New Guinea, where I was given the great honour of being the first foreign representative of any form to address the Parliament in Port Moresby, and that was a great honour.
So we'll continue to stand up for our issues at home.
We'll continue to engage in Australia’s national interest with the world.
Today, I'll be hosting the new New Zealand Prime Minister, Chris Hipkins, who will be here and attending Parliament and that will be another important day today to advance the relationship with our family across the ditch.
And Chris, I know quite well, and many of you will know as well I'm sure, will do a great job as the Prime Minister of New Zealand.
Can I thank everyone for the hard work that they did over the Christmas-New Year break?
I, myself, am planning to have some time off in April.
But we continued to work to create the better future that we promised.
We are seven months in now, or a bit more than that, eight months in to our term.
There’s a lot more to do.
This a government with a sense of purpose.
And last week when I was in the West - in Tangney and Pearce and Cowan and Perth.
In other seats where I've been - in Bendigo, in Braddon, right around the country.
What I get back is that people do appreciate the fact that this government is governing based upon what we said we would do.
There are big challenges ahead this year.
We have a big agenda, but I'm very confident that the Ministry as well as the entire Caucus, the people in this room, will be able to deliver that better future that we committed to last May.
Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging, and I thank Aunty Violet for her Welcome to Country.
It is a particular honour to be here with you today, and I thank Georgina and UN Women Australia for their leadership.
International Women’s Day is part of a long history of women’s activism. And it has always been imbued with a deep understanding that the greatest weight that words can carry is the difference that they can make.
I am proud to be Prime Minister in a Government that is committed to making a positive difference to the lives of Australian women – and, in the process, making Australia a better country.
Among our achievements during the first eight months in Government, we have:

Passed legislation to make child care cheaper, which will work for children, work for families, but importantly as well, work for the economy by driving workforce participation and productivity;
Committed to extend Paid Parental Leave to six months, the biggest expansion since it was introduced by the last Labor Government;
Worked to expose and close the gender pay gap, and we’ll be introducing further legislation in the Parliament this morning;
Importantly, from the first of February, Australians now have access to 10 days paid family and domestic violence leave, something that passed the Parliament with support across this Parliament, importantly, meaning that it won't be the subject of political dispute in the future;

And I am proud that these are the achievements of the first Australian government to be made up of a majority of women.
Fifty-four of the 103 members of the caucus that I lead are women. And we’re better for it.
The majority of Parliamentary Committee chairs are women. A first.
And a record 10 members of the Cabinet are women, including senior members such as the Minister for Finance, Katy Gallagher, and of course our Senate Leader, Penny Wong.
Australian women have been world leaders – among the first in the world to win the vote and to be eligible to run for Parliament.
The success of the composition of our caucus didn't just happen. There were decades of work, primarily from women, in setting quotas and nurturing cultural change.
The pay-off is a diverse and strong caucus.
What we have achieved here is a Government that better reflects the Australian community.
Truer representation means that you make better decisions.
As a Government that listens to women’s voices, we can better govern for all Australians.
I am only sorry that my great friend Susan Ryan is not here to see it, though I am proud that her great legacy is woven into so much of what we do.
If she were still here, she would have been the first to remind me that there is always more to do.
And indeed there is, as the figure of Australia running 43rd when it comes to women’s quality. Think about that, and the state of our economy. We’re a G20 nation, and we’re running 43rd.
Quite clearly, not good enough, and no time for us to rest on our laurels.
The Adelaide-born suffragist Muriel Matters never did.
When Australian women became among the first in the world who could vote and run for parliament, Matters was one of many Australian women who took up the fight in what was then the motherland, the UK.
As part of the Women’s Freedom League’s campaign to enfranchise British women, her courage was matched by her inventiveness.
As Clare Wright recalls in her book ‘You Daughters of Freedom’, it was in the lead-up to the King’s state procession to open Parliament in February 1909 that Matters had an idea.
WFL members were banned from distributing pamphlets in the street. Matters spotted the loophole in that and decided to go above the street.
She hired a motorised blimp, and planned to fly over central London, to scatter 25kg of pamphlets over the Royal procession while shouting through a loudhailer.
Bear in mind that this was in the very early days of flight. The sheer audacity of this plan.
Unfortunately, the wind was stronger than expected and the little airship – emblazoned with the message “VOTES FOR WOMEN” – proved a bit challenging to steer.
Matters and her pilot ultimately missed the Royal procession, but she was still able to send her pamphlets over London in a blizzard of equality.
She got her headlines, all right. What Muriel Matters didn’t about know about cutting through in the media wasn’t worth knowing.
It took courage, conviction, imagination, and that deep, burning desire for other women to enjoy the same democratic equality that she had already been granted at home. She knew how to make her voice heard and demand change.
I thought that was a relevant story at UN Women Australia, talking as Georgina has about the responsibility that we have, not just here, but in our region as well, in other nations, to promote equality for women.
We of course heard that same shout for change just under a year ago during the women’s March 4 Justice across Australia.
Including, significantly, one on the lawn just a handful of metres from here.
Australian women raising their voices and demanding change. Saying enough is enough.
We’ve heard powerful, compelling voices – not the least Grace Tame, who used her time as Australian of the Year to make it clear she would never be kept silent again.
She and so many others spoke up. They spoke loudly and they spoke clearly. They spoke for those who have yet to find their own voices, or who simply can’t. And they spoke to our whole nation.
And we heard women’s voices so powerfully at the federal election a couple of months later.
The parliament we have now is very different to the one that we had before May 21.
More women in the Parliament makes our democracy stronger. We make better decisions when a more diverse and representative range of voices sit around the decision-making tables.
For our Government, that means we will not rest in our efforts to bring about real, meaningful equality. To make sure we govern for all Australians.
That’s why we’re putting women’s participation and opportunity at the heart of our economic agenda.
You saw that at the Jobs and Skills Summit and the Budget handed down in October by Treasurer Jim Chalmers and Finance Minister Katy Gallagher.
It was a budget that put the needs and aspirations of women front and centre.
I made a very conscious decision to make the Minister for Finance also the Minister for Women.
If you think about the title that goes across all of the spending portfolios, that ensures that through the personification of Katy Gallagher, there is that assessment of every portfolio, not just one or two, or when all of us remember, that it's an important factor. And I assure you, that Katy certainly does that.
The Budget did make some major changes to put the aspirations of women front and centre.
We are doing a better job at recognising and valuing the essential care work – paid and unpaid – that women have traditionally carried the load on.
We are making serious reforms in early childhood learning and parental leave.
We’re funding pay rises for aged care workers.
Why is it, that in 2022, those people who clearly are the most underpaid, are the same people who got us through the pandemic?
Cleaners, aged care workers, child care workers, what do they have in common? They're primarily feminised industries. And that's why our industrial relations plans were also aimed at dealing with that.
We’re developing a National Strategy for the Care and Support Economy, setting a long-term vision to deliver quality care and decent jobs across all of those services and care sectors.
Being a good global citizen, of course, here at the UN, we know means also being a good member of the neighbourhood.
We have someone called Penny Wong, sitting there, doing precisely that work. Changing the way Australia is perceived just by her dignity, and who she is, and her clear compassion for the people of this region.
Just one example is our recently renewed commitment to strengthening our education partnership with Papua New Guinea. And that includes making sure that equality for women and girls goes far beyond the opportunity to attend school.
Now, no government stands on its own. I firmly believe that change doesn't occur just in one direction, it comes from the bottom up when it is most lasting. Governments need to respond to that, and where appropriate, they need to lead.
There is a better Australia at our fingertips. An Australia in which equality is no longer a goal or an aspiration, but a reality.
A reality that I hope, in the end, will be entirely unremarkable.
And that should be the task that we set ourselves.
Something whereby dealing with issues such as the wage disparity which is there, the disparity which is there in superannuation accounts, the disparity which is there in so many areas of economic participation.
Where there's equality and people don't really notice it, because of course, there is. Because it should always have been the case.
Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
This is a room full of innovators and job-creators and employers.
You have put your faith in Australia, you have invested in this nation and our people and their skills.
You have invested in our self-reliance, in our resilience, in our capacity to compete and win in the world.
And in doing so you have created secure jobs and opportunities in suburbs and regions around Australia.
I am determined to lead a government that upholds your faith – and shares your commitment.
A government that works with you to deliver a new generation of Australian manufacturing success.
***
I can honestly say that I’ve been a lifelong supporter of Australian food and beverage manufacturing.
One of my happiest memories as a boy growing up in Camperdown is heading down to the corner of my street with mates to Weston’s biscuit factory – and getting freebies of Wagon Wheels which were imperfect.
The sheer volume of Wagon Wheels that I ate in those days…means I’m sorry to say I’ve not had one for decades.
But I am comforted by the fact that all these years later, Wagon Wheels are still made in Australia.
For me, for Ed Husic, for every member of our Government, revitalising manufacturing isn’t about happy memories or nostalgia.
Manufacturing – including food and beverage manufacturing - is about the future.
Your industry is at the heart of our ambition for Australia to be a nation that makes things here again.
Where we do even more with what we have, and we do it better.
Value-adding and taking full advantage of the skills and creativity and hard work of the Australian people.
This is why we have made our National Reconstruction Fund, a priority for the first sitting of parliament this year.
This is one of the biggest-ever investments in our country’s manufacturing capability.
It’s about learning a fundamental lesson of the pandemic – so Australians aren’t left stranded at the end of global supply chains.
It’s about building a long-term safeguard against inflation and keeping your great products on the tables of Australian families and on the menus of Australian restaurants.
And investing in manufacturing means industries like yours can continue to export your great Australian products to the biggest markets and the fastest-growing economies in the world.
Countries where ‘Made in Australia’ stands for high quality, high-skill and sustainable production.
Making sure we’re best placed to deliver a new generation of Australian workers the secure, well-paid jobs they deserve.
In some areas, I appreciate government needs to catch up where business is leading.
Because I know there’s a huge amount of innovation happening across the food and beverage supply chain already, keeping Australia at the front of the pack worldwide — especially around sustainability, packaging and reducing waste.
I’m proud that through the National Reconstruction Fund, $500 million will be available to invest in unlocking potential in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and fibre.
And a further $1 billion for advanced manufacturing.
Ed and I are looking forward to working with all of you, to maximise the value of this national investment.
And maximise the opportunities for Australia to succeed.
I thank all of you from the nation’s food and beverage manufacturing industry for coming together tonight.
Here’s to a better future ahead.
A future made in Australia.


ANTHONY ALBANESE PRIME MINISTER: Minister, can I welcome you, very much, back to Australia. You're a regular visitor here. And I, of course, am looking forward to being in India in just a few weeks' time now for the bilateral visit. And I thank Prime Minister Modi for the invitation. And then, of course, I will welcome the Quad Leaders meeting, including Prime Minister Modi, that we will be hosting here in just a short period of time in the first half of the year. And then, of course, there will be another visit for the G20 in the second half of the year. And I know that my Treasurer is there, I think, next week for a series of meetings that will be hosted in India for the G20. It will be an important period. Our relationship goes from strength to strength. I've already had a number of meetings with your Prime Minister. And our economic relationship is important. I think we have complementary economies. I look forward to strengthening that as well, as well as on security issues. Operation Malabar, of course, will occur in the coming period, which we are hosting. We have much to talk about today. And you are a very welcome visitor in our country.


This year our focus as a government is on providing stability, confidence and security.
Greater security in the economy.
In energy and industry and jobs and wages.
Greater security in Medicare and child care and aged care.
In education and skills and housing.
In building and delivering the infrastructure and services Australians rely on.
And in defence and national security, investing in our sovereignty, strengthening Australia’s relationships in the region and securing our place in the world.
After 9 months in government, my colleagues and I are fully aware of the size and scale of the problems that we inherited.
Across portfolios, we are confronting a decade of national policy failures.
Failures which have been exposed and compounded by global shocks.
The cost-of-living pressures Australians are facing can be traced back to a global pandemic that constricted supply chains, making it more difficult and more expensive to bring things here but also a hollowing-out of local manufacturing that meant we weren't making enough things here.
Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine has pushed-up energy prices around the world and it comes on top of years spent attacking renewables and neglecting our energy grid, meaning energy prices were more vulnerable to international movements than they should have been.
&nbsp;
In every advanced economy, central banks are responding to inflationary pressures with sharp rises in interest rates, meaning mortgage-holders pay more.
And having inherited a trillion dollars of national debt, every interest rate rise increases the cost of servicing that debt.
The natural disasters which have visited devastation on families and communities across our continent have also brought severe economic consequences, billions of dollars in damage to agriculture and infrastructure, and further spikes in the price of food.
In an interconnected world of rapid change, there will always be shocks. There will always be challenges to our prosperity and threats to our security.
The measure of a government’s performance and a nation’s strength is not whether these events occur.
It’s whether we are prepared.
It’s how effectively we respond.
It’s what we do to protect our people and our economy from the worst of the consequences.
It’s also what we learn.
And it’s how we adapt and reform and improve.
This is at the heart of our government’s agenda for the year ahead.
An economic agenda of relief, repair and restraint.
Doing everything we can to tackle inflation and help Australian families with the cost-of-living.
Building on everything we have delivered since May last year.
And implementing reforms to deal with the structural weaknesses inflicted on the nation by that wasted decade of denial, delay, neglect and a pathology of political conflict above and beyond everything else.
The very day I had the honour of being elected Labor Leader, I spoke about Australians suffering from ‘conflict fatigue’.
People were sick of the short-termism, the stunts and scares designed to whip up division or create a diversion.
More than that, they were tired of the government picking phoney fights instead of tackling real problems.
That political culture is corrosive for democracy.
It feeds those who cultivate cynicism and deal in misinformation.
The best way to push back against it is to demonstrate the capacity of government to deliver a real improvement in people’s lives.
That is why my team and I are determined to bring a greater sense of purpose to the work of government.
Lifting Australia out of the cycle of neglect and crisis and hurried announcement.
And instead, balancing urgent action with a focus on long-term reform and investment, delivering that lasting progress Australia needs.
Building greater security for our nation, greater confidence in our economy and greater stability in people’s daily lives.
This begins with the first priority – and the foremost responsibility – of every government, national security.
Last week, the Deputy Prime Minister and I received the final report of the Defence Strategic Review.
The former Chief of Defence Force, Sir Angus Houston has described this as ‘the most important’ work that he has done in Defence.
What an extraordinary statement for Sir Angus to make considering his contribution to this nation.
Our Government commissioned this review because we recognise we live in a time of profound geopolitical uncertainty, both in our region and around the world.
We wanted an independent, clear-eyed and expert assessment of the challenges we face, the capabilities we require and the tough decisions we need to make to keep Australia safe.
I can confirm today that before the Budget in May, we will be releasing an unclassified version of the report - as well as providing our formal response.
But I want to make two things clear right now.
First, as I said before the election at the Lowy Institute, I can promise all Australians that our Government will ensure that Defence has the resources it needs to defend our nation and deter potential aggressors.
Secondly, while there will inevitably be a focus on the capability gaps we need to fill, we should never lose sight of the extraordinary service performed by the men and women of our ADF.
And on that, I want to outline to you a section from the Review’s foreword.
“Australia has a strong and deep Alliance with the United States, a professional defence force and defence organisation, and an enviable international reputation as a capable country in military, peacekeeping and humanitarian and disaster relief”.&nbsp;
All Australians can take pride in this – and we should take confidence from it.
Because with the right investments in our capability and our sovereignty, our defence force can be made ready for future challenges.
These investments include announcing, through AUKUS, the optimal pathway by which Australia will operate our nuclear-powered submarines.
This will be the single biggest leap in our defence capability in our history.
Yet AUKUS is about much more than nuclear submarines, or even technological inter-operability.
AUKUS is about the future.
It further formalises the common values and the shared interest that our three nations have in preserving peace and upholding the rules and institutions that secure our region and our world.
Australia has long understood that partnerships and alliances are key to our security – that’s still true today.
But we recognise that pursuing and defending our sovereign interests and contributing to regional stability requires us to build our sovereign defence capability, including advanced manufacturing.
As Richard Marles has said national security demands a whole-of-nation effort.
It also presents a whole-of-nation opportunity: for new jobs, new industries and new expertise in science and technology and cyber.
Our collective cyber capability is, of course, a critical asset for our national security. And, as if we needed a reminder, the data breaches of last year gave it to us.
It is vital to protect our economy, our businesses and our privacy.
That’s why next week in Sydney, I will be convening a Cyber Security Roundtable.
Clare O’Neil and I will be bringing together representatives from industry, civil society, security agencies and the public service to discuss the shared imperative we all have to uplift our cyber security.
This will be another important step ahead of the delivery of our National Cyber Security Strategy later this year.
Our government has shown its clear commitment to the three pillars of Operation Sovereign Borders and the important role of the Australian Border Force.
And we understand that keeping Australians safe also means supporting our intelligence agencies and law enforcement agencies to guard against threats abroad and here at home, whether that be foreign interference and espionage, or violent extremism in all of its forms.
The shocking events in Queensland, which claimed the lives of two young police officers and an innocent neighbour, were a terrible reminder of the dangers of violent extremism.
That devastating day also underscored the importance of continuing to upgrade our national co-operation on gun reform, something that was advanced at the last National Cabinet meeting.
Today I also want to make this point: Australia’s international engagement is an essential part of our Government’s approach to national security.
From day one, we have made it a priority to rebuild Australia’s standing and influence.
Emphasising that we work with our Pacific neighbours as partners and equals, with a shared interest and a shared responsibility to build a more secure and peaceful and prosperous region.
And in the months ahead, reflecting the focus our Government has placed on a family-first approach to regional security, we expect to sign our bilateral security agreement with Papua New Guinea and ratify our newly-signed Bilateral Security Agreement with Vanuatu.
Through APEC, ASEAN and the East Asia Summit, we have worked to deepen our connections and our strategic dialogue in South East Asia.
Making sure that Australian companies can seize the extraordinary chance we have to be a partner of choice to some of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
And towards the middle of the year, I’ll be hosting the Quad Leaders Summit.
I’m looking forward to welcoming the leaders of three of our Indo-Pacific partners: the United States, Japan and India here to Australia, to further our collaboration on regional security and prosperity.
Our Government has worked hard to stabilise Australia’s relationship with China, our major trading partner.
Recognising the value of direct dialogue, seeking to co-operate where we can while being prepared to disagree where we must, and always acting in our national interest and in support of regional stability.
In the best tradition of outward-looking, engaged Labor Governments, we are seeking to build security in the Indo-Pacific, not from it.
This is where Penny Wong has done such an outstanding job.
Demonstrating that Australia is back at the table; as a supporter of the rules-based order, as a constructive member of multilateral forums and as a trusted partner for regional co-operation and bilateral negotiations.
I don want to make this point. I have made it before, but it is worth repeating.
The entry ticket, the threshold credibility test for so many of these conversations is our commitment to act on climate change.
Upgrading our national emissions reduction target to 43 per cent by 2030 sent a message to the world about Australia returning to the ranks of responsible nations.
But the target, the number, is only the ‘what’.
The Safeguard Mechanism before the Parliament is a big part of the ‘how’.
It will empower business and industry with the certainty and confidence to invest in reducing their emissions.
Meaningful action on climate change is our environmental responsibility.
But it is also central to our diplomatic strategy – and it represents a transformative economic opportunity.
Energy security is national security – and Australia can be a renewable energy superpower.
Powering our industries here at home to produce low-emissions products like green steel and green aluminium and green ammonia.
And exporting clean energy, green hydrogen, critical minerals and value-added products.
Energy security is a pressing global challenge. We can make it a national economic strength if we get it right.
Already, 1 in 4 Australian jobs are related to international trade.
And jobs in export industries pay above the national average income.
We can create more of these jobs and grow our economy by diversifying our exports, moving up the global supply chain and revitalising local manufacturing.
Making our economy more resilient – and our nation more secure.
Securing the future of Australian manufacturing was a central purpose of the Energy Price Relief Plan that we negotiated with every state and territory in December.
The temporary price caps that the New South Wales, Queensland and Commonwealth governments have imposed on gas and coal are the most significant intervention in the energy market for a very long time.
But we were not going to stand by and watch Australian families, Australian businesses and, importantly, Australia's manufacturing industry be hammered by unchecked global price spikes.
Since the October Budget, when we first flagged the prospect of intervention, future prices of wholesale electricity in New South Wales and Queensland have nearly halved according to the energy regulator.
And as the Secretary of the Treasury, Dr Steven Kennedy, told Senate Estimates last week.
“Following the December announcement, National Electricity Market futures prices have declined significantly.”
Our government stood up for Australian manufacturers, we always will.
But we want to do more than just hold on to what we have.
This is where our $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund is so central.
The NRF – which the House of Representatives will be voting on next month – represents one of the biggest-ever investments in Australian manufacturing capacity.
And investment is the key word.
The NRF is modelled on the success of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation - a proven vehicle for driving an enhancement of private sector capital.
Through ten years now, every $1 invested by the CEFC has unlocked $2.60 in private sector investment and it produces a return.
The NRF will be independently run, on a commercial basis, with decisions taken in the national interest - not marginal seat politics. No colour coded spreadsheets here.
Its investment mandate will work across seven priority areas:&nbsp;

renewables and low emission technologies
medical science
transport
value-adding in agriculture, forestry and fisheries&nbsp;
value-adding in resources
defence capability
technologies that support new jobs in areas like manufacturing

In the early days of the pandemic, people were shocked that Australia couldn’t make enough masks or PPE for our population.
It showed the vulnerability of being the last link in the global supply chain.
But the National Reconstruction Fund is about more than helping us produce things at short notice in times of crisis.
It’s about building a more resilient and more diversified economy, with more jobs in regional Australia.
It’s about national security through economic sovereignty - our capacity to stand on our own two feet.
Our National Reconstruction Fund will help grow and create industries over the long-term.
Revitalising our traditional strengths but seeking out new ones.
Making sure that when our universities and researchers make a world-leading breakthrough there’s technology and industry here to commercialise that idea and workers with the right skills to make the product.
And the NRF will help protect our economy from inflationary pressures.
The Reserve Bank has made it clear that supply-side shocks account for at least half and as much as three-quarters of the inflation in our economy.
Our world-class universities have made Australia a higher education destination of choice.
But we can be a leader in skills and technology and manufacturing as well.
Put simply, as I said during the campaign: I want us to make things here again.
And I want products Made in Australia to be recognised and sought after around the world.
Recognised for their quality, their sustainability, their innovative design – and the skill of the workers who produce them.
Our National Reconstruction Fund will create new jobs.
And Jobs and Skills Australia will identify the skills in demand for today and tomorrow.
And our fee-free TAFE places will empower Australians with the skills to build a career in areas of vital national importance including nurses, disability workers, early educators and aged care.
Our New Energy Apprenticeships programme - which I launched this week in Perth - will support 10,000 new apprenticeships specifically targeted at the growing demand for skilled workers in our renewables sector.
And all this will be complemented by the work we are doing to clear the visa backlog and simplify our migration system, with greater emphasis on permanent residency and citizenship.
This is how it fits together: cleaner, cheaper energy driving advanced manufacturing and creating jobs - and skilling Australians for those jobs.
That's how the NRF is linked to Jobs and Skills Australia, is linked&nbsp;to fee-free TAFE, is linked to clean energy plans as well. It's a plan for the future growth of our economy.
For taking advantage of where we find ourselves in 2023. Shaping the future - not being scared of it.
These reforms boost economic security for business and industry.
Security for people in their daily lives means helping Australians with the cost-of-living and getting inflation under control.
That’s our plan: Relief. Repair. Restraint.
Relief for cost of living:&nbsp;

Cheaper child care
Cheaper medicine&nbsp;
Fee-free TAFE&nbsp;
And energy price relief for households

Repairing our supply chains and our skills base.
And restraint – the responsible budget approach that saw us return 99 per cent of revenue upgrades to the budget across this year and next, when inflation is most acute.
As Treasurer Jim Chalmers has said, we remain hopeful that inflation peaked in the December quarter and will begin to ease.
Equally encouraging, wages are moving again.
The fastest rate of wages growth in a decade – confirmed today –&nbsp;alongside the fastest rate of jobs growth in the first six months of any government.
Good jobs and fair wages are fundamental to an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
And so too are quality, reliable and affordable services.
That’s why we’ve begun the work of strengthening Medicare, in co-operation with the states.
Our new Urgent Care Clinics will be 100 per cent bulk-billed, taking pressure off hospital emergency departments.
We’re putting people with disability back at the centre of the NDIS.
Our plan for universal affordable child care is an economic reform that will boost productivity, and increase workforce participation while taking pressure off family budgets.
Our new Housing Accord, our Housing Australia Future Fund, the Housing Supply and Affordability Council, our Regional First Home Buyers Guarantee and our Help-to-Buy scheme together represent the most comprehensive federal housing policy in decades.
Because we believe every Australian deserves the security of a roof over their head.
Confidence, stability and security for all Australians means a growing and a productive economy, where the people who contribute to our national prosperity share in its benefits.
And an economy that promotes the full, equal and respectful participation of women.
This is something our government – the first government in Australian history with a majority of women members, 54 out of 103 – has made a national priority.&nbsp;

Cheaper child care&nbsp;
Expanding Paid Parental Leave&nbsp;
Implementing all 55 Respect@Work recommendations
10 days Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave in place from the first of this month

And new measures to help close the Gender Pay Gap.
These are concrete steps toward gender equality – and these are economic reforms that boost productivity, participation and economic growth.
My colleagues and I understand that our nation faces significant challenges.
Families are having to make tough choices - and so are we, as anyone who attends our ERC meetings would be able to confirm.
Off the record. Without going into the detail, of course.
We’re being upfront with people about this.
Because we’ve seen the harm that has been done by a wasted decade of a government putting-off problems, or pretending they don’t exist.
Equally, we recognise there are very few quick fixes here.
We want to build to last – and that takes time.
And yet for every question facing the nation, our opponents offer the same answer: No.
For a decade in Government they created these problems – and now in Opposition they stand in the way of the solutions.
After a decade of inflicting low wages as a “deliberate design feature of their economic architecture”…
They said no to increasing the minimum wage.
No to Secure Jobs and Better Pay.
No to making gender equity and job security objectives of the Fair Work Act.
No to helping the heroes of the pandemic by increasing their wages.
After a decade of denial and delay on climate change, a decade of chaos and paralysis on energy policy…
They said no to the new jobs and opportunities of renewable energy.
They said no, in December, to helping families with their power bills.
No to energy security for Australian manufacturing.
No to the Safeguard Mechanism that they designed in government and that the Australian business community are crying out for them to support to give them the support they need.
After a decade of hollowing-out our skills base and driving manufacturing offshore…
They’re saying no to the National Reconstruction Fund.
No to making things here again.
No to 180,000 fee-free TAFE places.
And after a decade of ignoring Australia’s housing challenges…
They are saying no to the Housing Australia Future Fund.
No the Housing Supply and Affordability Council.
No to more crisis accommodation for women and children fleeing family violence.
And no to better housing for Veterans.
No alternatives. No compromise. No contribution.
Just the same relentless negativity that defined the No-alition under Tony Abbott.
Such a contrast with the constructive approach we took in Opposition during the pandemic.
Where – even if we disagreed with elements of various economic stimulus, even if we sought to move amendments – we gave an assurance that they would have our bipartisan support.
Because we understood that in tough times, we knew the responsibility we had, to the nation.
I want Australians to enjoy a more secure nation, with more secure industries and more secure jobs. To have a better future.
The Liberals want the next ten years, to look like the last ten years.
You can’t deliver for people if you’re trying to divide the nation.
In all its forms, our future security depends on engaging with the world and shaping change.
That’s what drives our government’s ambition for Australia.
Not division and fear and negativity - but optimism and purpose and urgency.
Because - as I said here at the National Press Club just three days before polling day - unless we shape the future, the future will shape us.
And I have no doubt that Australians can rise to this moment and make this decade and beyond our own.
We have enormous advantages if we are prepared to seize the opportunities that are right there before us.
And my government is working every day to build greater security – for the nation, in our economy and in people’s daily lives.
By engaging in our region.
By investing in our sovereignty, our self-reliance, our capacity to make things here again.
By seizing the opportunities of renewable energy.
By building an economy that embraces innovation and productivity, repays hard work and rewards initiative.
And by strengthening the services people rely on.
This is the better and more secure future we are determined to deliver.
A better future, made here in Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respect to their elders past, present and emerging.
And I'm very happy to be here at the launch of the football season.
What we've seen in recent times is a 20 per cent increase in the number of football players in this country. This is a code that is exploding.
And it's a fantastic way for young people, in particular, whether it be young boys or young girls, and we're seeing a further explosion in the amount of women and girls are playing football, some 16 per cent in the last year.
And with the World Cup coming to Australia and New Zealand in the middle of the year, that's going to just get even bigger and better.
The Football World Cup being held in the middle of the year, I'm not sure that Australians realise yet how big deal this is. This is the third most watched event in the world after the Men's World Cup and the Olympics. The third most watched event in the world will be held right here in Australia and New Zealand.
Literally tens of thousands of people will be travelling to Australia as a major tourist destination. But literally hundreds of millions of eyes will be on Australia. It is such an enormous opportunity for us to promote our great country.
Now here at Fraser Park, is an example of the way that football has developed in Australia. The club was begun - the giveaway is the colours that don't represent South Sydney, they actually represent the national colours of Portugal - a few Portuguese migrants began this football club and then took over this area with the community club with the football club here and with the best chicken in Australia.
Since then we've seen a big expansion. When I was last the Minister for Infrastructure, we provided $2 million for the upgrade of these facilities. And that made an enormous difference in making sure that this club could continue to not just survive, but to thrive.
Now since then, it's become a club, not just for the Portuguese, one that recognises that heritage, but for the Inner West Community. And in particular, its become a club that competes at the highest level, that attracts junior players, gives them the skills that they have to potentially go on to be professional football players.
But whether it is to become a professional, or just to have a bit of fun, this is so important. Every parent I speak to worries about how much time their young boy or girl spends on their iPhones or on playing games, or - I'm showing my age here, and the age of my son - Nintendo, or whatever it is these days. We worry about getting kids off screens and on to fields.
From teams young people will learn how to win, how to lose. I'm not a great fan of this nonsense of kids not keeping score, because every kid knows the score in every sport that they compete in. But nonetheless, they learn how to win, they learn how to lose. Most importantly, they learn social interaction, that is so important for the growing up as they get older.
And that is why it's so important, that teamwork. You can have the best player in the competition and you still won't win a game if you don't play as a team.
And that's a really important lesson in life, that is something my government attempts to put into practice. We want our whole team as a nation to come together and to work together in our common interests, which is so important.
So congratulations, as well, to the club on another season coming forward. But I want to finish up with - I've spoken about the players, the young and the old, there are senior senior teams here as well - but a special shout out to those people who keep sport going. That's the parents who bring their young ones to training to the games each and every week.&nbsp;I miss it enormously.
To the coaches, to the administrators at the club, they give out their own time to put something back into the community. That's so important. So a special shout out to all of you. I really look forward to it being a fantastic season ahead for all of you.
I'm very proud to be the local MP for this area. And to now be running the country as Prime Minister was something that I wasn't anticipating happening. But I'm proud of this multicultural, vibrant community where people work together in our common interests.
Congratulations to all involved today.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government committed to the Uluru Statement from the Heart, in full.
Later today, I’ll be on my way to India.
I’ll be joined on that trip by 25 CEOs and business leaders – in transport, resources, finance, higher education, architecture and energy – one of the biggest and most significant Australian business delegations to ever visit any of our trading partners.
Australia and India are Indo-Pacific partners through the Quad – and I’m looking forward to hosting the Quad Leaders Summit in the middle of the year.
Our two nations share a rich history - bound by our democratic values and enlivened by genuine friendship and fierce sporting rivalry.
By any measure, Australia is a better place because of our large, diverse and aspirational Indian-Australian community.
Yet for all of this, in 2021-22, India was only Australia’s sixth largest goods and services trading partner.
We can elevate that - and not just by volume.
Our government is seeking to deepen and diversify Australia’s trade links.
Greater diversity in who we trade with - and greater variety in what we trade.
Meaning our economy is more resilient and more secure.
1 in 4 Australian jobs are related to international trade.
I am determined to create more jobs in export industries and broaden our export base…
…so that more Australian businesses – big and small – can find markets for their products and services overseas.
If you look at India, they have set ambitious goals for 50 per cent renewable energy by 2030 - and 30 per cent Electric Vehicles by the same year.
Australia can help realise those goals - and not just as a supplier of critical minerals.
But as a provider of technology and services, mining equipment, software and systems expertise, training and skills.
And value-added products, made in Australia: batteries and storage and charging technology, the next generation of solar panels, electrolysers and zero carbon fertilisers through green ammonia.
And in resources too – green steel and green aluminium and green iron. &nbsp;&nbsp;
The point that is always worth making here is that this is not a zero-sum game.
We can do all these things as well as remaining a trusted and reliable supplier of energy to key trading partners such as Japan and the Republic of Korea…
…as well as supporting their transition to cleaner sources such as green hydrogen.
Australia has the natural advantages to make this happen.
We can be a global provider of choice in the resources, research and expertise that will drive the world to net zero.
But – as every business person in this audience understands – natural advantages are no guarantee of success.
Securing the next generation of Australian prosperity depends on making the right investments in our workforce, our infrastructure, our productivity and innovation.
Because the world isn’t waiting for us.
And doing things the way we’ve always done them before, just because that’s the way they’ve always been done, doesn’t ensure stability – it only guarantees decline.
In the last few years, global shocks have presented us with a series of national wake-up calls.
We’ve seen we are vulnerable, when we are the last link in a global supply chain.
We’ve seen our national energy grid is out of date and our energy market more exposed than it should be, to movements in international prices.
We’ve seen that our cyber security systems – in government and in corporate Australia – are not at the level they need to be.
And we’ve seen the flaws and weaknesses in our national skills base, the over-reliance on temporary migration exposed by closed borders.
All of this has come at a cost.
It’s driven up inflation, hurting family budgets and business costs.
And it’s shown us the extraordinary pressures on our public hospitals and aged care sector.
The worst thing Australia could do, the most expensive mistake our nation could make would be to ignore these warnings.
To dismiss what’s happened as a once-in-a-century event and assume that things will gently return to normal.
We have before us a window of opportunity, a chance for genuine renewal and reform:

To deliver greater economic security, by investing in our sovereignty, our capacity to stand on our two feet
To build lasting energy security, by upgrading our energy grid, reducing our emissions and reducing our energy costs
And to create stronger job security for people, by investing in the skills and training and innovation that drive productivity.

&nbsp;But we have to move fast – because other countries have seen the same signs.
Economies around the world are embarked on a new wave of investment in their own advanced manufacturing capacity.
And they’re seeking new productivity gains through investment in research and development and skills and science and technology.
Governments – and businesses – here in Australia, have to do the same.
That’s the idea at the heart of our National Reconstruction Fund.
Based on the proven success of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, this is a model for enhancing private sector capital investment and delivering a return on taxpayer dollars.
Boosting our nation’s capacity to make things here again – and enabling businesses to add more value here.
We are determined to legislate our Safeguard Mechanism: to provide business and industry with a clear, stable and long-term framework for reducing emissions.
Everyone recognises that the global transition to net zero will take time.
Equally, we understand there is no time to waste.
The work of transition will require massive investment in building new physical assets and modifying existing ones.
This is where gas in particular has a key role to play, as a flexible source of energy – providing peaking power today and continuing to provide firming power.
Helping to smooth the transition to renewables, while guaranteeing energy security both for Australia and for our partners in the region.
And when businesses have to make capital decisions over five and ten and twenty year timeframes, it is so important they can look to government for the confidence and certainty of a stable foundation and a long-term vision.
Not the sort of chopping and changing that saw the Liberals and Nationals announce 22 different energy policies without delivering a single one.
Including, I might add, the very Safeguard Mechanism that they are now seeking to oppose.
We’re acting to upgrade Australia’s energy security – and we’re also acting on cyber security.&nbsp;
Cyber security is as essential and as important for business as a lock on the door.
It’s vital to protecting your intellectual property, your clients’ privacy and your customers’ confidence.
Threats like cybercriminal activity are fast-moving and rapidly-evolving – but for too long the capacity of government and business has been off the pace.
We are determined to change that.
That’s why, last week, we brought together business and civil society and intelligence agencies and the public service to inform a comprehensive and co-ordinated Cyber Security Strategy.
And with this same focus on greater long-term security, we are reforming our migration program, returning the emphasis to permanent residency and citizenship.
We are making Infrastructure Australia a serious, rigorous body again.
Moving away from the partisanship and short-termism, so we can get Commonwealth investment flowing into a pipeline of productivity-enhancing projects that create jobs and train apprentices.
And – last month – we tasked the Productivity Commission to map out the path to universal, affordable child care.
Universal, affordable child care is an investment in early education, in the next generation, that the world is making.
Importantly, it’s an economic reform which will boost workforce participation, productivity and population – the three Ps of economic growth - while taking pressure off family budgets.
I’ve said before that business has been ahead of government in so many areas over the last decade.
More engaged, in more parts of our region.
More alive to the global challenge of climate change – and the global opportunity of renewables and clean energy technology.
And I have no doubt, there are leaders in this room who have driven company-wide, even sector-wide initiatives that our government can take lessons from.
My colleagues and I didn’t come to office with a sense of entitlement, we don’t imagine we hold a monopoly on good ideas.
We want to work with business, to get things done, for the good of the nation.
Last year’s Jobs and Skills Summit - which many of you made a valuable contribution to – stands as proof of that.
Those two days of discussions produced agreement on 36 immediate outcomes, which we acted quickly to deliver:

Increasing the Permanent Migration Intake to 195,000
Additional investment in visa processing, to tackle the extraordinary backlog we inherited.
The creation of Jobs and Skills Australia, to identify and anticipate workforce demand – now and into the future.
Industrial relations reform, to encourage employers and employees being able to sit down and negotiate improvements in productivity and pay.
Expanding Paid Parental Leave – and making it more flexible.
And a national skills agreement, signed by every state and territory to create 180,000 fee-free TAFE places this year.

&nbsp;There are Australians enrolled in new courses, training for good jobs in areas of national priority, right now, as a result of that agreement.
And work is well underway in other areas: including creating new digital apprenticeships in the public service and improving workforce participation opportunities for people with disability.
Not all of these ideas came from within government.
Not all of these were policies we took to the election.
Neither was the Energy Price Relief plan we agreed with every state and territory and government, to shield Australian business and Australian households from the worst of global price spikes.
But what these things have in common is they recognise and meet an urgent national need – and they set us up for a more secure future, over the long term.
Through a wasted decade, the previous government ignored every wake-up call and warning.
And they shot down every alternative, because it suited their pathology of political conflict.
We are determined to leave that pattern of neglect and crisis and hurried announcement behind.
We’ve put a priority on orderly process, on debate informed by evidence and experts.
Because we understand that to deliver reform, people need to know where you are coming from – as well as where you want to go.
So when my colleagues come to you, as business leaders, seeking your input, be assured it is not for the sake of it, or the look of it. It’s not to pad out a report to put on the shelf.
We want you involved and engaged in the work of change and reform.
Of course, that doesn’t mean I expect us to agree on every element of every initiative - no reform worth doing is wholly uncontested. &nbsp;
But I think we all come to this conversation with the understanding that turning away from this window of opportunity…
…hitting snooze on this wake-up call, settling for a slow decline as the world forges ahead, is simply not good enough.
Our government has every confidence Australia can rise to this moment.
And we are determined to continue working with business and unions, with civil society, policy experts - and a reinvigorated public service, to seize the opportunities ahead of our nation.
Deepening and diversifying our international investment and trade links.
Taking our place as a clean energy superpower.
Revitalising advanced manufacturing in our regions.
Training Australians to lead in cyber capability and technology.
And building an economy that embraces innovation and flexibility and equality for women to draw on the talent of our whole population.
In all of this, business has a vital role to play - and I look forward to engaging with you in the years ahead.


Namaskar.
Thank you to Your Excellency Devvrat for hosting me at Raj Bhawan.
Thank you as well to Chief Minister Patel for welcoming me to your state of Gujarat.
This isn’t my first Holi — it’s definitely a highlight on the Australian festival calendar — but it is my first in India.
And it’s great to be celebrating here, in Gujarat.
Holi is a chance to renew ourselves — and each other.
And it’s little wonder it has been so heartily embraced back home in Australia, by people of all backgrounds.
That’s what we’re all about in modern Australia.
Our multicultural nation benefits from respecting the beliefs, traditions and experiences of people from all over the world.
From Australia’s First Nations peoples — custodians of the world’s oldest continuous culture — to families and communities joining us from every land.
And making Australia home.
This includes generations of Indian migrants.
Today, Australia has an Indian-born diaspora of nearly 800,000 people — and it’s growing quickly!
Many of them are Gujarati, too.
Our recent census reports more than 80,000 Gujarati-speakers have made a home in Australia.
Whatever the future holds, I know that Australia’s Indian-origin community is and will continue to be a crucial partner in the task of making our great nation greater still.
Across the board, Australians of Indian heritage are making incredible contributions.
In business and education, industry and academia, the caring professions.
And as volunteers, neighbours and friends.
They’ve given so much — and, in doing so, live out the message of Holi: making connections, building communities and enriching lives.
These human ties bind Australia and India — and must always be at heart of our relationship.And I know that when the gulal we scatter today has drifted away, the ties between us — hearts and minds; family and friendship — will endure and flourish.
Have a wonderful celebration.


Good evening, everyone.
Khem cho.
I am very pleased to be here in India.
It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge that Deakin University will be the first overseas university approved to establish a branch campus in India.
It’s a great honour for Deakin University – and for Australia, too.
The campus will be built at the new GIFT district not far from here, and will offer students the opportunity to study cyber security and business analytics with Deakin.
Along with Deakin, the University of Wollongong also has intentions to establish a campus at GIFT City.
Of course, we always welcome students to come and study in Australia, and that will be continue to be an important focus for us.
But not everyone has the means or the ability to pack up their lives and study in another country. There might be financial constraints, or family commitments, or a variety of reasons that you want to, or need to, stay closer to home.
So the presence of Australian universities in India opens up new ways for Indian students to obtain an Australian education by bringing Australia a little bit closer.
When I was growing up, I didn’t know anyone who was going to university.
No one in my family had ever been to university.
But Sydney University was just up the road from where I lived. I’d see it all the time. And the proximity made it real to me.
It made it seem possible.
So this is a terrific development and I congratulate everyone involved in making it happen.
Which brings me to another significant development in our bilateral education relationship.
I’m pleased to tell you that we have finalised the Australia–India Education Qualifications Recognition Mechanism.
This new mechanism means that if you’re an Indian student who’s studying – or about to study – in Australia, your hard-earned degree will be recognised when you return home.
Or if you’re a member of Australia’s large Indian diaspora, you’ll be able to feel more confident that your Indian qualifications will be recognised in Australia.
It is the most comprehensive and ambitious arrangement agreed to by India with any country.
It paves the way for commercial opportunities for Australian education providers to offer innovative and more accessible education to Indian students.
And it provides a solid basis for our tertiary institutions to consider new ways of partnering with each other.
I acknowledge my Minister for Education, Jason Clare, his Indian counterpart and everyone involved in landing this comprehensive agreement. It’s a fantastic piece of work that will have tangible benefits.
These developments – Australian university campuses and the qualification mechanism – are just the latest additions to our ever-growing education partnership.
The University of Melbourne has been offering blended Bachelor of Science degrees in partnership with selected Indian universities for several years now.
It’s fantastic to see that Melbourne Uni now plans to expand this collaboration by launching a dual degree with three of India’s leading universities.
The New Colombo Plan has awarded 29 scholarships and more than 7,000 mobility grants for Australian undergraduates to study in India. This includes five scholars and 110 mobility grants in the 2023 intake.
I am pleased to announce a newer scholarship offering - the Maitri Scholarships.
These are for Indian students to study in Australia for up to four years.
The scholarships are part of the wider Maitri program that seeks to boost cultural, educational and community ties between Australia and India.
With “maitri”, of course, being another word for “friendship”.
Again, thank you to everyone who has been working on these projects which will broaden the horizons of students from both our nations.
Congratulations.
Thank you.


Distinguished guests from the Indian food and beverage, film, tourism and hospitality industries.
Namaskar.
Good afternoon, everyone — it’s wonderful to see you all here.
Thank you to Don Farrell, Australia’s Minister for Trade and Tourism, for bringing us together— and Austrade and the Australian Food and Wine Collaboration for showcasing such an outstanding selection of Australian products.
Distinguished guests from the Indian food and beverage, film, tourism and hospitality industries
Since returning to India yesterday, I’ve been immersed in the wonders of this country.
Celebrating the festival of Holi in Gandhinagar.
Watching the cricket with Prime Minister Modi in Ahmedabad.
I’m delighted to be sharing some of the wonders of Australia in return — our food and wine, our tourist destinations, and our cinema.
Because these things are celebrations — of our land, our people, and our stories.
Australia and India share this sense of life.
As you know, the India-Australia Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement recently came into force, unlocking enormous potential in our relationship.
It gives Australian businesses far greater access to the mighty Indian economy — a market of 1.4 billion people, and one of the world’s fastest growing major economies.
More than 85 per cent of Australian goods exports by value to India are now tariff free — and 96 per cent of imports from India to Australia are tariff free, too.
Australian fresh lobster and lamb used to be subject to a 30 per cent tariff in India.
Now, it’s zero.
Tariffs on other products like avocado, citrus and seafood are on a pathway to zero.
I look forward to the bustling restaurants of Mumbai and Delhi showcasing these great Australian products, with a glass of premium Australian wine alongside.
We’re one of the world’s leading wine-producing countries.
And some of our most popular varieties and labels are being showcased today — like&nbsp;Shiraz from the Barossa Valley, and Sauvignon Blanc from Southern New South Wales.
Coopers craft beers are also available across India, and I congratulate Coopers on recently securing distribution with VBev, one of India’s largest alcoholic beverage importers.
It’s a great example of an Australian brand finding new markets, and bringing their quintessentially Australian product to the world.
I feel so fortunate to be visiting India for the third time in my life.
This is the first trip for one member of my team, though because he grew up watching Bollywood films on SBS
He told me he was so excited to come here.
So it’s particularly special to be here in Mumbai, the capital of Indian cinema.
Prime Minister Modi and I will have more to say on this tomorrow, but I am pleased that our two governments have been working hard to bring our two film industries closer together.
For me, films are food for the soul.
They tell stories, help us to feel, and reflect who we are and where we come from.
They can inspire empathy, foster understanding, and promote dialogue.
Bringing our two countries’ storytellers together – actors, producers and filmmakers – will in turn bring our people closer together.
I look forward to seeing more Indian – Australian co-productions on our screens soon showcasing the best of both our cultures, landscapes and people.
As a cricket tragic, I’m hoping fast-bowler-turned-Bollywood-actor Brett Lee might even feature!
With the end of the pandemic, I also hope that Indian tourists, students and other travellers will continue to flock back to Australia.
We can’t wait to welcome you with a hearty g’day, and to share our country’s wonders.
From the natural beauty of the Great Barrier Reef and Katherine Gorge, to the architectural feats of Sydney’s Opera House and Harbour Bridge, to the rich tapestry of our multicultural society — which includes a thriving Indian community of almost one million people, to our rich Indigenous culture that dates back some 65,000 years and whose deep, spiritual connection to the land is represented by the sacred site of Uluru.
Australia and India have so much to share, and so much to learn from each other.
So let us experience the wonders of our nations, and deepen the friendship between our peoples.
Dhanyavaad.


Students, faculty, Australian alumni, distinguished guests.
Namaskar.
It is such an honour to be here at what is not just one of India’s most prestigious centres of higher education … but a place of world renown, and one that is publicly run and funded.
Professor Banerjee, Dr Saran and everyone at IIT-Delhi and the Observer Research Foundation — thank you so much for hosting this afternoon.
This is my third visit to India, but my first as Prime Minister. The first, I hope, of many.
I’m very pleased that my arrival has coincided with Holi. In all its colour and joy, this festival has become a beloved fixture on the Australian calendar, but it is so good to see it here at the source.
It partly set the scene for this visit — a celebration of the close partnership between our nations.
But this visit is also very much about the future. Because of our track record together, it’s a future I feel ambitious about.
It’s an ambition backed by a keen awareness that we have so much to do.
I’m the latest in a long line of Australian prime ministers who have come to India to celebrate and pay tribute to the warm and close relationship our two nations share.
And as I’ve moved from Ahmedabad to Mumbai to Delhi, the message I’ve delivered is this: Australia and India have never been closer. But we can do even more together.
To solidify the Australia–India relationship as one of the most consequential in our region.
To bring our economies and people closer still.
And to solve the greatest challenges of our time.
Our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, achieved in 2020, and the recent India–Australia Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement have laid the groundwork for the next phase of Australian–Indian cooperation.
Now’s the time to make these achievements count.
Let’s now lay out a pathway to deepen the work we do together across our entire spectrum of endeavour.
My discussions with Prime Minister Modi at our Annual Leaders’ Summit today — as well as my engagements over the past days — have zeroed in on the areas where I’d like to see even more collaboration.
Trade, investment and the economy.
Strategic and security engagement.
And a future built on clean energy.
On trade, our two-way trade more than doubled in the seven years to 2021.
I’d like to see that growth move faster.
This is a priority for my Government. We believe in free trade and we are working hard to deepen and diversify Australia’s trade links and supply chains.&nbsp;
If the global shocks of the past few years have taught anything, it is that we need to pay more attention to global supply chains.
The experience of recent years has shown us that it’s important to diversify our trading base, but also to strengthen our existing trading relationships.
And it has shown us that the economic complementarity between Australia and India is growing.
We are natural partners. Not only in traditional areas but increasingly in newer ones as we seize the opportunities of the transition to net zero, shaping the future rather than letting it shape us.
So we’re looking at ways to help businesses on both sides of the Indian Ocean benefit from easier access to each other’s markets.
I have been accompanied to India by more than 20 Australian business leaders from major companies.
Among them are representatives from the transport, resources, finance, university, energy, architecture and design, health, commodities and information technology sectors.
They have briefed me on the fruitful discussions they have had this week with Indian counterparts as part of the Australia-India CEO Forum, and the opportunities for deepening cooperation.
I’m also pleased to say negotiations are underway for a full Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement — one that will open access even further.
I’d like to take this opportunity to announce the appointment of Tim Thomas as the inaugural Chief Executive Officer of the Centre for Australia-India Relations.
The Centre, which will open later this year, will work across government, industry, academia and community to build greater understanding of the Australia-India relationship and support opportunities that arise flowing from our growing connections.
On education, we’re also hoping to break new ground — and I mean that in a very literal sense.
I was so pleased to announce that Australia’s Deakin University is on track to be the first foreign university in the world approved to open a physical campus in India, at Gujarat’s GIFT City.
And where Indian students aspire to study in Australia, our newest Maitri scholarships will provide that chance as well.
I know there are members of faculty here at IIT-Delhi — and in the audience now — who are Australian university alumni.
We are honoured to consider you part of our Australian family.
In 2017, I was honoured to launch the Australian Alumni Association of India website here in Delhi.
I very much want to see growing numbers of Australian and Indian students to have the experiences of living and studying in our respective countries, and to bring those experiences home.
Think of it as human cross-pollination. Through it we draw from each other’s strengths and add to our own – and in the process, each of us becomes something greater.
Of course, joining up our best minds is not just desirable
It’s a necessity — especially where the globe’s biggest challenges are concerned.
It was Gandhi who said that Earth can provide enough to satisfy every human’s needs — but only if we let it.
In the face of a changing climate, both Australia and India have begun to heed such warnings with the seriousness they deserve.
Prime Minister Modi’s remarkable goal for India to install 500 gigawatts of renewable energy capacity by 2030 will have a profound impact on the global energy transition.
The global move to a clean energy economy is here.
And it’s shifting gears – quickly.
To get a sense of what is possible, look at what India has already achieved.
Between 2018 and 2021, India increased solar generation by 31 terrawatt-hours. That’s enough power for 24.7 million Indians.
Over the next two years, domestic production of solar cells and solar modules in India is expected to more than double.
Australia is blessed with abundant resources used in the production of renewable energy.
It makes sense for Australia and India work together.
Working together means our goals can be reached sooner.
And the benefits of reduced costs and greater access to renewables can be shared — with our trading partners, too.
India’s manufacturing scale and huge domestic demand, Australia’s abundance of critical minerals, and our combined research nous, mean there’s plenty of mutual gain.
It’s my hope that our deepening cooperation on new and renewable energy can drive new innovation and investment.
And I look forward to seeing new clean energy projects, particularly on solar and hydrogen, coming to fruition. Because in them, we see one of the substantial foundations on which we can build a better future.
Across all of this work — from the economy to education to clean energy — India and Australia seek to work together.
Our interests are converged.
We’re aligned in our respect for the kind of planet we want our children and our grandchildren to inherit.
We’re aligned in our belief in education as a public good.
And in our commitment to democratic principles.
Australia is committed to a global order that’s free and fair — and an Indo-Pacific region where sovereignty is respected.
Our defence links are crucial, and they’re growing. I’m very pleased that Australia will host Exercise Malabar for the first time this year. Building real collaboration with partners like India, Japan and the US is a good thing.
But our strategic partnership isn’t only about defence links, as important as they are to regional stability and balance.
We are – and need to be – strategic partners in a deeper sense, working together and through structures like the Quad, to support stability and rules and fairness in the Indio-Pacific.
We have a huge year ahead – India is hosting the G20, and Australia will host the Quad leaders meeting.
I have had excellent talks with Prime Minister Modi and his team on the forward agenda.
Building the region we want requires sustained partnerships.
Ones defined by deep trust.
Collective strengths.
Shared values.
And we believe India is a natural leader in the Indian Ocean.
We’ve pledged to find new ways to capitalise on our strengths, manage logistics, and collaborate on research that benefits us both.
Working side-by-side, building on the foundations of a partnership decades in the making, and with a huge potential that is within our reach.
When India gained Independence, the Tricolour was unfurled at a midnight ceremony at New Delhi’s Constitution Hall.
Mere hours later, the flag was raised more than 10,000 kilometres away, in Canberra.
It was the first official raising of the flag outside of India.
Australia’s foreign minister at the time, “Doc” Evatt, used the moment to paint a picture of the relationship as he saw it, saying:
“Our geographical proximity and our common interest in the affairs of the Indian Ocean ... naturally throw our lots closely together.”
Broadly, Evatt was right.
But from my vantage point today, it’s safe to say there’s nothing “thrown together” about our relationship.
It has been a series of deliberate choices.
By our leaders and, more importantly, by our people.
Those who’ve crossed the Indian Ocean for travel or trade, searching for new opportunities or fresh perspectives.&nbsp;
And those who’ve chosen to build their lives on distant shores.
It’s in these bonds — of family, of migration, of friendship, and perhaps a dash of cricket — that the soul of the India-Australia relationship resides.
It’s easy to see why Australia and India are today such natural partners, and why there is so much more that – together – we can do. Should do. Will do.
Just as I’m so energised by being here in your dynamic country, I’m energised by the opportunities before us.
A shared future. Built on trust, respect, affection, and an embrace of a better tomorrow.&nbsp;
Thank you.


President Biden.
Prime Minister Sunak.
I am honoured to stand alongside you both – here, overlooking the Pacific Ocean - as leaders of true and trusted friends of Australia.
Today, a new chapter in the relationship between our nation, the United States and the United Kingdom begins.
A friendship built on our shared values, our commitment to democracy and our common vision for a peaceful and prosperous future.
The AUKUS agreement we confirm here in San Diego represents the biggest single investment in Australia’s defence capability in our history.
Strengthening Australia’s national security and stability in our region.
Building a future made in Australia with record investments in skills, jobs and infrastructure.
And delivering a superior defence capability into the future.
My Government is determined to invest in our defence capability.
We are also determined to promote security by investing in our relationships across our region.
From early in the next decade, Australia will take delivery of three US Virginia class nuclear-powered submarines.
This is the first time in 65 years - and only the second time in history - that the US has shared its nuclear propulsion technology.
We are also proud to partner with the United Kingdom to construct the next generation submarine, to be called SSN-AUKUS.
A new, conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered, submarine - based on a British design, and incorporating cutting edge Australian, UK and US technologies.
This will be an Australian sovereign capability - built by Australians, commanded by the Royal Australian Navy and sustained by Australians in Australian shipyards - with construction to begin within this decade.
Australia’s proud record of leadership in the international nuclear non-proliferation regime will continue.
We will of course continue to adhere to our obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and the Treaty of Rarotonga.
Our agreement unlocks a set of transformative opportunities - for jobs and skills and research and innovation.
In Adelaide and Barrow-in-Furness.
In Western Australia and here in the United States.
Opportunities that will shape, and strengthen, and grow Australia’s economy for decades and create around 20,000 direct jobs for Australians from many trades and specialisations.
Engineers, scientists, technicians, submariners, administrators and trades people.
Good jobs, with good wages, working to ensure the stability and prosperity of our nations, our region, and our world.
Our future security will be built and maintained not just by the courage and professionalism of our defence forces, but by the hard work and know-how of our scientists and engineers, our technicians and programmers, electricians and welders.
For Australia, this whole-of-nation effort also presents a whole-of-nation opportunity.
We will work with the state governments of South Australia and Western Australia to develop training programs that equip Australians with the skills they need to fill these jobs.
Working together, our universities and research institutes will collaborate to train more Australians in nuclear engineering.
We are already sharing skills, and knowledge, and expertise across our borders, lifting the capability and capacity of all three countries.
Already - today - Australians are upskilling on nuclear technology and stewardship alongside their British and American counterparts.
Already – today - there are Australian submariners undergoing nuclear power training in the United States and I am proud to confirm that they are all in the top 30 per cent of their class.
Built by innovation and extraordinary and emerging technologies, these boats will present a unique opportunity for Australian companies to contribute - not only to the construction and sustainment of Australia’s new submarines, but to supply chains in America and in Britain.
The scale, complexity and economic significance of this investment is akin to the creation of the Australian automotive industry in the post-war period.
And, just as the vision of Curtin and Chifley in creating our automotive industry lifted our entire manufacturing sector, this investment will be a catalyst for innovation and research breakthroughs that will reverberate throughout the Australian economy and across every state and territory.
Not just in one design element, not just in one field, but right across our advanced manufacturing and technology sectors.
Creating jobs and growing businesses, right around Australia.
Inspiring and rewarding innovation.
And educating young Australians today for the opportunities of tomorrow.
Our AUKUS partnership is not just about the US and UK sharing their most advanced submarine capability with Australia, it’s also about drawing and building on the expertise within our three nations, so that we can achieve things greater than the sum of our parts.
This is a genuine trilateral undertaking – all three nations stand ready to contribute and all three nations stand ready to benefit.
I look out from here today and I see new frontiers in innovation to cross.
New breakthroughs in technology to achieve.
A new course for us to chart, together. &nbsp;
Mr President. Prime Minister.
For more than a century, brave citizens from our three countries have been part of a shared tradition of service in the cause of peace, and sacrifice in the name of freedom.
We honour their memory. We always will.
While we respect and honour the past – through AUKUS, we turn ourselves to face the future.
Because what the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia hold in common is more fundamental, and more universal, than our shared histories.
We are bound – above all – by our belief in a world where the sovereignty of every nation is respected – and the inherent dignity of every individual is upheld.
Where peace, stability and security ensure greater prosperity and a greater measure of fairness for all.
And where all countries are able to act in their sovereign interests free from coercion.&nbsp;
Our historic AUKUS partnership speaks to our collective and ongoing determination to defend those values and secure that future – today, in the years ahead, and for generations to come.
A journey that will strengthen the bonds between our nations – as friends, as peers, as leaders.
We embark with great confidence in the capacity and creativity of our people.
With optimism in the power of what our partnership can achieve.
And with an unwavering conviction that whatever the challenges ahead, the cause of peace and freedom will prevail.
Thank you very much.


Thank you very much, Minister Keogh.
And I also acknowledge all of the special guests who are here, but I particularly want to acknowledge the veterans and the serving personnel of the Australian Defence Force who have joined us here as well this morning.
Welcome here to Parliament House.
We are here today to acknowledge courage.
We are here today to acknowledge sacrifice.
We are here to acknowledge the bonds of camaraderie forged under fire, and the cruel realities of loss.
Half a century after Australian guns fell silent in Vietnam, our nation has not repaid what we owe to the 60,000 Australians who served in that conflict.
And we cannot.
More than 3000 were wounded and, tragically, 523 were killed.
Futures were robbed, lives were changed irrevocably – for those who went, for those who loved them.
And yet for so long, we did not – as a nation – measure up to them.
It is a debt we can never repay, but for so long it was a debt that we failed to even acknowledge.
Let us stand in this place, in this Parliament, and speak – loudly, clearly – about those who were sent to war in our name, who did their duty in our name, but whose names we did not hold up as proudly as we should have.
This year, as we mark 50 years since the role of Australian troops in the hostilities in Vietnam came to a close, let us acknowledge your service and sacrifice.
Many of you returned to face new battles at home.
And not every one of those battles was won.
Some of them were fought so quietly they went unnoticed.
Indeed, for so many of our veterans, silence was a shield against the world – an outer stillness while within them, the cacophony of war raged on.
That has been the experience for so many, whether they raised arms against the enemy, or worked desperately to save the lives of the wounded and the dying.
Just as our veterans stepped up for us, we must step up for them.
We owe them a debt greater than mere gratitude.
And here, in the nation’s Parliament, is the right place to begin.
So to each and every one of our Vietnam veterans, I say:
We honour you. We thank you. And we are so sorry it took us so long as a nation to do so. You deserve better.
Let us begin here with this formal acknowledgment in the national Parliament.
This medallion and certificate are a small but meaningful way to honour your service and to recognise the sacrifice of those who tragically never returned home.
It honours those who did return home, but have endured those scars of service, both seen and unseen.
It also serves to further acknowledge the families of Vietnam veterans for your sacrifice and support.
These medallions are available for every veteran.
They can be applied for by veterans, widows of veterans and other family members of veterans of the Vietnam War.
We are extremely grateful to be joined today by some of those fine Australians who donned our&nbsp;uniform to serve in our name in Vietnam.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I thank you.
Your presence here today honours the families of those we lost. It honours all those you served with. All you experienced together. All you endured together.
Your experiences during and after the war are a powerful reminder of the sacrifices made by those who have served our country and the debt of gratitude we owe each and every one of you.
It’s important as Australians that we know the stories of your service in Vietnam, but also what you’ve achieved since.
In your advocacy for your mates, your local community and your continued involvement with ex-service organisations, we see some of the very best of the Australian spirit.
It is that spirit – backed by lived experience – that has seen so many veterans adding to and strengthening communities and businesses with their skills as leaders, planners, thinkers, and communicators.
And an ethos built on service, courage, respect, and integrity.
To every veteran here today, it’s an honour to be here with you.
For those serving men and women, thank you for joining with your veterans and the Parliament here today, including the Chief of the Defence Force.
I say today, and every day: thank you for your service.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the opportunity to vote for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people at a referendum later this year.
I know Qantas has a&nbsp;deep and longstanding commitment to the cause of reconciliation – and recognition.
And&nbsp;Australia has been talking about this for a long time.
It’s been six years since the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
Nine years since the&nbsp;Qantaslink&nbsp;Dash 8s&nbsp;carried the R for ‘Recognise’&nbsp;around the nation.
In 2023,&nbsp;all&nbsp;Australians&nbsp;will have an opportunity&nbsp;to celebrate the extraordinary privilege we&nbsp;all&nbsp;have to share this island continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture,&nbsp;and&nbsp;to recognise this&nbsp;in our nation’s birth certificate, our constitution.
I look forward to Qantas playing an important role in that conversation.

Your Excellency, Governor-General David Hurley
Chairman&nbsp;Richard Goyder&nbsp;
CEO Alan Joyce&nbsp;
Former Prime Minister&nbsp;Scott Morrison
Leader of the Federal Nationals David Littleproud

Distinguished guests, one and all.
It’s an honour to be here tonight, to&nbsp;join with you in celebrating&nbsp;our national carrier – and a world leader.
There is&nbsp;probably&nbsp;no other&nbsp;Australian&nbsp;companywhose logo&nbsp;stirs the emotions quite&nbsp;like the sight of the flying kangaroo on a Boeing 737.
And there are very few organisations that project Australia’s character&nbsp;and qualities to the world in the way Qantas&nbsp;does.
Whether you’re a tourist visiting our beautiful country, or an Aussie returning home,&nbsp;boarding a&nbsp;Qantas&nbsp;flight&nbsp;is that moment of connection&nbsp;with the warmth and humour of Australia.
And&nbsp;all&nbsp;that&nbsp;is&nbsp;due&nbsp;to&nbsp;so&nbsp;much&nbsp;more than your longevity, or&nbsp;your logo.
It’s a credit to&nbsp;your people – the skill of your pilots, the&nbsp;boundless&nbsp;patience and cheer of your cabin crew, the dedication&nbsp;and care&nbsp;of your engineers and ground staff.&nbsp;
And it’s a tribute to the way&nbsp;your airline&nbsp;brings people together, connects us, empowers us and inspires us to see more of our country and the world.&nbsp;
All that matters&nbsp;in day to day, routine&nbsp;travel – but&nbsp;it counts for double in the tough times.&nbsp;
I was&nbsp;the&nbsp;Minister&nbsp;responsible for aviation&nbsp;for many years, it was a job I loved.&nbsp;
And every day in that job,&nbsp;I knew&nbsp;if there was acrisis, anywhere in the world, whether it was a natural disaster or&nbsp;a violent uprising, I knew I could&nbsp;pick up the&nbsp;phone and&nbsp;Qantas would swing into action, getting Australians to safety.&nbsp;
The last few years have reminded us all how important that is.&nbsp;
Moving&nbsp;firefighters and equipment&nbsp;around the country&nbsp;during&nbsp;the&nbsp;Black Summer&nbsp;bushfires.&nbsp;
And delivering&nbsp;tens of thousands of Australians safely home&nbsp;during&nbsp;those uncertain early&nbsp;months&nbsp;of the pandemic.&nbsp;
All this is why Australians&nbsp;are rightly&nbsp;proud that our national carrier&nbsp;has&nbsp;endured&nbsp;and prospered through a century of change and transformation.&nbsp;
When Qantas was founded,&nbsp;our nation&nbsp;still strained against&nbsp;the&nbsp;so-called&nbsp;tyranny of distance.&nbsp;
A mindset that saw our region as a place to refuelon the way to Europe, not a destination&nbsp;in its own right.
Today we embrace the opportunities of our region, home to the fastest-growing economies in human history.
And the great example Qantas sets for&nbsp;our nationis that you don’t hold your place as a leader in such a&nbsp;rapidly-evolving and&nbsp;ultra-competitive global market by standing still.&nbsp;
Qantas has&nbsp;survived and thrived by innovating, adapting, seeking new and better ways of doing things.&nbsp;
And you’re still&nbsp;leading in this&nbsp;regard - adding&nbsp;new flight paths to your map, new aircraft to your fleet.&nbsp;
Setting new standards as a sustainable airline – and upholding&nbsp;your&nbsp;cherished&nbsp;reputation as the world’s safest airline.
Long may that&nbsp;continue.
Congratulations to&nbsp;Alan&nbsp;and&nbsp;the whole&nbsp;team: the pilots and cabin crew; the engineers and ground handlers; the sales&nbsp;and service&nbsp;staff.
And the&nbsp;tens of thousands of Qantas&nbsp;people&nbsp;and&nbsp;passengers&nbsp;who, over&nbsp;the years, have&nbsp;made the national carrier&nbsp;what it is today – and are working to make it even better in the future.
On behalf of all Australians, I say&nbsp;thank you, congratulations&nbsp;and&nbsp;I wish you&nbsp;all the very best in your&nbsp;second century of service to our nation.
ENDS


Thank you to ANIC for inviting me to your National Iftar. I’m honoured to join you all.
I’d like to make special note of Minister Ed Husic, Minister Anne Aly and the newly announced Minister Jihad Dib – I’m honoured to join you as you break your fast.
I am proud to lead a Government that includes Australia’s first Muslim ministers, and represents and celebrates the diversity of beliefs and experiences of modern Australia.
I am also proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the chance to vote in a referendum to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the Constitution.
It will be unifying moment for our country, and I am deeply appreciative of the very positive and constructive contribution the Australian National Imams Council has made.
In their endorsement they reminded us, and I quote:
“Before 1770, Muslims engaged with the Aboriginal people of this land. They shared resources, engaged in trade and had a respectful relationship. 
A relationship of equals.
Those values - respect and fairness – are core values of my government and I know those values are shared by people here tonight.
Events like this one remind us of the value of coming together and taking time to reflect on both the sacrifices in our histories and the possibilities of our shared future.
Our world is so fast-paced, ever in motion. But tonight reminds us of the importance of sharing food, sharing experiences, and spending time with each other – and how this strengthens and nourishes our bonds as people and as a community.
The Muslim community here in Australia makes such an important contributions to the rich fabric of our nation.
From business owners to community leaders, Australia benefits from your creativity, dedication and hard work.
I would also like to applaud the work of the Australian National Imams Council.
You are helping raise new generations of Australian Muslims - showing how the next generations can be proud of their heritage and their faith in such positive ways.
So many Australians can look with pride towards the work you are doing, helping keep culture and faith alive and strong.
We know that there are times when that isn’t an easy task.
I know many in this room have been advocating for better anti-vilification provisions for a long time.
I want to reiterate my Government’s commitment to moving forward with this in this term of Parliament.
Thank you for your hard work on this. We will work alongside you to get this right, and fulfil our commitment to you.
And I am confident Australians will embrace these moves, another source of pride in our inclusive and diverse nation.
Every one of us stands that bit taller, that bit stronger when we're surrounded by our community.
And what is truly admirable is the strength, the cohesion, the warmth and the generosity of Australia's Muslim community - in all its many facets.
Ramadan, and all it brings, underlines all that - and reminds all of Australia that there is so much to appreciate.
You are very much at the heart of the story of this great nation.


Well, thanks very much. I also begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet no pay my respects to the elders, past, present, and emerging.
I do want to acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues, Linda Burney, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs. We have Mark Butler, the Minister for Health. We have Julie Collins, the Minister for Housing and Homelessness. We have Assistant Minister for Infrastructure, Carol Brown, and we have Bridget Archer, the Member for Bass all joining with me at this launch from the Federal Parliament.
Importantly as well we have the Tasmanian Premier Jeremy Rockliff and the Leader of the Opposition Rebecca White here as well. And can I say as well, Anna Reynolds, thank you to the Lord Mayor for hosting us here today.
Importantly, as well, we have a former federal colleague of mine, Pat Farmer, who I got to know more than 20 years ago when he was elected as a member for Macarthur. And during that time he brought his resilience and his skills and his running capacity into the Federal Parliament.
He contacted me just a short while ago with this idea of a run for the Voice. And to me, it seemed absolutely perfect, because what the Voice is about is a bottom up approach, from local and regional voices to be heard, through a national Voice, having a say for Indigenous Australians.
Because of the nature of our Constitution, the referendum will mean that every Australian will have the opportunity to cast their one vote; one vote, one value. And so people in big cities, or small towns or remote communities will all have a say.
In Pat's vision - in running some 14,000 plus kilometres around this great nation over six months, 80 kilometres a day, on average, every day - he is showing his commitment to reconciliation. He will through this run, mobilise these local communities where he visits and I know that he's hoping to mobilise that support, throughout Tasmania firstly, but then throughout the entire nation and finishing on the 11th of October, fittingly at Uluru.
This is an important statement in itself, for Pat's inspirational journey to end where the Uluru Statement from the Heart was formed.
This is an important opportunity for us. For over 120 years with the best of intentions, governments have done things for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, not with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The Voice is just a means to an end. It is how we listen to First Nations people in order to close the gap on education on health, life expectancy, on incarceration rates, rates on economic opportunity.
And we know from our experience, that where we consult with Indigenous Australians, you get better outcomes. We see that with the Indigenous Rangers program. We see that with community health programs. We see that with justice reinvestment.
Common sense tells you that if you're working with people, you will get better outcomes and neat you are imposing solution.
Nothing can be further from the truth than that this is about a 'Canberra Voice'. This is a Voice to Canberra, from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, showing them respect.
But it's also for non-Indigenous Australians about how we see ourselves. Whether we're a confident, forward looking nation that can advance reconciliation. Whether we have the confidence to acknowledge the fullness of our history and our past and come to terms with it, and whether we can walk forward together.
So this constitutional change is about just two things, and two things only. First, it's about recognising Indigenous Australians in our Constitution. And secondly, it's about the fact that Indigenous Australians should be consulted about matters that affect them.
That is what this is about. And that's why I'm very confident that Australians, when given the opportunity, which they will have some time between October and December this year, will vote Yes.
That's why I'm pleased that every single state and territory leader is supporting a Yes campaign as well. And I do want to take the opportunity to acknowledge publicly, Dominic Perrottet, the former Premier of New South Wales for his support for this as well.
This is a campaign that should be above politics because it's about justice. It's about doing the right thing. It's about advancing reconciliation.
And that's why we're seeing such momentum. We're seeing momentum from employers and from trade unions. We're seeing momentum from faith groups. We're seeing momentum from non government organisations. We're seeing momentum from local government organisations. We're seeing momentum from sporting organisations and community clubs and we'll see that continue into the future.
This is a gracious, generous offer from First Nations people. This is just a hand out, asking in that great Australian way when you meet each other, we put our hand out as a gesture to shake hands to come together as an acknowledgement. And that's what this is from First Nations people.
We should have the fortitude and the grace to embrace the opportunity which we have to go forward.
Pat, I think that you are doing Australia a great service once again. You are showing your ongoing commitment to our great country.
This is about the day after the referendum being held, waking up to a more united Australia, waking up to an Australia that come to terms with its past, waking up to an Australia that's more reconciled and is able to go forward in that moment of national unity.
I think you for everything you're doing to support this cause and to inspire Australians to vote Yes, to vote Yes to a better future, a more reconciled future between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.


Thank you Mr President for your leadership and for bringing us together today. I’m indeed delighted to join you from Australia this evening.
Strong climate action is at the very top of my Government’s agenda and it is a clear priority for the Australian people.
We are moving swiftly to drive down emissions and seize the opportunities of the global net zero transformation.
Already, within our first year of Government, we’ve enshrined new climate targets in law for the first time, providing certainty and stability to drive investment.
Our 2030 target – 43 per cent below 2005 levels – will require ambitious action, but we are determined to achieve it.
We've also put our 215 biggest industrial emitters on the path to net zero by 2050 by passing a law that caps their emissions. This reform will mean they cut emissions by nearly 5 per cent every year.
This week, my Government has announced Australia’s first National Electric Vehicle Strategy to increase the supply of electric vehicles and encourage their rapid uptake.
Since we last met, Australia has joined the Global Methane Pledge, and we are working to find innovative ways to drive down these emissions.
We’re making sure we get more renewable energy into homes and businesses by modernising our energy grid, and we’re encouraging our industries to take up clean energy technologies through a new national government investment vehicle, our National Reconstruction Fund.
Together, these actions will boost the share of renewable electricity generation in Australia to our target of 82 per cent by 2030.
My ambition is to transform Australia into a renewable energy superpower.
Our abundant sources of renewable energy and critical minerals underpin our competitive advantage in the net zero economy, with exports like green hydrogen supporting economic prosperity and energy security, particularly in our region.
It will be crucial for the net zero transformation that we create diverse, resilient and sustainable clean energy supply chains.
Australia knows that we cannot do this alone. The International Energy Agency analysis shows that globally we need to triple clean energy investment by 2030.
For economies across the Indo-Pacific, we need to close the climate financing gap.
And work together to support the rapid transformation of global financial architecture to mobilise and align both private and public finance in support of the Paris Agreement goals.
Of course, Pacific Island countries have been at the forefront of global climate action.
Climate change is the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of our Pacific family.
We must do more to help the Pacific address what is an existential threat, especially for smaller Pacific nations.
We want to work with global partners to drive ambitious climate action and investment to keep 1.5 degrees within reach.
And to realise the economic opportunities for all countries in our transition to a net-zero world.
We all share in the challenges. And we all share in the possibilities.
That’s why we must all act together.
Australia will play our part.
Thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.&nbsp;
I am proud to lead a Government that is offering all Australians the opportunity to vote to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Islander people in our Constitution.&nbsp;
Prime Minister Hipkins, distinguished guests.
My fellow Australians, and soon-to-be fellow Australians - any minute now.&nbsp;
Every citizenship ceremony is a proud and joyous occasion.&nbsp;
A moment for you and your loved ones to reflect on the determination and optimism that has brought you here, to the banks of the Brisbane River and to the open arms of our Australian family.&nbsp;
And a moment for all of us who welcome you to celebrate the choice you have made - to join us as citizens of our great nation and to join us as whole-hearted partners in the work of making it greater still: more fair, more prosperous and more equal.&nbsp;
Today’s ceremony belongs to a tradition three-quarters of a century old.&nbsp;
Since 1949, over 5.7 million people from every part of the world and drawn from every faith and background have pledged their loyalty to Australia, to our laws, our values and our democratic beliefs.&nbsp;
Every generation of migrants has enriched our nation with their aspiration and innovation, their hard work and deep sense of family and community.&nbsp;
Yet for all that has gone before, today also marks an historic first.&nbsp;
Through 80 years of diplomatic representation, 50 years of the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement and 40 years of our Closer Economic Relations Free Trade Agreement it has often been said that Australia and New Zealand are not just friends, we are family.&nbsp;
In conferring these citizenships today, we give new weight and meaning to that cherished sentiment.
We acknowledge the difficulties and delays you have faced to get to this point – and we ensure that those who come after you will enjoy a smoother road to citizenship.&nbsp;
We affirm the shared ambition and the common vision Australia and New Zealand have for a democratic, peaceful and prosperous future in our region.&nbsp;
And we build on the unbreakable bond between our peoples - a connection that has held strong through tragedy, disaster, hardship and war.&nbsp;
This Tuesday, at Anzac Day ceremonies across both our countries, Advance Australia Fair and God Defend New Zealand will play.&nbsp;
We will pause to commemorate and honour those young Australians and New Zealanders who risked and lost their lives so far from home more than a century ago - and all those who have served and sacrificed since.&nbsp;
In countless ways, the world has changed beyond the imagining of those first Anzacs - and yet the bond between Australia and New Zealand endures and thrives, stronger than ever.
To all the New Zealanders joining us today as new citizens and to your family members who are taking up this opportunity as well.
I say, on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, whatever path has brought you here - we are proud to embrace you.
Welcoming you as Australian citizens will just strengthen the bonds between our great nations.&nbsp;
ENDS


We gather before the dawn because they did.
&nbsp;
Picture those first Anzacs. Far from home, huddled in their boats, waiting, wondering.
&nbsp;
Lance Corporal James Bell of the 9th Battalion would later recall sailors lined up on one of the battleships and giving a muted cheer, waving their caps in a circle and “uttering a subdued whisper, barely audible to those in the boats”.
&nbsp;
They set off in the gap between moonset and sunrise. The quiet amplified any sound, the darkness any fear. And as the night began to melt into the half light of the new day, imagination gave way to reality.
&nbsp;
Gallipoli is just one battle in our history, but in all its stories of valour and resilience, in its simple truth of Australians looking out for each other no matter how bad things got, it has come to stand for something so much bigger in our collective heart.
&nbsp;
Every Anzac Day, from the greatest memorial to the simplest cenotaph, we honour all who have served in our name, and all who continue to serve today.
&nbsp;
It is a collective act of remembrance, reflection and gratitude – one carried out by multiple generations of Australians and devoted to multiple generations.
&nbsp;
But an important part of its spirit will always belong to that fateful coast half a world away and more than a century distant.
&nbsp;
Every loss, every death at Gallipoli was like a sapling torn out of the earth, leaving a hole where a tree should have eventually stood. Across Australia, communities began recording their names.
&nbsp;
One of Australia’s first war memorials was erected the following April in the Sydney suburb of Balmain, in my own electorate.
&nbsp;
Among the names it bears is Private Cecil Robert Winch, who landed at Gallipoli on that very first day and did not live to see another.
&nbsp;
And yet amid it all there was courage. There was camaraderie. And, especially when things were at their worst, there was humour.
&nbsp;
While so much has changed in warfare since, the great character of Australians at war has not.
&nbsp;
Yet it must be acknowledged that we have not always honoured those who have fought in our name as well as we should.
&nbsp;
Likewise we must acknowledge the truth that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who donned the khaki fought harder for Australia than Australia was sometimes willing to fight for them.
&nbsp;
Yet we learn, and we keep taking steps forward together.
&nbsp;
Australians have gone overseas for us.
&nbsp;
They have gone because there is so much to fight for.
&nbsp;
And what we have created as Australians, and nurtured over generations, is something we must never take for granted.
&nbsp;
As we gather here, in towns and suburbs across the country, and in former battlefields across the world, we are surrounded by their names and the places that made their final claim on them, laid out in an atlas of grief.
&nbsp;
Every one of those names was once a familiar face. A voice. A future that lived brighter and longer in the imagination than reality and circumstance allowed.
&nbsp;
In so many distant cemeteries, epitaphs are spelt out in the simplicity of sorrow.
&nbsp;
In a cemetery on the Western Front, the inscription from the sister of Queensland stockman George Laurie begins:
&nbsp;
“Far away from all who loved him ...”
&nbsp;
In Gallipoli, the message that stands at the final resting place of William Henry O’Bree is from his parents. It simply says:
&nbsp;
“We miss him at home.”
&nbsp;
We do not know where all Australians fell, lost to the final embrace of the earth or sea.
&nbsp;
Teams of volunteer investigators have laboured to solve the mysteries of the missing and offer the only consolation left to so many families.
&nbsp;
The first team of searchers that headed out in Gallipoli’s shadow was led by Vera Deakin, the daughter of former Prime Minister Alfred Deakin. Her team ended up dealing with 32,000 cases.
&nbsp;
Every one of those cases a human being. Every one of them missed at home. Every one of them a loved one.
&nbsp;
Of course, many did come home only to face another battle within. A battle that, tragically, is not always won.
&nbsp;
If we are to truly honour our veterans, we owe them something more than just gratitude. Just as they stepped up for us, we must step up for them.
&nbsp;
Across our country this morning, Australians have gathered in peace, free citizens of a proud and free nation.
&nbsp;
One hundred and eight years after those first Anzacs set off in their boats, we remember them and all who followed – and we reflect on all that has been made possible by generations of sacrifice.
We hope that war will one day be done, that the cause of peace will prevail, and we can stop inscribing names on memorials.
&nbsp;
But even then, we will keep gathering before the dawn.
&nbsp;
We will gather together, we will gather for them.
&nbsp;
It is because of them that we can await the light.
&nbsp;
Lest we forget.
&nbsp;
ENDS


Well friends, I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
And I recommit the government I lead to the implementation of the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full, with constitutional recognition enshrined with a Voice to our Parliament.
And we will give Australians the opportunity to vote yes for a better future in the last quarter of this year.
And I want to thank in advance the mighty trade union movement for following on the tradition that can be traced back for generations.
It was the trade union movement that backed up Vincent Lingiari, when he walked off, along with his people, off Wave Hill.
It is the trade union movement that has stood up for justice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
And I'm very confident that the trade union movement will be part of a successful campaign to achieve constitutional recognition this year.
My friends, I came here last year as the Labor leader, and I stood here and I promised to be back as the Prime Minister this year, and here we are.
I promised that a Labor Government that I lead would look after the interests of working people.
And the first thing we did was put in a submission to the Fair Work Commission to make sure that those people got a fair pay increase.
Remember the dollar coin they said would ruin the economy?
Well, it got done by the Fair Work Commission and I'm proud of it.
We promised we'd look after aged care workers, and on July 1 that 15 per cent wage increase will happen.
We promised 10 days paid family and domestic violence leave, and today it is law.
We promised to put gender pay equity as an objective of the Fair Work Act, and that is law.
We promised that workers and unions would have the right to bargain collectively, and today that is law.
We promised to abolish the ABCC, and it is gone.
We promised to abolish the Registered Organisations Commission, and today it is gone.
We promised to look after the interests of those working Australians, who are the people who were the true heroes of the pandemic.
We said that they needed more than thanks, and that is what my government, working hand in hand with the Queensland Government, led so brilliantly by Annastacia Palaszczuk, my friend, is delivering for Queenslanders.
But friends, we know there is more to do.
And in the Budget, which is just eight sleeps away, what you'll see is cost of living support for people under pressure.
What you'll see is a plan to make sure that those people in central Queensland and other areas, dealing with change in the economy, are not left behind.
That we provide support for new industries and new jobs, as well as making sure that we look after working people.
We promised better opportunities for better jobs for Australians, and we're delivering 180,000 fee-free TAFE places this year.
Friends, May Day is a celebration of all that working people have achieved, by combining, in trade unions to organise collectively because individuals can't possibly achieve the sort of justice that we need.
Justice in wages and conditions, justice in gender pay equity, justice when it comes to safety in the workplace, so that all those who go to work to drive our economy can come home safely.
We promised that unions would not just be heard but would be respected.
And with the Australian Labour Advisory Committee, where we sit around and we discuss common issues going forward and how to advance the national interest, that is happening.
I look forward to coming back here year after year.
Queensland is such a great state, you have such an enormous opportunity, if governments have the courage to seize that opportunity for new jobs and new industries, for new growth, whilst looking after the pristine natural environment that makes this such a great state.
I'm very proud to represent the people here, the labour movement, as Prime Minister of Australia.
I promised I'd be back, I promised we'd deliver, and we'll continue to do so.
Happy May Day


Thank you very much Stephen. Thank you to you, as High Commissioner, and to Jane and to all the staff at the High Commission, who have worked really hard so that we can just turn up and do what we need to do without any concerns about about Australia's position.
I've got to say that whenever I travel overseas, you just see Australia punching above their weight in foreign affairs.
And can I can also acknowledge this bloke here, he is an absolute legend. And the other VC winners, of course, who who are here with us.
This is an extraordinary gathering of people. When I went through the CVs, some of you I chose, some of you were people who weren't as familiar to me as others.
But what we wanted to get was a group of people who said Australia, with all that strength, with all that diversity. The Palace, when I met with His Excellency, said that they wanted Indigenous representation, we also wanted to get a balance of gender, balance of different backgrounds that reflected modern Australia in 2023.
And what we have here is people from the arts and culture, from sport, from Defence, from academia, from health, from across so many areas, and what a what a remarkable group of people.
You are representing Australia at what is an incredible event of historic significance. For almost all of us here, this is the first time in our lifetime that we have seen a Coronation occur, that we have seen a change in Australia's head of state.
And a couple of days ago, I got to meet King Charles to have an audience with him. And then just this afternoon, I was with the Prince of Wales again.
And I think regardless of what Australians think of constitutional arrangements, and we'll have different views on that, as a nation, what we need to do is to celebrate who we are, and to respect our institutions. And there's such enormous respect for the royal family.
I think that was raised up to a different level when we farewelled Her Majesty last year. Her Majesty was a constant, reassuring presence in our lives, and in our experience. And when she passed away, there was a great deal of mourning for someone who we had affection for, but also incredible respect.
Some of us have chosen public life as something I think it's a very honourable profession. But for the royal family, they're born into it. And they serve as their duty, but also due to their commitment to their nation, but also to the Commonwealth, of which Australia is an important part.
Over the next couple of days, culminating in the Coronation, there'll be of course receptions and various events held tomorrow as well. It is a chance for us to acknowledge the significance of this historic event. But also it's about the future and going forward.
One of the things that I certainly admire about King Charles and the Prince of Wales who is continuing that tradition, is their concern about the future.
Their concern and outspoken views about climate change, about the need to protect our planet, about the urban environment, about a whole range of issues, including respect for Indigenous Australians, which is why the Palace's request which was well received by a government such as mine, was so heartwarming.
King Charles has a great affection for Australia. He was a student there there in Victoria. And that affection has continued and been passed down.
When I spoke with the Prince of Wales today I reiterated the invitation to him, as I have for King Charles, that the Royal Family would all be very well in our nation at a time of their choosing.
This is arising out of sadness for the passing of of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, this is a time for commemoration for the coronation on Saturday. The whole world will be focused on London and thank you for participating in it.
Many of you are based here in the United Kingdom. But for those of us who travelled, it is a long way. I pointed out, as I do to our friends in this part of the world, that going that way, down south to to Australia is downhill. And it is actually quicker. It is actually quicker because of the rotation in the world.
So I'm very hopeful that they will grace us with with their presence soon. But thank you for gracing us, on behalf of the Government, with your presence.
Because this isn't about the Government. This is about you, and you are representative of the Australian people over the next couple of days.
You're very welcome. And I'm very honoured to be a part of this. And that is lifted up more by the extraordinary quality of the people in this room, who have made a great contribution to making Australia a better place and many of you have made a great contribution to make the world a better place as well by your presence here in the United Kingdom. So welcome.


RISHI SUNAK, PRIME MINISTER OF THE UNITED KINGDOM:&nbsp;Good morning, everyone. It's great to welcome Anthony back to the UK, but especially to Downing Street. I think we had a fantastic meeting when we last saw each other in San Diego. And it just shows the strength of the partnership and the friendship between our two countries. We've got great news, because our Free Trade Agreement we're announcing is coming into force imminently, which is going to be an enormous opportunity for our citizens and our businesses. But also, when we were in San Diego, we announced an unprecedented multilateral defence partnership in AUKUS, which demonstrates the respect and trust between I think our two countries very well. And we will continue to build on that. I know you visited the training here of Ukrainian troops that you're participating in, and I know the Ukrainians are very grateful for it, and we're very grateful to you for participating in that program. But also, I know we'll be having a chat about some sporting stuff later on, with the Women's World Cup in your part of the world this summer. And we're obviously going to be reclaiming the Ashes this summer over here. But Anthony, over to you, welcome.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well we'll agree on most things, but on sport perhaps, the rivalry will continue. But thank you so much, Prime Minister, for the welcome. I think our relationship goes from strength to strength, and with AUKUS, with the trade deal, with our common action on climate change and seeking those economic opportunities that will come from it, I see a theme - jobs. Jobs created here in the UK, jobs created in Australia, and I just think our relationship goes from strength to strength. And of course, we do have that rivalry, with the Ashes this year being held here, your team's been doing really well, playing a very positive brand of cricket. But the World Cup, of course, we will have, I must inform you, Prime Minister, that we will have Sam Kerr as our flagbearer tomorrow at the Coronation. And Sam Kerr will invariably be winning and being the key goalscorer at the World Cup, being at home on our home soil.
PRIME MINISTER SUNAK: We'll see, I'm sure the Lionesses will have something to say about that. But we look forward to it anyway. Thank you very much.


Well, friends, it is good to be back. And it's good to be here the day before what will be a Labor Budget in every sense tomorrow night. A Labor Budget which tackles the immediate challenges that are before us.
When talking with other international leaders in the UK, at the sidelines of the Coronation, there are none who didn't wish they were Australia. You have global inflation having a major impact on slowing economies right around the world.
You have, in spite of, I did have time to watch on the way back, one of our opponents yesterday morning saying that we had the highest inflation of any country in the G7. Now, we're not in the G7. That's a separate point.
But in fact, of course, the UK has a higher inflation rate, the United States has higher interest rates, and the world is struggling through two events. One, the ongoing impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and secondly, the pandemic and what it did to supply chains and causing disruption around the world.
What we're doing is tackling those immediate challenges, dealing with the pressures that are on working families. And tomorrow night, we will have $14.6 billion of cost of living relief targeted for those who need it most.
And I want to congratulate, particularly, Jim Chalmers, our Treasurer, and Katy Gallagher, our Finance Minister, and all the members of the ERC who have sat for day after day, hour after hour, to the point whereby I had to leave the country to get away from those meetings to have a break.
We have worked very hard over many months since the October Budget. We've worked hard as well because we've had to find dollars for all of those programs that ended on June 30 of this year.
Essential programs on community services funding, essential programs relating to our national security, essential programs regarding infrastructure, regarding service delivery right across the board, including in areas like health and education.
We had to find money for the programs that, it's not like they just were going to end on June 30. It's that they didn't begin when we have an art gallery down the road here that has one piece of art, thanks to Gough Whitlam, worth half a billion dollars, but has buckets in the corner collecting water from leaky roofs, then that is simply not good enough.
And we had to find space to protect that as well as to protect a few other natural assets, such as Kakadu, and the areas around Sydney Harbour National Park, which have suffered from absolute neglect for a long period of time for the nine years of the former government.
But we've done that. We've done that whilst making sure that, as I promised during the election campaign, we don't leave people behind. But we also don't hold people back. And tomorrow night is about aspiration of people for a better life.
Aspiration, the investment we're making in expanding fee-free TAFE to 300,000 places, in providing support for additional university places, in providing the support for advanced manufacturing, in recognising as other world leaders do, like the UK Prime Minister, Conservative Rishi Sunak, that the challenge of climate change is also the economic opportunity of creating jobs and new industries as we transition as well.
There's another area in which we create aspiration, one of them standing here. And I was really proud, today, to announce the single parenting payment would increase from eight to fourteen, so that those families could look after people.
Now, when we sat down around that table for hour after hour, we always went back to the commitments that we made. We made commitments that no matter how young you were, the first youngest Australians, that they'd get the support through early learning. Right through to working people would get support as well, and we're seeing wages starting to rise, as we said we would.
And we also said that we'd look after our oldest Australians who need respect. And that's why I'm very proud that we are providing the funding, an additional $11.3 billion in adjustment that's been made, to make sure that we fulfil the promise to lift up the wages of people in the aged care sector, 250,000 of them.
So this Budget will be in the best tradition of the Australian Labor Party. Dealing with those immediate challenges, but always with the eye on the future, on the medium and long-term, to make sure that we're delivering, laying those foundations for a better future that we promised when we moved from the office down there, to this office here.
And I do note that while we've been doing that, we've seen other resignations foreshadowed and more chaos on the other side. Well, they can be distracted by being concerned about each other and concerned about themselves. What our concern is about is always about the Australian people. Always about the Australian economy and jobs. Always about a fairer society. Always about how we create that better future.
And I must say, colleagues, that our ranks are about to increase. Now, we had a little by-election on April 1. And for 100 years, governments have had hopes that they would win a seat off the opposition, a held seat. But for 100 years, it hasn't happened.
When I rang Mary Doyle and asked her to recontest as the Candidate for Aston, it was a big ask. When Mary Doyle started, she was running for a seat that had received a Liberal primary vote of 54.7% and a two party preferred vote above 60%. She ran hard in that campaign, and showed herself to be a quality candidate whose decency just absolutely stood out to the people of Aston. And she received a very big swing.
It was a big ask to run twice for a seat, and Mary Doyle was prepared to do just that. And all of the figures showed that we were hoping to do okay, and if we had have held that vote from 2022, that would have been outstanding.
But instead, Mary Doyle decided to defy history, and a by-election in which you receive a swing of that magnitude, towards the government from an opposition-held seat, is literally unprecedented. The only precedent we can find going back was 1920 in Kalgoorlie that were different circumstances. To be clear, a bloke was expelled from the Parliament for treason, against the Crown, and recontested. And not surprisingly, under the circumstances, whatever people might think about that, he was not successful.
But Mary Doyle was successful. She ran an amazing campaign. She worked each and every day to do us proud. And I'd like to ask colleagues to welcome the Member for Aston, Mary Doyle.


Yunupingu walked in two worlds with authority, power and grace, and he worked to make them whole — together.
What he could see was not the reinvention of Australia, but the realisation of a greater one.
With his passing, consider what we have lost.
A leader. A statesman.
A painter. A dancer. A singer and musician who always carried his father’s clapsticks and felt the power they carried within them.
Australian of the Year in 1978. Member of the Order of Australia. National treasure.
A remarkable member of a remarkable family.
A great Yolngu man. An extraordinary Australian.
A man who stood tall in his beloved country, and worked to lift our entire continent in the process.
Yunupingu understood a fundamental truth: if you want to make your voice count, you have to make sure that it is heard.
He made sure with the sheer power of his advocacy for land rights.
He made sure when he helped draft the Yirrkala Bark Petitions, which delivered such a powerful message that resounded within the walls of our nation’s Parliament.
And he made sure when he took part in that masterclass of concise and unifying eloquence, the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
As he put it: “At Uluru we started a fire, a fire we hope burns bright for Australia.”
He fought so hard for reconciliation and was let down every time.
At Garma last year, after I announced the draft of the constitutional recognition provisions and confirmed the Government would propose a referendum during this term, he took me aside, and he asked me, “Are you serious this time?” I replied: “Yes, we’re going to do it.”
When I spoke with him just before the end, on the very day that we announced the words in the legislation that have been brought before this Parliament, I told him I was hopeful we would get there. He responded, “You spoke truth.” Three powerful words that will forever be with me.
And this brought him some comfort, as did his totems of fire and baru, the saltwater crocodile, which watched over him in his final days.
Now Yunupingu is gone, but the gurtha — the great tongue of flame and truth with which spoke to us — is still here. And it lights the path ahead for us.
He saw what was going on around him as clearly, just as he did when he turned his gaze within. In his own words:
"My inner life is that of the Yolngu song cycles, the ceremonies, the knowledge,&nbsp;the law and the land. This is yothu yindi. Balance. Wholeness. Completeness. 
A world designed in perfection, founded on the beautiful simplicity of a mother and her newborn child; as vibrant and as dynamic as the estuary where the saltwaters meet the freshwaters, able to give you everything you need.”
He belongs to all of that now.
Yunupingu’s fire will keep burning for us. We see it in the passion and wisdom and determination of remarkable leaders like Marcia Langton, Noel Pearson, Tom Calma, and our own Patrick Dodson and Linda Burney.
And we see it in our wonderful Northern Territory representatives. His local members, Marion Scrymgour, in this House, and Senator Malarndirri McCarthy.
We could feel it in the poignant, powerful tributes they paid to a man who taught them so much. And we can see it in the simple truth that the finest tribute we can offer to Yunupingu's memory is within our grasp.
Our hearts go out especially to the Yolngu, the Gumatj clan, and the great Yunupingu family. To all who loved him, and to all who were moved by him, to all there who have gazed out to where the Gulf of Carpentaria meets the sky.
We will never again hear his voice anew, but his words – and indeed his legacy – will keep speaking to us.
Yunupingu now walks in another place, but he has left such great footsteps for us to follow here in this one.
I sincerely hope that we do just that.


Well thank you so much. I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present, and emerging. And of course, I'm proud to lead a government that will give Australians the chance to recognise Indigenous Australians in our Constitution in the last quarter of this year.
It's great to be here with Dr Mike Freelander, my parliamentary colleague, with the new Minister, Anoulack Chanthivong, congratulations on your appointment to the ministry, to local Mayor, George Grace, and importantly to Ross Doonan and to the entire team here at DECO. And I do want to acknowledge as well the workers here at DECO.
I visited this facility two years ago when I was the Opposition Leader, and I promised to come back if I was elected Prime Minister and open the new facility. And fortunately for me, that happened. And it's great to be here. I'm someone who has a record of all the commitments that I've made and I believe in fulfilling them.
Because when I was here, I was just taken aback by this family business, and how in accord it was with what the Government is trying to do for Australia. And I thought it was appropriate to do it at the end of our Budget week, our first major Budget that we've handed down, but our second Budget within one year of us being elected, because this typifies what we need to do for our country going forward.
I firmly believe in a future made here in Australia. We are dead last of advanced economies around the world for manufacturing. Last. It's not good enough.
I was here during the pandemic, as Ross said, and one of the things we learned from the pandemic is that if we're at the end of supply chains, we're vulnerable for global shocks that we don't see coming.
Now we've had and are still getting through a pandemic. But there could be other issues of trade. There could be other issues of conflict in our uncertain world. And that's why we need to be more self-reliant. That's why we simply can't afford to sit back and to say, 'Don't worry, we'll make things offshore somewhere else and that'll be okay'. It's not.
We need to bring manufacturing back here in Australia, and companies like DECO show that it certainly can be done. DECO began here as an small aluminium photo imaging business some 20 years ago. Now, it's a world-leading innovator across a whole range of building products and finishes, with more than 100 employees here in well-paid secure jobs.
Businesses don't just happen. They require leadership. And you've taken risks, Ross, and I admire that, and the the commitment that your family has done. But when businesses like this succeed, they succeed not just for their business. They succeed for their local community, here in the Campbeltown area, but they also succeed for our nation, for our national economy.
And that's why Tuesday night's Budget was about a stronger foundation for a better future. About how we further invest in skills and training, how we invest in infrastructure, and invest in our manufacturing capacity here in this country.
On Tuesday, we announced the $3.7 billion National Skills Agreement, to be negotiated in partnership with the states and territories. And that's in addition to 300,000 additional fee-free TAFE places. We want to give young Australians, or Australians who are retraining, the opportunity to get a good secure job by training in TAFE. We have had 180,000 fee-free places just this year. And when we invest in apprenticeships, that helps businesses like DECO here to meet their workforce needs going forward, as well as assisting people into the future.
We also have something that I'm sure that Ross will be looking at in the future, which is our National Reconstruction Fund, with specific funds within it for the sort of activity that takes place here, including in defence industry procurement. When we talk about our program of subs and our upgrade of our defence capability, we are talking about our national security, but we're also talking about industry policy, how we make things here and build that security as well. So that is really important, that's a $15 billion program.
On Tuesday night, we also announced a $392 million industry growth program to help small and medium businesses just like this one in the National Reconstruction Fund priority areas to commercialise their ideas and grow.
When I was listening to Ross go through the people who've assisted this business to grow, including the patent lawyers, what that really was a sign that this is a business that innovates. And one of the things about this country that I'm so proud of, is that there is no country in the world that actually does science and innovation better than this one. We are the country of the cochlear implant, of the black box, of Wi-Fi.
What we haven't been good at is commercialising those breakthroughs. There isn't a solar panel in the world that does not have intellectual property that was developed here, and largely at two institutions, the Australian National University and the University of New South Wales. But we make hardly any solar panels here. That makes no sense. So we need to make sure that we back innovators, that we back companies like DECO to grow in the future. Because if we do that we can be more successful.
I'm also conscious about the work that this company has done in having the carbon light aluminium as well, and innovating to make sure that its footprint, in terms of emissions, is reduced. It's another example of how in today's competitive globalised world, companies will need to engage in that. It won't be an add-on, it will be a necessity for companies to be able to do that.
And I know from last time I was here about the renewable energy that helps to power this important facility right here. And on Tuesday night, we announced a hydrogen fund, something that Australia potentially has the world's best opportunity going forward. We have, as we can feel on this beautiful day here in Campbelltown, the best solar resources in the world bar none. How is it that Germany produces more solar power than here? I don't know if people have been to Germany, let me tell you, this day in May is better than any day you get there.
We need to use the natural advantages that we have. And the natural advantages that we have are&nbsp;the sky and our weather, our wind resources as well, our hydrogen, the fact that we have everything that goes into products that are going to be in demand: lithium, vanadium, copper, nickel, all of these products. The fact that we can produce green steel and green aluminium in the future through the use of hydrogen, the enormous natural advantages that we have.
The other advantage that we have, and our best advantage, is our people. We're a multicultural country that can engage in language and with people. We are located in the fastest growing region of the world, in human history, just to our north. Those growing markets for products present an enormous opportunity.
And we are a brave country, and an innovative country, which this business really personifies and this family personifies. Being prepared to take risks, to grow a business, to seize opportunities which are there.
So I'm very confident and optimistic about Australia's future. And it's a very conscious decision to come here in Budget week as the first event that I've done after we handed down our Budget. I wanted to send a signal that nothing is more important to my government than expanding manufacturing, than backing small and medium business, than growing jobs and opportunity for Australians going forward.
So I thank you very much, Ross, for the opportunity to be with you here today. I thank Mike for the incredible work that he does as the local member for this community, together with Anne Stanley. Campbelltown has extraordinary representatives in in Canberra, who I assure you are constantly knocking down my door with asks and requests, but they're never anything for themselves. They're for this community that they're proud to represent.
So congratulations to all involved. And it's a great honour for me to be here today.


It’s often said that we stand on the shoulders of giants. Yunupingu was a giant who made sure we could.
He lifted us up and held us there so that we could see as far as he did.
And what a vision he shared with us.
A vision underpinned by an unbending belief in the need for Aboriginal people to hold their future in their own hands.
A vision so grounded in all that was just and fair and right that, ultimately, it elevated us all.
He had every right to be cynical, but he wasn’t. No matter how often Australia let him down, he kept striving to have us rise to his level of integrity.
And as he did, what Yunupingu helped us all to see was not the reinvention of Australia, but the realisation of an even greater one.
Now his life is at an end, we gather in the place where it began.
And as we gaze out to where the Gulf of Carpentaria meets the sky, we soften our sorrow with joy and gratitude for all that his life was.
It is an honour to be here in the country that so filled his heart, but as it’s my first time in Arnhem Land without him, it is a poignant one.
Yet his presence – and the reminders of all he believed in and all that mattered to him – are all around us, the profound cultural, political, social and economic legacies of a leader.
Of a statesman.
A painter, dancer, singer and musician.
Australian of the Year in 1978. Member of the Order of Australia. A national treasure.
A remarkable member of a remarkable family.
A great Yolngu man. An extraordinary Australian, who understood if you want to make your voice count, you have to make sure that it is heard.
He made sure with the sheer power of his advocacy for land rights.
He made sure when he helped draft the Yirrkala Bark Petitions, which delivered such a powerful message that resounded within the walls of the nation’s Parliament.
He made sure when he co-created that blueprint for treaty, the Barunga Statement.
And he made sure in his crucial role in that masterclass of concise and unifying eloquence, the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
In his words: "At Uluru we started a fire, a fire we hope burns bright for Australia."
Now Yunupingu is gone, but the gurtha — the great tongue of flame and truth with which spoke to us — is still here. And it lights the path ahead for us.
We will never again hear his voice anew, but his words – and his legacy – will keep speaking to us.
The finest tribute we can offer to his memory is within our grasp.
Yunupingu walked in two worlds with authority, power and grace, and he worked to make them whole — together.
Now he walks in another place, but he has left such great footsteps for us to follow here in this one.
With deepest respect. Vale Yunupingu.


Thank you friends.
 I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet  and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
 And I am proud to lead a government that will give all of you, all Australians,  the chance to vote in a referendum to recognise our First Peoples in our  nation's Constitution later this year.
 And I urge my Indian-Australian friends, vote yes.
 It is a huge pleasure to welcome Prime Minister Modi to Australia.
 In just my first year as Prime Minister, which I'm celebrating today, I have  met the Prime Minister, my friend, six times.
 But absolutely nothing beats standing with him on a stage like this, looking  out at this magnificent sea of faces. What an honour!
 And what a joy it is to get to welcome Prime Minister Modi here, with all of  you.
 I get to speak to some pretty big crowds as Prime Minister. But I have to say  that the warmth and the energy here tonight is second to none.
 I said to my friend, the Prime Minister before, the last time I saw someone on  the stage here was Bruce Springsteen, and he didn't get the welcome that Prime  Minister Modi has got. Prime Minister Modi is the boss!
 Friends, I saw that myself in India in March, where he hosted me with such  generosity and warmth.
 It was a trip full of unforgettable moments: celebrating Holi in Gujarat,  laying a wreath for the great Mahatma Gandhi in New Delhi, and doing a lap,  something I will never quite forget, of the incredible stadium at Ahmedabad on  Day 1 of the fourth test.
 Everywhere I went, I felt that deep sense of connection between the people of  Australia and the people of India.
 It is a warmth I also felt when I backpacked around India for 5 weeks in 1991.  And I say this, to my friends from the Australian Parliament who are here  today, if you want to understand India, travel by train and video bus. You can  even hitchhike, they're very friendly.
 It is a connection that I feel here tonight. And once again, I feel so grateful  to be a part of it.
 Your million-strong community has contributed so much to this country.
 The people here tonight - your families, your communities - will always be the  lifeblood of the relationship that India and Australia share.
 And tonight, I announce that the new Centre for Australia-India Relations will  be based in Parramatta.
 A place that itself is a testament to the vitality of the Indian-Australian  experience.
 One that after last night has a proud Indian-Australian – Sameer Pandey  – as its Lord Mayor, congratulations.
 Now we want to see more connections – more Australian and Indian students  living and studying in each other's countries, and bringing those experiences  home.
 More business leaders and artists and families sharing your experiences, and  your knowledge, and your ideas.
 Prime Minister Modi and I have just unveiled a plaque for the foundation stone  of the "Little India" gateway in Harris Park. And won't that be good to visit.
 But tonight, as Prime Minister, I want to say thank you.
 You have brought the spirit of the world's biggest democracy to Australia. And you  have helped make our democracy stronger and more inclusive. 
 You've strengthened Australian society, bringing our country the benefits and  riches of such a beautiful and diverse culture.
 And I'm so proud that you have made Australia your home - that you see your  life and your future here.
 You make our nation and our shared communities better. You make Australia  stronger.
 Friends, I want you to give a big Australian welcome to my dear friend, Prime  Minister Narendra Modi.


I rise to contribute to the debate on the Constitutional Alteration Bill.
“We invite you to walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future.” 
That’s the closing line of the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
On Friday, it will be six years since that patient, gracious, generous and optimistic invitation was extended to the people of Australia.
A hand outstretched. A powerful show of faith in the innate decency and fairness of all Australians.
Through this legislation, and this referendum, our Government is giving the people of Australia the opportunity to take up that invitation.
To grasp that hand.
If not now, when?
Already, this gracious call has been answered by faith groups and community organisations.
By local sporting clubs, and our national sporting codes, enriched for decades by the skill and genius of Indigenous superstars.
By universities, by the business sector and the trade union movement.
By every single Premier and Chief Minister across the political spectrum.
And by everyday Australians in their thousands: knocking on doors and making phone calls, explaining how a Yes vote will give Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people greater opportunities – and make us a better and more united and more reconciled country.
Mr Speaker, later this year, all Australians will be asked one question:
“A Proposed Law: to alter the Constitution to recognise the First Peoples of Australia by establishing an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.
Do you approve this proposed alteration?”
Voting Yes will add the following words to our Constitution, as proposed in this legislation:
Chapter IX Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
129 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice
In recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of Australia:

There shall be a body, to be called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice;
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice may make representations to the Parliament and the Executive Government of the Commonwealth on matters relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples;
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to matters relating to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice, including its composition, functions, powers and procedures.

Mr Speaker, this differs, and is the only time there has been a change made from the draft wording that I put forward at the Garma Festival in July of last year.
At that time, when I put it forward, I said that it was a draft and we were open to debate. And I encouraged Members to come forward, and indeed, the public to come forward as well.
Since then, this draft in this legislation improves on the Garma legislation, and shows the fact that we were trying, as much as possible, to embrace as many people as possible going forward with this wording, and we took that on board.
The difference between the Garma words and these words in this legislation is the following:
The Garma words had in recognition but they said of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders rather than Islander Peoples, that's the difference there.
Point one remains exactly the same. In point two, we, together with the Referendum Working Group, agreed to changes to make it clear in the second and third points the primacy of the parliament, to make it even clearer.
So it adds the before Parliament to make it clear it's this Parliament, and of the Commonwealth is added in section two to make it clear that this is what we are talking about.
There are two critical changes in clause three. The first is to change the words that were there. It said:
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to the composition, functions, powers and procedures of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.
That was the Garma wording. There were two critical matters changed in the wording that's before this Parliament now. One is to add the word matters, so it reads with respect to matters relating to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice. 
What that does legally is very much broaden and make it very clear the primacy of the Parliament. And the second is the key word including, its composition functions powers and procedures. Again, making it very clear, making it even tighter, the legal definition.
This form of words is legally sound, and should be the words that goes forward.
Indeed, to quote the advice of the Solicitor-General, advice that I note was called for by those opposite. They now have it, the Australian people have it.
In the words of the Solicitor-General:
[Section] 129 is not just compatible with the system of representative and responsible government prescribed by the Constitution, but an enhancement of that system.
Powerful words by the Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia, backed up people such as former Chief Justice French, former Justice Hayne, the leading legal academic on constitutional matters, Professor Twomey, and so many others.
Mr Speaker, some have suggested that we alter or remove the second clause, specifically, the reference to 'Executive Government'.
And I certainly respect the Member for Berowra and his motives. We share a passion for advancing reconciliation with First Peoples. And he has my utmost respect.
But the argument put forward is not a legal or constitutional one.
They are not saying that the Voice shouldn’t talk to the Executive Government.
They’re just saying that it shouldn’t be included, that part, in the Constitution.
In recognition as well, of course, that the Executive Government under our system, as opposed to systems such as the United States, derives its power from this Parliament. From this Parliament.
Instead, they want to alter the proposal in the hope of gaining more support.
To that I say two things:
Firstly, the changes made to the Garma draft and agreed to by the Referendum Working Group are aimed precisely at reinforcing the primacy of the Parliament.
Secondly, in spite of that, the Liberal Party frontbench already locked themselves into saying No before the committee process, that they called for and they said was important, had even commenced its work.
And the National Party decided to say No before the draft question had even been finalised.
From the outset, instead of seeking ways to agree – they have looked for excuses to disagree.
This is in spite of the fact that in 2019, both political parties went to that election saying that a Voice would be advanced.
That the same thing occurred, of course, going back to then-Prime Minister Howard, who spoke about the need for constitutional recognition all those years ago.
Instead of taking the chance to unify, there are some that have sought only to divide.
Now clearly, there is no form of words that will satisfy some of the leaders of the No campaign.
Indeed, the Leader of the Opposition gave a speech in this Chamber that is simply unworthy of the alternative Prime Minister of this nation.
And therefore, we will not undermine the hard work and the goodwill of so many people across such a broad breadth of the political spectrum, including the former Minister for Indigenous Affairs, who I pay tribute to today.
Minister Ken Wyatt, who worked so hard to bring us to this moment and who was included and was a part of, of course, the Referendum Working Group that came to this united position.
Mr Speaker, alongside the proposed question and amendments, the Referendum Working Group also published a very clear set of design principles, and I want to go through them today, because what they did was explain what Constitutional Recognition through a Voice is and how it will work.

The Voice will give independent advice to the Parliament and Government.

It will be able to make representations to the Parliament and the Executive Government on matters relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
It can do that proactively – as well as to respond to requests from the Parliament or the Government.
And the Parliament could seek its input early in the development of laws and policies.

It will be chosen by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people based on the wishes of local communities. 

Not appointed by the Executive Government or the Parliament, chosen by locals, serving a fixed term, to ensure regular accountability.

The Voice will be representative of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, gender balanced and include youth. 

Members would be chosen from each of the states, territories and the Torres Strait Islands. With specific remote representatives as well as representation for the mainland Torres Strait Islander population.
All of that work, of course, occurred under the former government, under the report commissioned, lead by Marcia Langton and Tom Calma, under the former Coalition government.

It will be empowering, community-led, inclusive, respectful and culturally informed 

The Voice will consult with grassroots communities, with regional bodies to ensure the representations it makes are informed by their views and experience.

It will be accountable and transparent 

Subject to standard governance and reporting requirements.

It will work alongside existing organisations and traditional structures 

Respecting their work and their contribution.

It will not have a program delivery function
It will not have a veto power

Over decisions by this Parliament or by the Government.
These design principles are the product of years of hard work, including by the expert members of the Referendum Working Group.
They also represent years of consultation and dialogue among communities.
The more than one thousand meetings that took place in the lead-up to the First Nations Constitutional Convention that was held at Uluru in 2017.
Thousands of conversations on country, in cities and in regional towns.
And – just as importantly – lifetimes of experience in what works and what doesn’t.
Decades of providing expert advice, authoring reports, leading Royal Commissions, building organisations.
Only for those recommendations to be ignored by governments that believed they knew best.
The choice we have now – as politicians and as citizens – is are we going to repeat those same mistakes.
Should we just keep doing what we have been doing for such a long period of time and expect a different outcome.
Are we going to accept another 100 years of expensive, well-intentioned failure by governments of all persuasions.
Across the board ,we have failed. That is why we have a Closing the Gap report every year, and why tragically, in so many areas, we have not closed the gap.
Are we going to sentence another generation to lives of lesser opportunity - to, as Uluru says, the ‘torment of powerlessness’.
Or are we going to learn from the success of programs that empower Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people:
Justice reinvestment in regional New South Wales – including by the former Perrottet Government that I pay tribute to their support for this process – reducing the crime rate, reducing the re-offending rate and improving educational outcomes.
Indigenous Rangers - proudly working to preserve our beautiful national parks.
Community Health Organisations – consistently delivering better services and getting better outcomes.
The success stories are there to see – but consulting and listening and co-operating shouldn’t be a matter of luck, or a question of who is in government.
It should be available, because consultation and listening is always the best option.
Mr Speaker, it is disappointing but not surprising that the loudest campaigners for a No vote have already been reduced to relying on things that are plainly untrue.
It’s also very telling.
And in his desperation, the Leader of the Opposition is now seeking to amplify this misinformation – and all of its catastrophizing and contradictions.
Shouting about ‘re-racialising the nation’.
Those exhausted clichés of Orwell and ‘identity politics’.
The ongoing conceit that there is apparently no inequality in Australia now, no legacy of discrimination, no disadvantage to address, no gap to close.
That logic suggests there is no need for a Minister for Indigenous Affairs. Job done.
This is the same Leader of the Opposition who says that he boycotted the National Apology because he thought it was just symbolism and wouldn’t make a practical difference.
Now he is leading a campaign against Constitutional Recognition through a Voice, saying that he only wants symbolism - not something that will make a practical difference.
Let’s be clear about this.
There is, of course, a powerful, uplifting symbolism in recognising the First Peoples of Australia in our Constitution.
The fact that we share this island continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture is a source of pride for all of us.
The fact that our national story stretches back 65,000 years and more – is something our nation’s birth certificate should recognise and celebrate.
All this alone is a reason to vote Yes.
But this alone won’t create jobs in communities, or get children through school, or tackle disease and disadvantage.
That’s why Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in every part of our country have repeatedly said that they don’t just want to be celebrated - they want to be heard.
Because the Constitutional Recognition Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are seeking themselves is the opportunity to improve their lives.
In the words of the Uluru Statement from the Heart, so ‘our children will flourish’.
So when No campaigners make these wild claims about what the Voice will concern itself with, I simply say to them – and indeed to all Australians following this debate – for just a moment, put yourself in the shoes of the people calling for this change.
Because for most non-Indigenous Australians, this will make no difference to their lives. But it is an opportunity to make a difference for Indigenous Australians.
Imagine you stand on the other side of the ‘gap’.
Imagine your brothers and sisters are likely to die a decade younger than the general population.
Imagine your daughter is more at risk during childbirth – and your grandchild more at risk of infant mortality.
Imagine your son statistically more likely to go to jail than university.
In 2023, imagine that people in your community twice as likely to commit suicide as anywhere else.
Imagine the rate of disease and disadvantage among your friends and neighbours is far higher than elsewhere.
Imagine all of this – and then imagine that after generations of being sidelined and ignored, you are finally given an opportunity to change it. To be heard.
You are finally given a meaningful say in the programs and policies that you know can work, that you know will make a difference.
Do you think you would spend a single second thinking about public holidays, or parking tickets, or any of the other nonsense the No campaign go on about?
This referendum is about two things: recognition and listening.
Recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our Constitution – and listening to them so we get better outcomes.
It is the means to the end. The end is about closing the gap.
Mr Speaker, in conclusion, Australians will cast their vote in this referendum, sixty years after the Yirrkala Bark petitions were tabled in the old parliament.
56 years after the 1967 referendum.
48 years after the sand poured through Vincent Lingiari’s hands.
32 years after the Barunga Statement, painted and planned by Yunupingu, was hung on the wall of this Parliament.
31 years after the High Court upheld Eddie Mabo’s call for justice and overturned the discriminatory fiction of Terra Nullius.
15 years after we said Sorry to the Stolen Generations.
All of those were opposed at the time.
All of those, we were told would lead to bad outcomes.
All of those are celebrated now.
We hold them up as milestones of national progress.
We see them as testament to the instinctive generosity and optimism and character of the Australian people.
A Yes vote at this Referendum is a chance for all of us to take the next step on the journey of reconciliation.
To be counted and to be heard on the right side of history.
More than that, to be part of a better and more reconciled future nation.
I say, Mr Speaker, if not now, when?
In this chamber we are each of us one vote among 151.
In this referendum we will only be one vote among 18 million.
Because this historic opportunity belongs to the people.
This is a chance for Australians from all faiths and backgrounds and from all walks of life to celebrate the best of our nation, to show the best of ourselves.
To vote Yes for Constitutional Recognition.
To vote Yes for the form that it has been asked for, through a Voice.
To say Yes to the invitation to walk together to a better future.
With humility and hope and optimism, I commend this Bill to the House


I begin by acknowledging the Kaurna people as the custodians of the lands and waters of the Adelaide region, on which we meet today. I pay respect to elders past, present and emerging.
It's an important beginning wherever we are on this great land, whichever Traditional Owners we have the privilege of acknowledging.
That such a courtesy has become part of the rhythm of Australian life is a good thing.
But it is just a beginning.
This year, we can take the next step on our journey together as a nation and add even greater substance to that acknowledgement.
The referendum is our chance to add weight and meaning, cementing our pride in our nation, and making a real and lasting difference in the process. Words are important, but we give them their truest meaning through our actions.
And there are few Australians who have shown that to us more clearly than Lowitja O'Donoghue.
To deliver the oration that bears her name gives rise to a rare sensation: simultaneously pride but also humility.
When I consider who has delivered this oration before, I am very conscious of the considerable company I am in.
Pat Anderson, Michael Kirby, Marcia Langton, Patrick Dodson, and Paul Keating, amongst others.
And last year, my dear friend Linda Burney, who came here just 10 days after the federal election, on the eve of being sworn in as the new Minister for Indigenous Australians – the first Indigenous woman to hold that position.
It was an election that doubled the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the Labor caucus of the Government.
Each of the Lowitja O'Donoghue orators is a remarkable Australian whose contribution to the life of our nation has made our country a better one.
My thoughts right now are particularly with my dear friend and father of reconciliation, Senator Patrick Dodson.
After a lifetime of devoting himself to others, he's spending some time taking care of himself.
I'd like to express my gratitude to everyone who has made today possible: Reconciliation SA, The University of Adelaide, Flinders University, the Lowitja Institute – and the Lowitja O'Donoghue Foundation which was established last year on Lowitja's 90th birthday to honour her legacy and a lifetime of work.
And, of course, our host. It is only fitting that we have been brought together by the foundation named for Don Dunstan – a man of courage and vision who dared to make a difference.
We are here to honour one of the most extraordinary leaders our country has known.
Lowitja O'Donoghue.
Some see her as the rock that stands firm in the storm, sometimes even staring down the storm.
But I see her as one of the great rocks around which the river of our history has gently bent, persuaded to flow along a better course.
As our nation prepares to make a profound choice, who better to honour than the very woman who so powerfully embodies the spirit of the referendum that shows us the success of the next one is indeed possible.
That 1967 referendum was a crucial turning point in the Australian story.
It was a unifying moment, one that appealed to people's decency.
Pitched by Prime Minister Harold Holt as a sign of our growing maturity, it was a campaign that truly came to life in the community.
And amid the faces of Aboriginal children adorning the posters were slogans of powerful simplicity. Among them: "Right wrongs, write yes."
One of the babies on the posters was Gumbayngirr woman Janelle Marshall-Buchanan, who only became aware of her role when her grandmother gave her a lovingly preserved clipping from a newspaper. As she put it:
"I'm proud of what my face has done for our people."
There's a fitting symmetry to the fact that her photo was taken by Jerry Rind, a Czechoslovakian Jew who fled his homeland during World War II and spent time in an Italian refugee camp before making a fresh start in Australia.
Along the way, he got swept up in the Aboriginal Rights movement.
He'd found a brighter future for himself. And he wanted the same for the people who had been here for so many millennia.
And at the heart of it all was Lowitja, driven by her faith in the Australian people and their instinct for a fair go.
Never has there been a referendum like it, and Lowitja made sure she was in Canberra for the result. She hitchhiked from Adelaide and slept on a friend's floor.
Nearly 91 per cent of Australians of voting age took up that invitation to say yes.
It was about what was right. That's what resonated within us then. That's what precisely drives us still.
As Lowitja warned, the danger of the result is that it let us collectively pat ourselves on the back, content with the fiction that the journey was done, and equality had been achieved.
Yet, as she also reflects, the 1967 referendum was powerfully symbolic. It was a moment of national idealism.
In her words:
"I do not disparage the symbolic ... As the 1967 referendum shows: the larger gestures may have to underpin other forms of progress."
But as we look back, let's look ahead to something even brighter. In 1967, 90 per cent of Australians voted to remove a harmful, discriminatory relic.
In 2023, our generation can go one better.
Instead of removing a provision that no longer speaks for who we are, we can make a positive change that speaks for the future that we seek to build together.
This can be a moment of Australian unity.
An extraordinary opportunity for every Australian to be counted and heard – to own this change and be proud of it, and truly live the spirit of the fair go.
After the tumult of colonisation, we have lived through a silence, a long tide of denial gnawing away at the shores of our spirit.
And an entire people have been kept so long in the margins, surviving against the odds, surviving even against misguided good intentions.
Lowitja herself has spoken of the gratitude she was expected to show as a child for being removed from her family to be raised by missionaries.
We have to come to grips with the past because a country that does not acknowledge the full truth of its history is burdened by its unspoken weight.
But we learn. We acknowledge. And bit by bit, as we each admit each truth into our midst like a shaft of light, we are easing that burden.
Moments of truth that include the Freedom Rides, the 1967 referendum, Mabo, Wik, the Redfern Speech, the Apology to the Stolen Generations and the red sand that was captured in a photograph on that brightest of days, forever flowing from Gough Whitlam's hand into Vincent Lingiari's.
None stands as an answer in itself, but each step forward sees us narrowing the distance between reality and our perception of ourselves – and the people that we aspire to be.
We've always been at our best when we've looked to the future with excitement and hope – that's when we make progress.
And we are saying not just to each other but to the world that we are a mature nation coming to terms with our history, assured of our values, and shaping our own destiny.
We sometimes speak of ourselves as a young nation, but the truth is we are one of the world's oldest democracies.
Our continent is home to the world's oldest continuing culture, which we are at last coming to recognise as the great source of pride that it must be.
Even from a geological perspective, Australia is home to the oldest continental crust on Earth, with parts of Western Australia's Gascoyne region clocking in at 4.4 billion years old.
So perhaps it's only fitting that we are not a nation given to acting in haste.
Indeed, Pat Dodson spoke of a referendum when he gave this oration nearly a decade ago.
And that was already seven years after the then Prime Minister John Howard promised a referendum before the 2007 election on recognising Indigenous Australians in our Constitution.
Last Friday, it was the sixth anniversary of the Uluru Statement from the Heart, which emerged from the First Nations National Constitutional Convention, whose delegates were all selected by their communities.
If you want to reach back a little further, it is nine decades since William Cooper – that great Yorta Yorta leader and trade unionist – began drawing up the petition that constituted the first call for something akin to a Voice to Parliament.
To those who keep saying now isn't the time, I ask: If not now, when?
This hasn't been rushed into. There have been no shortcuts. Nor is this something, contrary to some of the rhetoric I hear, that began in Canberra.
This has been a grassroots movement, the culmination of years of discussion, consultation and patient, hard work by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
And what shines so brightly at the very core of its gracious request is the desire to bring us all closer together as a people reconciled – and to lift our great nation even higher.
This will be about recognition of this continent's first people in the nation's birth certificate, providing a people what Marcia Langton and others have termed "a rightful place in the nation".
And the mechanism through which they have so patiently asked for that recognition is the Voice to Parliament, wrapped in the protection of the Constitution.
The Voice won't be a funding body. It won't run programs. It won't have a power of veto.
We know it from the Solicitor-General's opinion, we know it former High Court judges. We know it from leading barristers. And we know it from constitutional academics, including Anne Twomey and George Williams.
It will be about consultation, an ongoing conversation. Fundamentally, it will be about listening.
A body that will be representative of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, and chosen by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
A body made up of representatives from every state and every territory.
Representatives from towns and remote communities and everywhere between.
Indigenous Australians who will provide advice – and that's what it will be, advice – on matters that affect them.
And because of it, governments will be more strongly equipped to make better decisions – co-ordinated, streamlined decisions – leading to better outcomes.
As the Solicitor General said in his advice on the words now before the Parliament, it will enhance our system of representative government.
When it's been tried on a smaller scale, it's clear that when decisions are made after listening to the people on the ground, the results are positive.
Look at the local Aboriginal, community-controlled medical services extending life expectancy, and improving the experience of people having to undergo dialysis or treatment for rheumatic heart disease.
Look at the Indigenous Ranger Programs that have tapped into a great well of wisdom, cutting feral animal numbers and boosting protection for our unique natural environment by employing local people to work on country.
And look at justice reinvestment programs that are reducing incarceration rates. If you want to see that in action, look at Bourke, where the community-led Maranguka Project is delivering results, including significant reductions in domestic violence, re-offending and juvenile charges, along with improved school retention.
Programs like these save money. The difference they make to people's lives, though, is beyond measure.
In Port Adelaide, work is underway through Tiraapendi Wodli, which means "protecting home" in Kaurna.
That's what is needed. Projects tailored to local needs and developed in partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Better outcomes. Good advice that, in the simplest analysis, lets us do things better.
We aspire to reach high for the symbolic ideal. But the ideal lacks meaning unless we commit to the concrete practical actions that will actually improve people's lives. This referendum gives us the tools to do both.
A change that inspires hope about a better future, and then has the means to make that better future real, substantive, and tangible.
Constitutional recognition is the "what". The Voice to Parliament and government is the "how".
Amid the fog of fiction and misunderstanding these past few months, it's important to spell it out again.
This isn't about politics. This isn't about politicians.
This is about people.
People striving to make themselves heard across our great nation.
In the regions and beyond in the remotest corners of our vast and beautiful continent.
All those voices rising across Australia like the headwaters of a thousand creeks and rivers joining into a mighty and wonderful current that will converge around each one of us as we step into the booth on referendum day.
Amid it all, there's another echo of 1967 – the Voice to Parliament is supported by well over 80 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
We get chances for change at regular intervals. A federal election every three years, a state or territory election every four.
But this referendum is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
We are fortunate to be here in this moment in history, where we have within our hands the chance to make a positive change that will last for generations.
A change that will outlast us.
An enhancement of our democracy and, as Noel Pearson puts it, an act of faith and love.
An act that, for most of us, will have no material effect on our day-to-day lives – except, crucially, how we feel about ourselves – and how we see ourselves as Australians.
For some, though, it stands to lift up their very lives.
We will vote yes because the only alternative available to us is more of the same. The Closing the Gap report makes clear that more of the same is simply unacceptable.
It falls each year like the harshest drumbeat.
Gaps in education, in employment and education opportunities, in rates of family violence and incarceration, and amid it all, the blunt truth of a 10-year difference in average life expectancy.
As the old saying goes, if ain't broke don't fix it.
Well, it is broken.
The status quo is a chasm between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia. And that is something that surely, in 2023, we cannot settle for.
We've given it a solid go for more than 120 years, a political holding pattern in which, as Tom Calma put it:
"Policies are too often made for First Nations people, rather than with us."
None of these are the fault of one government – this is something that lies at the feet of governments of all political persuasions.
The problems are intergenerational, but what is now so tantalisingly within our reach is the chance for an intergenerational solution.
None of us has anything to lose. But we have something wonderful and so very real to gain.
And in the end, it will lift all of us.
After the 1967 referendum, we woke up as a better nation. Not because anyone believed that the referendum was going to magically solve every problem, but because we had – together as a nation – done what was right.
And because we had looked to the future – in hope, in fairness, and with an abiding faith in our better selves.
Once again, we have a chance to act not just with our heads, but with our hearts as well in unison.
Who do we want to be when we wake up the morning after this referendum?
I believe we will rise with a stronger sense of ourselves.
A great nation that has dared to become even greater – not just to ourselves but to the world.
And I firmly believe that we will. Not because I am innately an optimist, but because of who we have shown ourselves to be.
That instinct for fairness – the great Australian instinct for the fair go that defines us – remains fundamental to our identity.
Yes, there are scare campaigns. But what those campaigns have in common is that they underestimate Australians so radically.
Claims have been made that the Voice to Parliament could even have an effect on parking tickets.
It's only a matter of time before they tell us that the Voice will fade the curtains.
And, gallingly, we have No case proponents saying this will put race in the Constitution – knowing full well, I would hope, that race has been in the Constitution since Federation – including in section 51(26), "the race power", which allows the Parliament to make special laws based on race.
These arguments are also galling because, unlike some existing provisions in the Constitution, the Voice amendment does not refer to race at all.
As the text of the amendment makes clear, Australians will be asked to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of Australia – not as a race.
And this is why former Chief Justice of the High Court Robert French welcomed the Voice amendment as providing, to quote him, "a significant shift away from the existing race based legislative power that the Commonwealth has with respect to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people".
This great lie will sit at the centre of the No campaign and needs to be called out.
Australians won't succumb to their appeals to fear and their even more ludicrous invitations to jump at our own shadows.
That's because Australians have a healthy scepticism of doomsayers, a scepticism kept in good health by memories of all the predictions offered by the Chicken Littles of the past.
Remember how the sky was going to fall in after the Apology?
Please enjoy the sky as you head back out today. It's still safely in place, as rainy as it is.
If the sky's clear tonight, you could look up and find the Southern Cross – and, if you're far enough from streetlights or in the wonderful remote parts of Australia, the Dark Emu.
These two cosmic formations are so central to our shared story.
They touch each other in the sky, and as the Milky Way gently wheels above us, the Southern Cross looks as though it's being supported by the Emu, or vice versa.
Every night, we are joined.
But there's another story in that.
Turn your eyes to the five stars of the Southern Cross and find the one that twinkles most softly.
It is the one star of the Southern Cross that isn't on New Zealand's flag, but is crucial on ours.
Several years ago, the International Astronomers Union formally recognised that star as Ginan, the name given to it by the Wardaman people in the Northern Territory.
To the Wardaman, it represents a red dilly bag filled with special songs of knowledge.
How many navigators over how many centuries have used Ginan to find their way, across the land, across the sea, and across time through the endless dance of the seasons.
We are ready to let the wisdom of our Indigenous leaders guide us once more.
I keep a copy of the Uluru Statement from the Heart on the wall of my office in Parliament House. What a masterpiece of spare eloquence it is.
As Premier Malinauskas said, if you haven't looked at it please do. It is quite extraordinatry.
Something that my friend and mentor Tom Uren taught me through the example of his own extraordinary life was that there can be such strength in gentleness, and that one doesn't preclude the other.
When I look up at those words on my wall, that is what I see. Such gentleness, yet such power.
I want to turn once again to the invitation that it extends to every single Australian in love and grace and patience. Specifically these lines:
"In 1967 we were counted, in 2017 we seek to be heard. We leave base camp and start our trek across this vast country. We invite you to walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future."
Together.
That is not rhetoric. That is an embrace.
It's an embrace that we've seen taken up across political lines, by every state and territory government, by every major political party.
We've seen politicians like Julian Leeser, Bridget Archer and Andrew Gee taking a stand on principle over the Voice. My colleague, the Liberal Premier of Tasmania supports it.
And I would like to again express my gratitude to Ken Wyatt, the former Minister, for all that he did during his time as the first Indigenous Minister for Indigenous Australians.
We've seen the embrace taken up in city and country.
Across civil society.
Across the business and working world, from BHP and Rio Tinto to Qantas to NAB. From the ACTU to the Business Council of Australia. From Deloitte and KPMG to the Law Council of Australia. The list goes on.
Across the spectrum of faith, including the Anglican Church of Australia, the Executive Council of Australian Jewry, the Australian National Imams Council, the Hindu Council of Australia, the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, and the National Sikh Council of Australia.
Across the sporting world, just like what occurred in 1967, including the AFL, the NRL, the Australian Olympic Committee, Netball Australia, Football Australia and Rugby Australia.
In the words of Rugby Australia:
"The Voice is not about division. Its about union."
It appeals to our best selves.
There is no step that can, on its own, get us to our destination. We keep taking steps.
And we keep walking.
We've lost some of the giants who urged us on in that journey, but we keep going.
Recently, we mourned the passing of the great Yunupingu. Even in grief, it was impossible not to be lifted by the power of his words:
"At Uluru we started a fire, a fire we hope burns bright for rAustralia."
At Garma last year, after I announced the details of the referendum, he asked me, "Are you serious this time? Because we have been let down so many times before." I replied: "Yes, we're going to do it."
Before he took his final leave of us to go walk in another place, I told him I was confident we would get there. And this brought him some comfort, his family tell me, in his final days.
So let's get out there and get this done. Let's make this change.
The passage of the Constitution Alteration Bill will be the final parliamentary step needed to establish the referendum. And then this extraordinary journey that began far from parliament as a grassroots movement will return to the people.
And it will be the people who decide.
One person, one vote.
So go talk with people.
The success of this referendum will depend on millions of conversations, reassuring Australians of all backgrounds and faiths and beliefs.
As Lowitja O'Donoghue knows, as the spirit of '67 shows, it's going to come down to shoeleather and door knocking and phone calls and the hard yards of mobilising and organising and patiently explaining the transformational opportunity that we have.
Now here we are on the cusp of the moment Lowitja envisioned so long ago when she said this to us:
"Australia has an opportunity, rarely given twice, to redefine itself as a nation."
So let us not content ourselves with modest change. Let us not fill our hearts with the empty warmth of the merely symbolic.
Let us write the beginning of a better chapter, a chapter in which we turn hope into reality. A reality driven by the removal, as the Uluru Statement says, of the "torment of powerlessness".
A reality in which the Uluru Statement's invitation to "walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future" is, at last, accepted.
Together we can do just that. And together we will.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we met. I pay my respect to their Elders past, present, and emerging.
I note from Louise's comments that great art makes you feel full of possibilities. We're going to give Australians a possibility to change the country for the better in the last quarter by voting Yes in the referendum that will be coming up.
Of all the gifts John Olsen gave us, the greatest was persuading us to see Australia with fresh eyes. To behold this landscape – in all its familiarity and extraordinary antiquity – and see it in a new light.
John summed it up himself in 2016 at the opening of a retrospective on a career that, for most of us, was already in its maturity by the time we were born. And I quote:
"We've got the richness of emptiness which for some reason was known as the dead heart. That's a lie. That's not true. It's teeming with life. And this kind of thing is an exciting thing. To be an Australian artist is to be an explorer." 
Carrying within him the echoes of this continent's millennia of art, John and his mind's eye explored from the air, but even from the greatest altitudes he could still peer below the surface and find the truth that lay beneath the literal.
He lifted himself even higher and delved ever deeper, an explorer whose maps were traced with music and philosophy and poetry. And what a wonderful send off today this is.
And this – all of this – just kept feeding John's inner richness to the point where it overflowed, pouring through his fingertips and the brush that was, in itself, such a perfect, intimate extension of the man.
By the time he was done, that once blank stretch of canvas burst with life and emotion, the familiar exploded and reassembled into something remarkable in its newness.
He created art during the highs; if someone knew how to ride the crests of life's happiness, it was John Olsen. And then, during those periods when the light grew dimmer, he still went in search of his spark.
What also shone brightly with him was his mentorship of young artists.
With a generosity that was every bit as bountiful as his charisma, John set about building a future that would extend far beyond even his long and remarkable life – a future for Australian art through the young artists striving to find their way.
The education John gave went far beyond the intricacies of technique, helping them build a cultural hinterland for themselves. John understood that art is never just the picture, and that it needs rich soil to feed its roots.
And how he kept replenishing it, like a grand old tree rising above the forest canopy, bestowing its leaves on the earth below in a never ending cascade of colour.
Now the tree has fallen.
John Olsen leaves a space but, true to form, he saw to it that it would be filled with colour and a light as bright as that twinkle in his eye.
We mourn an extraordinary Australian, an Australian who has lifted up this nation. This poet of the brush. But more than anything, we celebrate him, and we hold on to the gift he gave us.
May John Olsen rest in peace.


I’m delighted to be back in Singapore and here for my first visit as Prime Minister of Australia.
I’m grateful to Acting Prime Minister Wong for a very positive and productive Leaders’ Meeting this morning. And I wish my friend Prime Minister Lee a speedy recovery.
And I’m deeply honoured that the International Institute for Strategic Studies has invited me to deliver the keynote address at this year’s Shangri-La Dialogue.
For two decades, this highly-respected forum has brought together experts in both defence and diplomacy.
Longstanding recognition that building peace, security and stability depend on both strategic capability and diplomatic capacity, reinforcing each other.
And by bringing together leaders and analysts from across the Indo-Pacific, ASEAN and founding dialogue partners such as Australia.
This gathering emphasises the value of frank and constructive discussion, as well as making it clear that preserving peace and security is not a task any one of us can shoulder alone.
Because just as the prosperity of our region has always been driven by shared opportunity - the stability of our region can only be secured through collective responsibility.
That emphasis on both agreement and action, co-operation and capacity, has always been at the core of this forum – and indeed is at the heart of ASEAN itself.
And even as the threats and challenges facing our nations have evolved and multiplied, we have held to the common understanding that we achieve far more together than we do alone.
In the context of the current strategic environment, this has never been more important.
We sometimes hear our region described as a potential ‘theatre’ for conflict.
As if this is merely a backdrop, a location, an arena for the ambitions of others.
Such a view is entirely – and dangerously - wrong.
Not only does such a characterisation dismiss the agency and ambition of a majority of the world’s population, and the engine room of the global economy.
It also presents the future of this region as somehow a foregone conclusion.
We’ve seen the flaw in that kind of thinking in the past.
The benign assumption post-Cold War that the spread of globalisation, free trade, and new technologies would create a more open, more stable world.
Some talked about ‘the end of history’, the beginning of a new world order, a unipolar era.
There was a strand of complacency underpinning that.
Meaning governments didn’t always thoroughly examine, or properly explain the benefits of trade agreements to people, as if the virtues of open economies were self-evident.
And we didn’t always pay sufficient attention to the maintenance and effectiveness of multilateral institutions and global rules.
The years that followed provided a sharp correction.

The rise of nativism and isolationism
A land war in Europe
And the biggest conventional military build-up since the Second World War, in our own region.

All proof that peace, prosperity and stability can never be taken for granted.
But the lesson we draw from this must not be that trade and dialogue and rules and people-to-people connections don’t support regional and global security.
That would only mean being wrong a second time, but in a different way.
To move from imagining conflict is impossible to assuming war is inevitable, is just as harmful to our shared goals.
The fate of our region is not pre-ordained. It never was. It never is.
What we do here, what we decide here, matters – for us and the world. And it always will.
I can assure you, that when Australia looks north, we don’t see a void for others to impose their will.
We see growing and modernising economies.
The fastest growing region of the world in human history.
We see the drivers of the global transition to Net Zero.
And we see a community of nations whose actions and decisions are essential to building prosperity and preserving peace in the Indo-Pacific.
Peace is not a gift and it’s never a given.
It’s not the default setting of any part of the world.
It has to be built, pursued, defended and upheld.
And when nations such as ours choose to promote peace, we are not opting-out from the big questions of security and stability.
We are not choosing the smooth ride, or the passive course.
We are committing to a whole-of-nation effort.
That’s my Government’s focus in Australia.
Investing in our capability and investing in our relationships.
Strengthening our deterrence and our diplomacy.
And bringing both to our presence in this region.
Directing both to the ongoing task of maintaining an environment that enables economic competition and guards against strategic conflict.
A region and a world where two countries can disagree – even very firmly – without that disagreement ending in disaster.
Central to this, is the word of the moment: ‘guardrails’.
Now, I’m a former Minister for Infrastructure, so I confess that when I hear guardrails, my mind goes straight to the safety barriers on the side of major roads.
But that’s actually not a bad way of thinking about what is being proposed.
Because this isn’t about a policy of containment, it’s not a question of placing obstacles in the way of any nation’s progress or their potential.
This is a matter of simple, practical structures to prevent a worst-case scenario.
And the essential precondition for this is, of course, dialogue.
Australia strongly supports renewed efforts from President Biden’s administration to establish reliable and open channels of communication between the governments of the United States of America and the People’s Republic of China.
I want to recognise the very important speech Prime Minister Lee gave in China recently on this subject, where he said this:
“Big powers have a heavy responsibility to maintain stable and workable relations with one another.”
Because the alternative, the silence of the diplomatic deep freeze, only breeds suspicion, only makes it easier for nations to attribute motive to misunderstanding, to assume the worst of one another.
If you don’t have the pressure valve of dialogue, if you don’t have the capacity – at a decision-making level – to pick up the phone, to seek some clarity or provide some context, then there is always a much greater risk of assumptions spilling over into irretrievable action and reaction.
The consequences of such a breakdown – whether in the Taiwan Strait or elsewhere - would not be confined to the big powers or the site of their conflict, they would be devastating for the world.
That’s why as leaders in this region – and as citizens of it – we should be doing everything we can to support the building of that first and most fundamental guardrail.
In Australia, our Government has put dialogue at the heart of our efforts to stabilise our relationship with China.
We’re not naïve about this process, or its limitations.
We recognise there are fundamental differences in our two nations’ systems of government, our values and our worldviews.
But we begin from the principle that whatever the issue, whether we agree or disagree, it is always better and always more effective if we deal direct.
It is also an acknowledgement of our common interests.
We have advocated strongly for the removal of any impediments to our trade.
Not just because Australian producers benefit from being able to export our high quality products and resources to our largest trading partner.
But because China, plainly, benefits from being able to import them. It is a win-win.
And that’s true on a broader level.
China’s extraordinary economic transformation has benefited not only its own population, it has benefited our entire region.
Importantly, it is also due to our entire region.
It’s been made possible by a regional architecture that facilitates fair trade, encourages the sharing of knowledge, spurs innovation and builds people-to-people connections through education and tourism and business and orderly migration.
American leadership has been an indispensable element in this, but we have all played our part, creating a prevailing climate of peace and stability – secured by sovereignty.
This is where guardrails are absolutely necessary – while not being entirely sufficient.
Because while we welcome any safeguard against a crash - there must also be a set of rules that serve all of us who use the road.
This has to go beyond a catalogue of principles, or a set of ideals.
It must be adaptable for unforeseen challenges, like a pandemic.
And it must be workable and meaningful, not just to those of you here practised in the artful formulations of statecraft, but to the citizens we serve.
Because the success and survival of the rules-based order depends on it both being fair - and being seen as fair.
On working - and being seen to work.
Upholding sovereignty, not just for the biggest powers, or the loudest voices – but for every nation.
Sovereignty that confers on every nation the right to determine its own destiny.
To enjoy freedom of action and policy independence.
The right to make our own choices, to speak for ourselves and our interests, free of external pressure or duress.
To pursue opportunities for our people without fear of coercion or retribution.
To have confidence in the integrity of our borders – including our maritime zones - and control of our own resources.
If this breaks down, if one nation imagines itself too big for the rules, or too powerful to be held to the standards that the rest of us respect then our region’s strategic stability is undermined and our individual national sovereignty is eroded.
That’s why, for example, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea matters to all of us in this region.
Its role is not simply to adjudicate on an incident-by-incident basis. It is to guarantee the security of our communications and our maritime trade and travel, essential for our shared prosperity.
The same is true for the rules which govern global trade, where we need to make sure that the deals we arrive at deliver greater opportunity for our people and industries and economies.
Because delivering stronger economic stability and facilitating closer exchange between our businesses and educational institutions and citizens is critical to building security in the region.
For as long as Australia has made our own foreign policy, our alliance with the United States has been central to it.
Ours has always been a bond of shared values and it remains a partnership of shared strategic interest – a common determination to preserve stability, prosperity and peace.
Australia has also helped to build the regional architecture that has grown to be so important for stability in our region, including recognising the centrality of ASEAN.
Of course, Australia has also always been a strong supporter of multilateral institutions and a constructive contributor to them.
A great Australian, Doc Evatt, played an instrumental role as an advocate for the formation of the United Nations and was a driving force in the drafting and proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
For Evatt and Australia this was a matter of principle and practicality - because he didn’t want the future entrusted to a ‘great power peace’ alone.
He wanted middle powers and smaller nations to have a seat at the table and to be able to make a contribution to their collective security.
The wisdom of that approach endures.
Of course, as I said before, bilateral dialogue is vital.
But when relations are strained, bilateral talks can sometimes be reduced to a list of topics to avoid, or be seen and judged through the prism of a single issue to be solved.
Whereas multilateral forums – the regional and the global – provide a new perspective, placing points of tension in the broader context, where they belong.
They safeguard our capacity to argue constructively and disagree respectfully.
Events such as this are part of the process as well.
Better still, they remind us of what we can achieve when we agree.
The challenges we can overcome if we work together - from climate change to the threat of nuclear weapons.
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation is a cause I’ve been passionate about since I was a university student. It’s one of the issues that drew me to a life in politics.
And I wanted to take this opportunity to acknowledge this region’s longstanding commitment to nuclear disarmament.
From the creation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in the 1970s, through to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and the Bangkok Treaty in the 1990s, the citizens of this region have shown an unflinching commitment to preventing the spread of these destructive, inhumane and indiscriminate weapons.
Recognising – from the outset - that this vital process could not be safely left to the Cold War mindset, with nations operating as counterbalancing pairs. It depended on multilateral rule making.
Of course, we know this is not a danger that belongs only to history.
North Korea’s extraordinarily reckless launch of ballistic missiles and Russia’s reprehensible threats to use nuclear force underscore the ongoing necessity of co-operative action and global rules to drive disarmament.
Multilateral forums also remind us of the opportunities we can grasp if we co-operate - in everything from sustainable development to the global shift to clean energy.
This understanding is at the heart of Australia’s Comprehensive Strategic Partnership with ASEAN, where we are seeking to provide practical support for the Outlook on the Indo-Pacific.
Because while our existing trade agreements play an important role – we recognise we need to do more here in the region.
That’s why my Government appointed Australia’s first Special Envoy for Southeast Asia, Nicholas Moore, who is driving Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040.
The strategy will identify new opportunities to strengthen our shared economic future. It will build on Australia’s existing contribution to the key needs of Southeast Asian countries, particularly energy security, food security, and infrastructure investment.
It’s that same spirit of practical partnership that drives our engagement with the Pacific Islands Forum.
Working with our partners, our equals, our neighbours and our family, on the basis of respect.
And whether it is Australia’s engagement in the Pacific.

Our support for ASEAN and the East Asia Summit.
Our founding pride in APEC.
Our faith in the leadership of the G20.

None of this is altered or supplanted by our participation in the revitalised Quad, or indeed our new AUKUS agreement.
Before I stood alongside President Biden and Prime Minister Sunak to announce Australia’s pathway to acquiring conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered submarines, I ensured that my government spoke with every ASEAN and Pacific partner and many other nations.
More than 60 phone calls, being open and transparent with the region about our intentions.
Being clear with the region and the world that Australia remains strongly committed to our obligations under the NPT and the Treaty of Rarotonga.
And as well, to co-operating with the International Atomic Energy Agency to set the highest standards for any country acquiring this capability.
More broadly, I think my friend President Widodo made a really valuable point in the course of talking about the goal of making the region a stable and peaceful one, when he said that the Quad and AUKUS should work as:
“Partners and not competitors.”
Partners, not competitors.
That’s very much Australia’s view – and it is precisely our approach.
The submarines we are acquiring - the single biggest leap in Australia’s defence capability in our history – reflect our determination to live up to those expectations.
To be a stronger partner and a more effective contributor to stability in our region.
Multilateral institutions are essential to writing the rules and keeping them relevant.
But reinforcing the rules – and upholding them - depends on our capability as well.
Because Australia was not just one of the first countries to work on creating the United Nations.
We were also part of the first UN peacekeeping mission, supporting Indonesian independence.
Backing our words with our deeds.
Our Government’s investments in new capability and technology and personnel are – unapologetically – about our national defence and our national sovereignty.
But they are also an investment in regional stability, strengthening our capacity to contribute to the collective security of the Indo-Pacific.
From shared peacekeeping missions such as the regional assistance mission in Solomon Islands, to providing essential support in times of humanitarian and environmental disaster, most recently in Vanuatu.
Australia is determined to deepen this co-operation with more shared exercises, building on the recent success of Talisman Sabre and our flagship regional engagement activity Indo-Pacific Endeavour.
In boosting our nation’s defence capability, Australia’s goal is not to prepare for war but to prevent it - through deterrence and reassurance and building resilience in the region.
Doing our part to fulfil the shared responsibility all of us have to preserve peace and security.
And making it crystal clear that when it comes to any unilateral attempt to change the status quo by force: be it in Taiwan, the South China Sea, the East China Sea or elsewhere, the risk of conflict will always far outweigh any potential reward.
Can I conclude by saying that before Shangri-La was an important dialogue or the name of a hotel, it was an old story.
The tale of a remote mountain paradise, where time passed more slowly, safely cut-off from the cares of the world.
Yet for us, as leaders and thinkers and decision-makers, Shangri-La is about dealing with uncertain, uneven, fast-moving complexity.
Even in the life of this forum, we see how quickly the ground can shift.
When this dialogue first convened, it was in the shadow of the September 11 attacks and on the threshold of new wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
When Kevin Rudd became the first Australian Prime Minister to address this forum in 2009, he said the question at the forefront of every nation’s mind was the Global Financial Crisis.
He also cautioned against ‘strategic drift’ and emphasised the need for ‘robust structures’ in a ‘dynamic environment’.
We could see the wisdom of that by the time Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull spoke here in 2017, warning of fighters in Syria and Iraq seeking to return to this region, and the need for revitalised co-operation against the emerging threat of cybercrime.
We can never know for sure the timing or indeed the nature of the next shock our region will face.
The test for all of us is not predicting when that challenge will arise – it’s how we respond when it does.
Recognising our collective agency and our shared responsibility.
Understanding that there is no security to be found in isolation.
No growth or prosperity to be gained from closing ourselves off from the world.
No stability without respect for sovereignty.
No lasting peace without engaging with each other – and working together.
That’s why Australia is invested and engaged and committed to Asia and the Indo-Pacific.
Australia is engaged.
Not as a spectator or a commentator.
Not calling for others to act, while we stand and watch.
Not urging nations down a path we are not prepared to walk ourselves.
Australia is engaged as a champion for peace and prosperity in the region and the world.
And as a constructive and committed contributor to the solutions to the challenges that all of us will face in the years ahead.
Investing in our capability and investing in our relationships.
Working to shape the future, not waiting for the future to shape us.


It’s great to be here in Hanoi, and what a day it’s been a visit to RMIT campus to launch their new Hanoi Industry and Innovation Hub, a pit-stop for beers and banh mi – to showcase Australian barley and wheat, and now here to highlight the incredible work of the business community.
I’m proud to visit Vietnam during our 50th anniversary of diplomatic relations.
It was the foresight of one of my predecessors – Gough Whitlam – that started us on this journey.
Fifty years on, that foresight has translated into a relationship underpinned by respect and trust.
No one knows this better than the business community – all of you here today.
The mutual trust we have today can be traced back to pioneering Australian companies — big names like ANZ, Allens and RMIT — that helped link Vietnam to the world.
Today, we have a swathe of Australian education institutions — Monash, Swinburne, UTS, WSU, and, of course, RMIT — investing in the education of Vietnam’s next generation of students.
We have agricultural innovators, such as Orlar, and Mavin Group, investing across the country, including in the Mekong Delta, scaling up their Vietnam investments.
And then there are the Australian manufacturing heavy-hitters, like Bluescope, building the products the world wants and needs.
Many leaders in our region recognised long ago the benefits of working together.
They understood that joining forces — promoting easier trade and investment in Southeast Asia — would benefit all of us.
And Vietnam’s journey to an economic powerhouse is a testament to that foresight.
Today, Vietnam is one of the fastest growing countries in the region.
Its economic dynamism is a remarkable achievement.
Australia wants to continue to be a partner with Vietnam as it grows.
Australian expertise — in education and skills, agriculture technology, resilience and renewable energy — can make a huge contribution.
In fact, to eat a Vietnamese banh mi — as I did just this afternoon — knowing the baguette is made from Australian wheat, tells you a lot about the complementarity of our economies.
Our two-way trade reached more than $22&nbsp;billion last financial year — up 40 per cent from the year before.
But I know there’s room to do more.
We see trade diversification as a mutually important – and beneficial – priority.
Our Enhanced Economic Engagement Strategy hopes to enrich our natural partnership.
The Strategy sets two goals: to become top-10 trading partners, and to double two-way investment.
Achieving them will depend on us working with you and innovators like you, on both sides of the commercial relationship.
My job is to champion strong, trusted trading relationships, wherever I can.
To make clear that we pursue trade not simply for the sake of it, but for the flow-on benefits for our workforces, our entrepreneurs and our people.
So it’s a pleasure to have the chance to do that today.
And to say a direct thank you to the businesses – Australian and Vietnamese – that are the backbone of the warm and productive friendship Vietnam and Australia share.
I wish you all the best.
Thank you.


Good afternoon, everyone.
I’m delighted to be here with you in Hanoi to celebrate the continuing growth of RMIT Vietnam and to celebrate the education links that are such a central part of the Australia-Vietnam relationship.
I am pleased to be joined by Professor Alec Cameron, RMIT Vice-Chancellor, who has travelled from Australia to join his team on this occasion. And I’m especially pleased to be joined by Professor Claire Macken, Pro-Vice-Chancellor of RMIT Vietnam, who is the face of RMIT in this country.
I’ve just arrived in Hanoi, and am marvelling at the sheer pace of life.
The energy on the streets is unmistakeable.
The scale and pace of economic development is remarkable.
And so it makes sense that RMIT is launching its Industry and Innovation Hub here.
Because industry and innovation thrives on this kind of energy.
The kind of energy that you can feel around you.
That inspires.
The kind of energy that drives you to excel.
Which is exactly what Vietnam is doing, as it continues to grow as an economic power in the region.
My government in Australia is ambitious for our education sector – to build on our reputation as being cutting edge, innovative, and globally competitive.
I see that drive reflected here too.
Australia and Vietnam share a commitment to excellence in education – and this is the natural foundation for this partnership.
Our 50 years of diplomatic relation have been defined by shared efforts that bring mutual benefits and support both of our countries’ economic growth and resilience.
And there’s no greater economic investment — no greater investment in our people, and their futures — than education.&nbsp;
Education is the biggest and most powerful weapon we have against disadvantage.
It opens the doors of possibility.
Education lifts us up - not just as individuals but it lifts our countries and our economies too.
And so I’m pleased that, today, we’re celebrating the evolution of an education partnership between our nations that began more than two decades ago.
When RMIT established Vietnam’s first foreign-owned university, the goal was to be:
“… a new university using new technology in a new millennium.”
In short: to be an innovator.
RMIT has certainly been delivering on this.&nbsp;
And, with this new Hub – RMIT’s first in Southeast Asia - it will continue to do so.
This Hub will be a gateway to international expertise.
Like RMIT’s first campus has done in Melbourne, it will contribute to the vibrancy of Hanoi’s inner city.
It will collaborate with community, government and industry to find innovative ways to tackle local and shared priorities.
Like sustainable cities or emerging technologies.
Today I’m looking forward to hearing about RMIT’s plans to expand its extraordinary campus in Ho Chi-Minh City, through a $250 million commitment.
This is a vote of confidence in Vietnam’s future.
And in the strength and the potential we see in joining forces on education.
Australia brings a lot to this partnership.
Our higher education system is world class. \
Our history of innovation and research is a proud one.
And we are making sure our universities have strong links to industry to drive our nation’s economic potential into the future.&nbsp;&nbsp;
We also know there is much we can learn from Vietnam in this partnership.&nbsp;
And we know there is more we can do together – through more joint action, joint research and collaboration.
And, importantly, making sure that the knowledge we create is spread in ways that boost our economies and improve the lives of our people.
It is great that while RMIT was the first Australian university in Vietnam, it is now not the only one – Monash, Swinburne, UTS and Western Sydney Uni have all joined RMIT in investing in the education of Vietnam’s next generation.
In addition to RMIT’s investments, I am pleased today to acknowledge Western Sydney University’s new Whitlam Scholarships.
These scholarships will allow 60 students to study degrees in business, communications and data science here and in Australia.
Qualifications that we need for today, and for the future.
Let me thank everyone who has been involved in these new initiatives
For your hard work and for contributing to the mutual trust and respect that Vietnam and Australia enjoy today.
Here’s to you. Thank you.


VƯƠNG ĐÌNH HUỆ, PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OF VIETNAM: I am confident that your visit will be a great success. And it will make meaningful contributions to further strengthening the strategic partnership between our two countries, with a view to upgrading our bilateral ties, elevating our bilateral ties to a new height - a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership between Vietnam and Australia in the time to come. I myself paid a very fruitful visit to Australia last December, as you are well informed. And once again, let me take this opportunity to extend my thanks to you, Mr Prime Minister, and the members of the Australian Cabinet, and your Deputy Prime Minister and other ministers for having spent the time for their meetings with me and my delegation. I will also like to extend my thanks to the very warm welcome and cordial reception extended to me and my delegation back then, a visit with a very effective and substantive working agenda. It also owes much to the work of our two embassies and two ambassadors. I'm also delighted to learn that Prime Minister Minh Chinh held bilateral talks with you, Mr Prime Minister, and it has been very successful. And in this meeting, I stand ready to exchange views with you on issues pertaining to the overarching relationship between our two countries, and the relationship between our two legislative branches, so that it can live up to the skill of our strategic partnership at present, and at a time when our two countries are discussing the potential of upgrading relations in the time to come. Now, I wish to hear from you, Mr Prime Minister.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much, Your Excellency, for a very warm welcome to Vietnam. And I'm pleased to meet with you again, having seen you in Australia just last year. And you are, of course, Your Excellency, the most senior Australian alumnus in Vietnam. And I can't think of a better role model for the benefits of our education cooperation. Vietnam is Australia's fifth-largest source of international students. Australia is the second most popular destination for Vietnamese students. We want to be the first. We want to improve in the future. And RMIT, which I visited yesterday, is the premier example of our close education links. And their announcement of a $250 million investment here in Vietnam is a sign, that this education relationship and cooperation will just go from strength to strength in the future. I did have a very successful meeting with your Prime Minister this morning. A good one on one discussion, and then a good bilateral meeting. And one of the things that we discussed, my government's commitment to a Southeast Asia economic strategy to 2040. And recently, Mr Nicolas Moore visited Vietnam, as well as our Governor-General, His Excellency, David Hurley, as well as my Trade and Tourism Minister, Senator Don Farrell. So we have had a lot of contact, just this year, but we will have more in the future. We understand the centrality of ASEAN to this region and to its operation. And we believe that the economic ties between us can be even stronger in the future. Trade grew with Vietnam by 40 per cent last year, and that reflects the economic dynamism which is here. A dynamism that I've seen on my visits during the period, first beginning in 1986, for my first visit here in Vietnam. So I'm very pleased to be here on my first visit as Prime Minister, and I look forward to our discussion today, and to increase the engagement between our respective parliamentary bodies, but also between our people to people links as well, and strengthening those relationships in the future. Thank you.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Thank you very much Prime Minister, and thank you for the very warm welcome that you have given us here in Vietnam. Thank you, as well, to your entire people for the warm welcome that we had yesterday on our arrival.
It is indeed 50 years since the Whitlam Government made the correct decision to recognise Vietnam. Since then, we have grown into strategic partners and good friends. Good friends across defence and security issues, across our economic relationships, but also our people-to-people exchanges as well, through areas such as education. My government is committed to boosting Australia's relationships in Southeast Asia. And we are, at the moment, developing a Southeast Asia economic strategy to 2040, where Vietnam will play a central role. I'm very pleased that my Special Envoy, Nicholas Moore, visited here recently, but also just weeks ago, you had the Governor-General of Australia, His Excellency David Hurley, had a very successful visit here as well to Vietnam. Our trade grew by 40 per cent just last year. I was able, as the Prime Minister said, to taste Australian wheat in a banh mi yesterday, and Australian barley in a beer made here in Hanoi. Some 99 per cent of the barley used in beer in Vietnam is from Australia. That is an example that we are seeing to diversify our trading relationships, and we see that as being very important as well.
Our friendship is absolutely vital to addressing the complex challenges that face us today in the region and indeed the world. We share a common view that the need for peace, security, stability and prosperity in our region. A common view that the rule of law must be upheld in international relations and national sovereignty respected. That is why we, of course, share those views as a basis for cooperation in multilateral forums, in ASEAN, and we recognise the centrality of ASEAN. Next year we will host a summit for ASEAN leaders in Australia, next March, which will be a very important gathering as well. I hope to welcome you to Australia, Prime Minister, at that time.
I'm very much looking forward to our discussion today. We've already had a very successful and open discussion with our one-on-one meeting this morning. It is typical of the way that we can relate to each other – with honesty, with a view to how we move forward together as well and I appreciate the spirit of that. I spoke at the Shangri-La Dialogue, just a couple of days ago, about ensuring that we shape our own future in this region rather than allow the future to shape us. And that is my perspective as the Australian Prime Minister. I thank you very much for what is my first visit to Vietnam as Prime Minister, but my fourth visit here, largely in a personal capacity in the past, because this is indeed a wonderful place to visit. And I note that we're going to have direct flights into Brisbane as well. That will help the people-to-people relations as well between us, because this is a relationship that is built through infrastructure and economic activity. But what it comes down to is a relationship between our people that we need to grow into the future. I thank you very much, Prime Minister.


I’m deeply grateful to you, Prime Minister Chinh for your hospitality this evening and for hosting me for this important visit.
It’s been an honour to travel to Vietnam in this milestone year of our relationship.
No matter where I have been on this visit – whether talking to students studying at RMIT, or meeting business representatives, or enjoying a Vietnamese beer at a bia hoi&nbsp;– I have felt welcome.
While I’m a long way from home, it doesn’t feel like it.
Even my Vietnamese beer yesterday was made using Australian barley.&nbsp;
My Banh Mi using Australian wheat.
And beyond plenty of Australians and Australian produce in Vietnam, I have also felt a strong sense of familiarity.
And that’s because there’s a lot of Vietnam in Australia.
350,000 to be precise – the number of Australians of Vietnamese heritage.
They brought their culture, their creativity and their ambition to Australia.
If you walk along any city or suburban street at lunchtime in Melbourne or Sydney or Brisbane, the people you see might just as likely be eating a Vietnamese banh mi as an Aussie meat pie.
You can even watch Luke Nguyen on both Masterchef Australia and Masterchef Vietnam.
Cafés sell Vietnamese coffees with condensed milk alongside cappuccinos and lattes.
And if you look on any primary school child’s bookshelf, you’ll probably see a Ninja Kid or Hot Dog book written by popular Vietnamese Australian author Anh Do.
Books and food might seem like simple examples, but they’re emblematic of the closeness of our relationship, expressed in the cultural affinity of our people.
Because that’s where relationships start.
It starts with our people.
Our respect for one another.
Our understanding of one another.
Our appreciation of one another.
People are the basis for what we want to build for the future.
A future where we:

Increase our prosperity by ramping up our trade and investment
Increase our potential by giving more people access to higher education and skills
Support one another as we transition to clean energy and achieve our environmental goals
And work together for regional security – for the precious stability that is under so much pressure in our region right now.

Together, we can build that future on the foundation of what we’ve achieved in partnership over the last fifty years.
A foundation of trust. Of growing trust.
Friendship.
Knowledge.
Respect.
And of shared interests.
All of this is a precious gift, based on the seeds of friendship that we inherit from the efforts of our people across the last five decades.
Seeds that we – that I personally – are committed to nurturing.
So, on this occasion of our anniversary year, let us reflect on how far we’ve come, and on the exciting opportunities ahead.
Thank you again for your hospitality.
And here’s to the next half century.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present, and emerging.
I'm proud to lead a government that will give Australians the chance to recognise Indigenous Australians in our Constitution.
What a moment of national unity it could be. What a moment of unity I believe it will be.
And, like so many of the important turning points in our national story, the union movement will play a crucial role.
The union movement has a proud history of supporting Indigenous Australians in their struggles for recognition and equality.
It was the union movement that sent food and supported the great strike in 1966 when Vincent Lingiari led the walk-off at Wave Hill.
You were part of the oxygen of the cause. This is the abiding instinct for justice, equality and the fair go that is the very heart of the union movement.
I know we can count on your support when later this year all Australians will be asked to vote to recognise and provide a voice for the oldest continuous culture in the world
As a proud former member of the Commonwealth Bank Officers Association – one of the predecessor unions of the mighty FSU – it gives me great pleasure to address this conference in Ballarat.
I’m sorry that weather has intervened to make this a virtual address.
It must be said that as a Labor Prime Minister, it’s good that you are meeting in the birthplace of John Curtin – one of the greatest leaders our country has ever known.
Even in the depths of World War II, Curtin had the courage and the determination to hold on to hope. Not just to secure our nation at a time when the world had been turned upside down, but to have the sheer audacity to look ahead.
Not just to win the war but to win the peace, to give Australia the best chance to build a better future when the war was finally at an end.
As I look at all your faces on the screen, I think back to another time when the world was turned upside down.
When I had the privilege of addressing your conference by Zoom in 2021, one of my priorities was to acknowledge an important truth: that so many of you and your fellow members kept us afloat during; the pandemic.
You played an important role in keeping the economy running in time of such deep and sometimes overwhelming challenge.
You made sure that Australians could access the financial services that were, in so many ways, a lifeline in the storm.
And, after everything we went through together as Australians, the fact that we are in as good a shape as we are is, without question, thanks in part to you.
It can be safely said that my career as a bank employee wasn’t a long one. But it gave me some insight into the crucial role FSU members play in their local communities – even if some of my references might be just a little bit on the retro side.
When I was a bank employee in the 1980s most retail customers were still using passbooks. Banking was hands-on and face to face. Regular interaction with customers was a key part of the experience of working for a bank.
So much has happened since those days that to describe it as a technological revolution would be a radical understatement. Nevertheless, what remains absolutely crucial in the finance sector – what is still at its very heart – is the human element.
Whether the roles are public-facing, or back office, the finance sector relies on the professionalism, dedication and hard work of members of the FSU to function.
That is why the Government I am so honoured to lead believes that workers and unions like the FSU need to be supported in their aspirations for good, secure jobs with decent pay and conditions.
Friends, we have not wasted a minute since coming to Government.
In just over 12 months, we have delivered major improvements for workers and their families.
We have banned pay secrecy clauses, which have been used to suppress wages, particularly for women.
We have introduced strong protections against sexual harassment, including a new user friendly process to obtain a stop harassment order from the Fair Work Commission.
And now, for two years in succession, we have successfully argued for a wage increase for workers on the minimum wage.
Last Friday’s decision by the Fair Work Commission to increase the minimum wage by 8.6 per cent, and to increase awards by 5.75 per cent is a real, meaningful win for workers.
These are record rises at a time when people are doing it tough.
Taking pressure off families. Respecting hard work.
That’s what happens when we have a government that backs workers.
Who can forget the former Government saying the sky was going to fall in if Australia’s lowest paid workers were paid a modest $1 per hour wage increase?
I carried a $1 coin with me through the election campaign – and I still have it.
We are also proudly funding a 15 per cent increase for aged care workers. I’ve been meeting with aged workers and what they tell me in no uncertain terms is just what a concrete difference it will make in their lives.
The chance to have conversations like that is one of the great privileges of being Prime Minister – and a reminder of why all of us in the Government are in the job.
After a decade squandered under the previous Government, working Australians now have a Government that actually has their back. A Government that works alongside unions like yours to make sure we get the best results we can.
We have changed the laws to make it easier for workers to collectively bargain, including the ability to bargain on a multi-employer basis.
We have made gender equality and job security part of the Objects of the Fair Work Act, and that includes the positive duty on employers to take reasonable steps to prevent sexual harassment.
We have introduced family and domestic violence leave – a crucial development that your union campaigned so hard for.
We have made it illegal for employers to advertise for workers below the award rate.
The new secure jobs, better pay bargaining laws are helping get some of the bigger employers to the bargaining table.
We’ve been busy – we’re not just there to occupy the space. But I also recognise there is still much to do.
That is why later this year we will be delivering on our commitments to close loopholes used to undermine decent wages and conditions.
We are legislating:

Same job, same pay, because you shouldn’t be paid less simply because you work for labour hire;
An objective definition of casual employment, because workers should have access to job security if they want it;
Minimum standards for gig workers, because 21st century technology should not mean 19th century working conditions;
And we are going to make deliberate wage theft a criminal offence, because worker exploitation will simply not be tolerated by this Government.

As a Government we understand that many working families are doing it tough.
We inherited a mess from the former Government, and while this can’t be fixed overnight, we are laying the foundations for a better future
In the recent budget we delivered almost $15 billion in cost of living relief, targeted to those who most need it.
We’re making medicines cheaper for 6 million Australians, and tripling the incentive to bulk bill so more people can see their GP for fee.
All of this is aimed at taking pressure off people, while not adding pressure on inflation.
Our approach to governing also involves a commitment to raising productivity, in particular, by improving the participation rates of women in the workforce.
Measures like our cheaper childcare package will result in around 1.2 million families benefiting from cheaper child care from 1 July.
Measures like our 180,000 fee-free TAFE courses, which have had an enormously positive response, with women making up the majority of new enrolments.
And last month, we announced an additional 300,000 free TAFE places.
Measures like increasing entitlements to paid parental leave to 20 weeks as of July 2023, progressively increasing to 26 weeks by 2026.
And we will just keep adding to that list.
We have begun the way we will continue. And as we do, we are guided by the values that we share – your union and every single member that makes it what it is and the Australian Labor Party, which grew out of the union movement and will always work as a proud and committed partner of the union movement.
The world keeps changing, but our core values do not.
All of us are working to improve the lives of our fellow Australians, and to build a better future.
A future that we strive for together. A future that we enjoy together.
I want to thank you for the warm welcome you have given me, and wish you all the best for the remainder of your conference.


The political world is filled with people with sharp elbows, but Bruce Childs wasn’t one of them.
Guided in perfect tandem by the passion of his convictions and his unwavering kindness, Bruce was a gentle giant of the labour movement.
He was a trade union secretary. ALP official. Senator. National ALP Left convenor. Evatt Foundation president and life member.
A peace activist. A man of principle, commitment and loyalty.
A man who spoke up for those who couldn’t.
And a man who knew that the Labor Party could not live up to its ideals and potential until it counted more women in its ranks.
Bruce always placed what was right ahead of any sense of personal ambition.
He also knew what it was to be a representative of the minority group in Sussex Street. I believe “character-building” is one of the phrases used.
It’s telling that even at a time when politics was being played at its hardest, and anything resembling even cordiality across party lines was the rarest currency of all, Bruce was viewed with admiration and affection across the spectrum.
He was a man of so many facets.
And, like so many, I had the great fortune of being able to count him as a friend and mentor.
What he had within him was one of the most powerful combinations a human being can contain: gentleness and strength. Two great qualities that reinforced each other.
Few people were better placed to recognise that combination than another of its most noted practitioners, the great Tom Uren.
Tom described his dear friend as:
“… a patient negotiator and an outstanding administrator … [and]&nbsp; one of the most outstanding collectivists I have known.”
When Bruce took his final leave of the Senate, he said something that has remained in Hansard as a guiding star for everyone since. And I quote:
“I have never identified with being a politician, but I really do identify with being a parliamentarian.”
Those are the words of a man who entered politics for the best possible reasons. A man who, amid all the noise and distraction and temptation, was guided by the truest spirit of public service – and we were all the better for it.
A man of integrity. A man who respected the best of our traditions and earnt the respect of all who had the privilege of knowing him.
We are here because we admired Bruce – all that he was and all that he stood for.
But above all, we are here because we loved him.
None more so than his family.
Yola, Steven and Bet – you are all so very much in our hearts. Bruce’s love lives on in you.
May Bruce rest in peace.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging. And I thank Marni for beginning&nbsp;us off so constructively and well this morning.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the last quarter of this year.
I’m grateful to Sky News and the Australian for this opportunity to talk about the Budget that we handed down last month and to share our Government’s vision for the future of the Australian economy.
In all the discussions that my colleagues and I had when we were putting together the Budget, I think the phrase we used the most was ‘getting the balance right’.
The balance between taking pressure off families, without putting pressure on inflation.
The balance between providing meaningful help for people doing it really tough, while also ensuring that we made the responsible choices to bank the bulk of revenue upgrades and be able to forecast the first surplus in 15 years.
And the big, overarching, ever-present balance that you have to get right in government.
Dealing with the pressing challenges of the here-and-now, while never losing sight of the future.
Providing support in the immediate term, in a way that builds for the long term.
Through this approach, we are providing a substantial cost-of-living package:

Tripling the Medicare bulk-billing incentive to help 11 million Australians see their GP for free.
Cutting the costs of medicines for up to 6 million people.
Energy Bill Relief for over 5 million households and 1 million small businesses
And more help for Australians with increases to Jobseeker, increases to rent assistance and something dear to my heart,&nbsp;improvements to the Single Parenting Payment.

These measures build on the actions of our first year in government.
In particular, they complement the savings we are delivering for around 1.2 million families, through Child Care changes which starts in 3 weeks’ time, and the first round of our Cheaper Medicines plan that took effect on the 1st of January this year.
All of this makes a difference - and just as importantly – as the Governor of the Reserve Bank said just last week, our Budget:
“Is actually reducing inflation in the next financial year”. &nbsp;
In the two Budgets that we have delivered, our Government has focused on making sure that fiscal policy works with monetary policy - not against it.
Because we know that&nbsp;interest rate rises put pressure on mortgage holders and small business.
And we know inflation is regressive. It hurts those with the least, the most.
So the best thing we can do to help working Australians is to take the pressure off inflation, create jobs and get wages moving again.
I’m proud that during our first year in office we have:

The most jobs created in the first year of any government in Australian history.
Record levels of workforce participation, including importantly a record number of women in full time work.
Wages growing at the fastest rate in a decade – and real wages growth forecast for next year.

We are not in Government to simply occupy the space.
Our purpose and our focus is to support people through adversity while building for Australia’s long-term prosperity.
We approach this task with optimism and with urgency.
Optimism born of the belief that if we act with purpose and determination, Australia can shape the future.
And urgency driven by the understanding that if we drag our feet or turn our backs, the future will shape us.
As I get around the country, I sense that same optimism and urgency from the business community too.
The clear understanding that there is a moment here that we cannot afford to miss.
And the real sense that for the first time in a long time, the Australian economy is breaking new ground.

Attracting record new levels of international investment in clean energy projects.
Diversifying our future exports.
Building greater resilience in our supply chains.
Moving more of our businesses up the international value chain.
And – at long last – supporting the full, equal and respectful participation of women in work.

In many of these fields – business has been ahead of government over the past decade.&nbsp;
And I think a big part of the reason that we’re making new national progress is because finally government is working with business, rather than holding it back.
Because the Commonwealth is looking for ways to work with the states and territories, not looking to pick fights with them.
We won’t always agree on every aspect of every issue but our starting point is always the understanding that all of us have a common interest in building a stronger economy.
This is especially important at a time when the global economic outlook remains highly uncertain.
The combination of high inflation and rising interest rates will see the weakest two years for the global economy in over two decades, outside the GFC and pandemic.
Tight financial conditions following recent bank collapses abroad are adding to the risks.
Australia is not immune to any of these challenges - but we are extremely well placed to navigate them.
We have both natural advantages and, under this government, the plans to capitalise on them.
Central to this is our vision for Australia as a renewable energy superpower.
It’s an investment in our energy sovereignty, our economic self-reliance and our security.
And the clean energy transformation is also the biggest element of our economic growth plan:

Reducing input costs for existing businesses
Powering a new generation of advanced manufacturing jobs in our regions and suburbs.&nbsp;
Creating new export markets for valued-added renewable technologies.

And through our new Hydrogen Headstart program we announced&nbsp;in the Budget, ensuring that we can not only sustain but grow large-scale, energy-intensive industry and transport while still cutting emissions and achieving Net Zero.&nbsp;
Exporting green hydrogen but also using it to produce and export green steel, green aluminium, green ammonia.&nbsp;
All of this is critical to our future economic growth.
And in order to ensure this growth is sustained and shared over the long term, Australia needs to lift our game on productivity - something the Reserve Bank Governor mentioned this week.&nbsp;
When we came to Government, not only did we inherit a trillion dollars in debt, we also inherited the worst decade of productivity performance on record.
So our economic task is not just to clear away the waste and strengthen the Budget, it’s to modernise the economy so we can maximise our natural competitive advantages.
This is where, as a country, we need a smarter and a more strategic approach to productivity than the self-defeating model that says workers should be expected to do more with less - or work longer for less.
That’s especially important in the context of labour-intensive sectors like the caring economy, which already represents 10 per cent of our workforce and is set to double in size before 2050.
Too often, the economic debate about boosting productivity is conducted only in the very narrow terms of things that governments should be abolishing or eliminating or undoing.
Now, of course, we should always be looking for efficiencies, we should always be mindful of unnecessary barriers or overlap.
But in the decade ahead all of us need to think much bigger than this.
Because the economic change underway is far bigger than this.
Above all, the way we use, apply and share technology will be absolutely critical.
Not just in the big firms but in millions of small and medium businesses and in the care and support economy.
We need to think about ways technology can empower workers.
Freeing people up from the routine parts of their job: basic data entry, record-keeping, paperwork - and giving them back that time to focus on producing and innovating and caring and educating.
There are substantial productivity gains we can achieve if businesses have the confidence to adopt new technologies earlier and more widely and Australian workers have the skills to use technologies more strategically and effectively.
I’m sure the business community will – as it always does – show leadership here, through competition and innovation and best-practice.
But Government has a key role to play in maximising the potential benefits and guarding against possible risks.&nbsp;
Firstly, investing in education and training.
On coming to Government we set a target of 1.2 million technology-related jobs by 2030.
The tech workforce has grown by 8 per cent in the past year, meaning that we are on track to hit that target.
We’re working to make sure that from the early years right through school and TAFE and university, Australians are learning the digital and data and technology skills that will prepare them for these jobs.
And through our establishment of Jobs and Skills Australia, the first announcement&nbsp;that I made as Labor leader, and our reforms to the skilled migration system, we’re making sure businesses have access to a workforce that’s ready to seize these opportunities, right now.
Secondly, Government needs to support the growth and uptake of the technologies themselves. &nbsp;
Which means investing in infrastructure, capabilities and future industries.
This is why we’re upgrading the NBN: expanding the full-fibre network to an additional 1.5 million homes and businesses – 660,000 of those will be in regional areas.
We’re ensuring Australia is in the race on quantum and artificial intelligence and other enabling technologies.
With significant investments in the Budget – and $1 billion in our National Reconstruction Fund targeted towards critical technologies.
Thirdly, we need to focus on safety.
This includes the work Clare O’Neil is leading to improve cybersecurity, including&nbsp;with&nbsp;our business roundtable which is working on it as well.
Making sure there’s guidance and support to help every business protect their systems, their intellectual property, their commercially-sensitive information as well as their customers’ privacy.
All of which is particularly important for time-poor small businesses without big IT departments.
Then there is the action that my Minister for Industry, Ed Husic is taking to improve community trust and confidence in the use of artificial intelligence.
There is huge potential here for productivity gains across the economy, for transformative advances in everything from medical research to manufacturing.
But, of course, there is an element of risk as well.
And given the pace of change underway, we need to co-operate across business and government to ensure our rules and regulatory frameworks are up to the task.
Before we move to the question and answer session, I want to conclude by saying that when I think about the three big changes underway in our economy that I’ve touched on briefly today,

The Clean Energy transformation
Breakthroughs in technology &nbsp;
Growth in the Care and Support Economy

I see cause for urgency and reason for optimism.
These three elements are central to our future prosperity – and our future productivity.
And they are driving and informing so much of the work our government is doing – from our draft National Strategy for the Care and Support Economy to the upcoming Employment White Paper.
Consulting and co-operating, recognising that the ‘how’ matters, that enduring economic reform depends on bringing people along on the journey.
Because for us, as a Labor Government, strengthening productivity isn’t an end in itself or a box to be ticked.
What counts is returning the benefits of the productivity gains to the employers, but also the workers whose efforts makes them possible.
Through improved living standards.
Stronger skills and services.
More dynamic markets.
Fairer wages.
And a better quality of life.
This is how we create a growing, productive economy that works for people – not the other way around.
And when I think about those three big shifts underway in our economy and around the world - I feel great confidence in our nation.
Because these are three opportunities uniquely suited to where Australia is at in 2023.
Our competitive advantage in natural resources, our chance to be a clean energy superpower.
An adaptable workforce with the skills and smarts to embrace technology and modernise our economy.
And the compassion and respect and instinctive care for one another that makes this the greatest country on earth.
These are the strengths that our Budget builds on, they are the values our Government seeks to uphold.
They are the reasons for our optimism and our urgency.
Because I’ve always believed that Australians have what it takes to shape the future.
And I know if we act now – working together across business and government - we not only can, we will.


I want to begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
And I am proud to lead a Government which will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people at a referendum later this year.
And I thank Paul House for once again giving us a superb Welcome to Country. I’ve seen Paul do a few now, in this room. I haven’t seen yet the glass yidaki brought out before, so thank you for sharing what is the ultimate merging of old culture going back all those tens of thousands of years, with very new technology.
It is great to be with you this morning to talk about what our government is doing to enhance Australia’s economic security in a time of global uncertainty.
And to discuss the reforms that we’re undertaking to drive up Australia’s future prosperity and our productivity.
This is the essential balance that defines our approach as a Labor Government.
Dealing with the pressing challenges of the here and now, while never losing sight of the future.
And I note in the introduction, talking about John Curtin. John Curtin established the ministry for Post-War Reconstruction in 1942 with Ben Chifley.
Think about that. That incredible foresight that laid the groundwork for the prosperity in the post-war era.
My government does take a similar approach to the pandemic. What are the lessons that we can learn? How do we provide support in the immediate term, in a way that builds for the long term?
And this is a balance that CEDA has long understood. It’s a thread that runs through all the conversations at these ‘state of the nation’ conferences that I’ve been attending for some time now.
Focusing on the present challenges that Australia has to overcome - while looking to the opportunities we must work together to seize.
This approach was central to the Budget that Treasurer Jim Chalmers handed down here, just over a month ago.
Helping people through adversity, while laying stronger foundations for our future prosperity.
Providing cost-of-living relief that also delivers an economic dividend:

Tripling the Medicare bulk-billing incentive to help 11 million Australians see their local GP for free.
Cutting the costs of medicines for up to 6 million people.
Energy Bill Relief for over 5 million households and 1 million small businesses.
Supporting people doing it tough with increases to JobSeeker and Rent Assistance and improvements to the Single Parent Payment.

All of these initiatives build on the actions of our first year in government.
In particular, they complement the savings we’re delivering for 1.2 million families, through Cheaper Child Care that starts on 1 July, and the first stage of our plan for Cheaper Medicines, which took effect on 1 January this year.
Just as importantly, as we did in our first Budget last October: we are returning the vast majority of revenue upgrades to the Budget, reducing waste and delivering significant savings – meaning we can forecast a surplus, the first in 15 years.
Taking these responsible decisions to strengthen the Budget position is critical when the international economic outlook remains highly uncertain.
Outside of the GFC and pandemic, the Treasury forecast for global growth is the weakest it’s been in two decades – a message that was reinforced by the OECD just last week.
Advanced economies around the world are dealing with the very difficult combination of high inflation and rising interest rates.&nbsp;
Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine continues to impact international energy markets and supply chains.
And tight financial conditions overseas, following recent bank collapses, are adding to the climate of risk.
Australia is not immune from any of this uncertainty.
But perhaps more than any other country in the world, we have what it takes to emerge from these challenging times in a stronger position, by not retreating into ourselves.
Not by falling back on the same, failed strategies of the decade just gone.
Not by papering over the cracks exposed by the pandemic or most importantly refusing to learn its lessons.
There is no security in that, only stagnation.
Australia’s future security and our future prosperity depends on our economy breaking new ground:

Attracting new sources of international investment.
Diversifying our future exports.
Boosting the skills of our workforce.
Building greater resilience in our supply chains.
Moving more of our businesses up the international value chain.
And supporting the full, equal, respectful and overdue participation of women in the economy.

This is the dynamic, competitive and diversified economy that we are already working with business to build – and we’re seeing encouraging results:

The most jobs created in the first year of any government in Australian history.
Record levels of participation, including a record number of women in full-time work.
Wages growing at the fastest rate in a decade – and real wages growth forecast for next year.

We’re proud of this record – but we’re not resting on it.
Because we know that after a wasted decade, there is not a day to waste.
We know Australia can’t afford to just wait and watch and react to the clean energy transformation, the growth of the care and support economy, or breakthroughs in technology
We have to seize these opportunities.
Acting with purpose and urgency to turn our natural advantages into national economic strengths.
That starts with clean energy.
It’s now crystal clear that the certainty provided by our legislated emissions reduction target has delivered a step change in investment.
In the last year, investment in large-scale solar and wind projects increased by nearly 50 per cent.
With 4.3 gigawatts of large-scale renewables to be added to the energy pipeline – enough to power 3 million homes.
And it’s not confined to large scale investors, it’s households and businesses too.
Last year, investment in rooftop solar was 22 per cent higher than forecast – with the majority of that growth, not surprisingly, coming in the second half of the year.
And of course, getting renewables up means getting emissions down.&nbsp;
These record levels of rooftop solar saw emissions from electricity fall by 3.5% - that’s 5.5 million tonnes of carbon dioxide taken out of the system.
Renewable energy helps the environment, it means lower bills for households and lower input costs for business.&nbsp;
It also presents a defining opportunity for economic growth: the chance for Australia to be a renewable energy superpower.&nbsp;
Guaranteeing our energy security reinforces our economic sovereignty.
It gives us the opportunity to supply the economies of our region with green energy, strengthening our trade partnerships.
For our suburbs and regional towns, it means creating a new generation of advanced manufacturing in renewable technology.
Our National Reconstruction Fund will back the creation of these new jobs and industries.&nbsp;
Our investments in 480,000 fee-free TAFE places, 20,000 additional university places and renewable energy apprenticeships will make sure that Australians are trained up to seize these opportunities.&nbsp;
And the new initiatives in last month’s Budget – especially our Hydrogen Headstart program – are about ensuring that places like Gladstone, the Hunter, Whyalla can sustain and grow large-scale, energy-intensive industry and transport, while reducing our emissions.
Exporting green hydrogen as an energy source, but also producing green steel, green aluminium, green ammonia.
Products and resources that will only become more valuable and more sought after as markets around the world make that transition to net zero.&nbsp;
The clean energy transformation underpins our Government’s economic growth plan.
Growing the care and support economy and adopting breakthroughs in technology are both critical to boosting our productivity.
And that’s an urgent priority.
Because the last decade has seen Australia’s worst productivity performance on record, including the last three years where it has essentially not grown at all.
Productivity growth is more than just a box to tick.
It’s essential for sustaining and sharing economic growth, building long-run prosperity and improving living standards.
And it’s the big workforces that can deliver the big wins.
The care and support economy already represents 10 per cent of our workforce.
But that’s set to double before 2050.
This means we need to recruit an additional 285,000 care workers.
A point always worth making in this context is that growing demand for care and support is overwhelmingly a good news story.
It reflects the fact that Australians are living longer.
More parents, women in particular, are participating in the economy and more children are gaining the benefits of early education.
And people with disability are getting access to the life-changing support of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
These services are Australian values in action: fairness, equal opportunity, compassion for others and aspiration.
Because reliable, affordable and universal services arm people with the confidence to pursue their aspirations, to fulfil their potential, to strive for the best.
Better care makes us a stronger country – because it means that Australians live better lives.
Better care can – and it must – drive greater productivity as well.
Because for all the growth in the size of the workforce delivering this care – and the growth in demand for it – over the past twenty years, productivity growth within the care and support economy has been virtually zero.
In the decade ahead, we cannot settle for a situation where the fastest-growing sector of our economy, is delivering zero productivity growth.
That would only put pressure on other industries to somehow offset the deficit, as well as undermine our future living standards.
Equally, we will not unlock meaningful productivity gains simply by demanding an already-stretched workforce do more with less.
That’s particularly true in labour-intensive jobs. &nbsp;
Productivity gains have to work alongside improvements in wages, conditions and standards – not against them.
This is where productivity isn’t just about getting more work out of people – it’s about people getting more out of their work, for the benefit of both workers and employers.
I said it many times as Labor Leader and I’ve held to it as Prime Minister: essential workers deserve more than just our thanks.
They should be respected, valued and properly paid for their contribution.
That’s why our government has consistently advocated for workers on the minimum wage, making sure that they don’t go backwards.
And it’s no accident that these tend to be feminised industries that bear the brunt of those low wages.
It’s why our Budget funded a historic 15 per cent wage increase for the remarkable aged care workers of Australia, with $11.3 billion allocated.
And it’s why we’ve worked with small business, big employers and unions to revitalise Australia’s broken workplace bargaining system.
For too long, the workforces with the most women - child care, aged care, disability support - have had the least bargaining power and the least pay.
Better bargaining will help us close the gender pay gap, drive stronger wage growth – but also boost productivity.
And technology has a key role to play in this as well.
Technology can empower workers and the people they care for.
Supporting greater independence for older Australians who want to stay at home, in a home care setting.
Tele-health consults, breaking down the barriers of distance and the hassle of travel for people in remote and regional Australia.&nbsp;
And freeing our aged care workers and early educators and health professionals and disability support workers from the routine, mundane, unrewarding part of their job, the hours of data entry and record-keeping and cross-checking.
Giving them that time back, so they can use it for the human interactions and conversations and experiences that mean so much and that make such a real difference.
Because that’s what inspires Australians to work in these fields, it’s what calls people to what are vocations.
It’s what these workers are best at – and it’s what we should empower them to do.
This a productivity gain – but it’s also a recruitment plan and a retention strategy.
This interaction between technology, productivity and the care economy will be a key feature of our both our Care and Support Economy Consultation Paper and our forthcoming Employment White Paper.
And I hope many of you in this room will contribute your expertise and insights to one or both of those documents and the national conversation around them.
The final point I want to make on technology is this.
The Government, with Ed Husic taking the lead, is engaged in a lot of work to get Australia on the front foot when it comes to technologies such as artificial intelligence.
We recognise there is huge potential to seize – but we also appreciate there are potential risks that need to be appropriately managed.
But that’s only one element.
We’re also investing in the fundamentals:

Upgrading the NBN, so more Australians have access to high-speed, full-fibre connections. Particularly in the regions.
Digital apprenticeships, to train the tech workers we need and meet our target of 1.2 million technology-related jobs by 2030.
Improving cyber-security, with an emphasis on helping small business and corporate Australia to protect their data and their clients’ privacy.

And a new push to help small businesses adopt digital technology with confidence.&nbsp; &nbsp;
As a rule, very few companies come up with an innovation or idea that is completely new to the world.
But many, many firms achieve remarkable success by recognising the value and potential in an idea when it emerges – and then applying it.
That’s where we can put more focus in Australia: embracing new ideas, grasping the scale and application of new technologies and changing the way we do business to maximise the benefits of those technologies.
Because if we can lift our game here, if we can give more businesses the confidence to take on new technologies more quickly, and more workers to use technologies more strategically, then not only will we achieve stronger growth, it will also be more widely shared across the economy.
To conclude on the State of the Nation after our first year in office.
When my colleagues and I were campaigning during the election just over a year ago, we knew that Australia was facing a period of economic uncertainty.
We knew there was a shocking legacy of waste and neglect that we would have to deal with.
And we knew that events beyond our borders and outside our control would bring significant and complex and unpredictable challenges.
But we sought the privilege and the opportunity of government to take up these challenges, to take them on.
To look after Australians doing it tough, to help people under pressure here and now – but all while never taking our eye off the future agenda.
That’s why people turn to Labor governments – they trust us to make the right decisions for the present, but importantly as well, to shape the future.
And while my colleagues and I always understood the world would present us with challenges, we also held to the belief that it would offer us great opportunities.
And those opportunities are before us now:

The opportunity to be a renewable energy superpower – and to use that to drive becoming a manufacturing powerhouse.
To lead the world in the standard of care and support that we offer our citizens.
To drive a new wave of productivity in our big firms and our small businesses and our start-ups.

Australia has the resources, the people, the get-up-and-go to seize this moment.
Our government is determined to make sure that we do just that.
We are a government with a sense of purpose.
Grasping these opportunities and sharing them is at the very heart of that purpose.
In our first year, I believe that we’ve laid a very strong foundation.
That was the theme of our Budget.
In the year ahead, we’ll continue to build the better future that the Australian people voted for.
To shape that future, rather than be stagnant and allow that future to shape us.
Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to their elders past, present, and emerging, and I thank you for the Welcome to Country.
Can I acknowledge Peter Dutton, the Leader of the Opposition, Paul Fletcher, the Shadow Minister, but importantly as well, can I acknowledge Walter Mikac and his partner for being here, for honouring us with your presence here today.
You are the most important person in this room by far today, there is no question about that.
I spoke with John Howard on the way here. He very much regrets not feeling well today, but he certainly wanted to pass on how important this is for him, and I'm sure if he could have been here, he certainly would have been.
Distinguished guests, fellow Australians.
The items we are here today to add to our National Museum tell the story of a devastating tragedy.
But they also mark a moment of powerful leadership and national unity.
And they capture the beginning of more than a quarter century of truly remarkable personal courage.
The first letter that Walter Mikac wrote to Prime Minister Howard, in ordinary blue biro on paper over here - the original, because it was faxed.
For the younger people in the audience, that's a machine that people used to put paper in and it would come out at a particular destination.
It's one of the most extraordinary things that I've ever read in my life.
The opening sentence alone stands as a monument to the grace and bravery of a truly great Australian.
And I quote, ‘Dear Mr Howard, as the person who lost his wife and two beautiful daughters at Port Arthur, I am writing to you to give you the strength to ensure no person in Australia ever has to suffer such loss’.
Think about the words there, ‘to give you the strength’, Walter Mikac wrote to John Howard.
Imagine writing that, a bare nine days after losing the three people you loved most in the world, to an act of unspeakable and unimaginable violence.
Having to grieve alongside so many others in the unrelenting glare of the national spotlight.
And before you've even had the opportunity to farewell your loved ones at those funerals.
Before your family have even been laid to rest.
Not only somehow finding the strength to think of others, to think of the future.
But to try and make sure that no one would ever suffer as you and your loved ones had.
Not just that, but going that step further, seeking to share that strength, to give it to the Prime Minister of Australia, to encourage him to hold on to his convictions and do what John Howard knew was right.
Of course, it is to Prime Minister Howard's enduring and eternal credit that he did precisely that, and I honour him today.
John Howard showed courage and determination in that moment of monumental national challenge.
Importantly, he had bipartisan support from Kim Beazley as the Labor Leader.
It was my first term. I was a very new Member at that time, but the bipartisanship was critical.
But I do want to also single out the late, great Tim Fischer, because for the National Party leader, it was particularly courageous to assert what was right, in spite of Mr Fischer's base of support being extraordinarily hostile to what was proposed in these reforms.
And I did think at the time that for Tim Fischer, his bravery as well, very much needs to be acknowledged.
Together, they answered Walter's call - be strong and act now.
They responded to the deep passion and principled advocacy so many of you in this room gave to the cause of reform.
Reforms that have seen the rate of fatalities from firearms halve since 1996.
As the population has increased, the rate has halved.
And if you compare that with what we see with our friends in the United States of America, they are waking up, as we do regularly, to tragedies there.
I think it is a remarkable achievement.
And while today is about honouring those moments of history, it is also, as Sarah said, a moment for us to acknowledge that this work goes on.
Just last Friday, our Attorney-General and Police Ministers' Council unanimously agreed to present options for a new National Firearms Register to be considered by National Cabinet.
And when we raised these issues at National Cabinet, I can assure you that there is a consensus across the states and territories, across the political spectrum, to ensure that we make this change.
This is the next step on reforms that began in 1996.
And I think it's fair to say that any progression of reform, Walter Mikac and those people who acted, including Prime Minister John Howard in 1996, along with Tim Fischer and Kim Beazley, can also take credit for anything that happens today.
I would say two more things by way of conclusion.
Firstly, there is an important letter in this collection from Prime Minister Howard, accepting the invitation to serve as the inaugural patron of the Alannah and Madeline Foundation.
Like every Prime Minister since, I have the privilege of continuing that tradition.
I think it is the only organisation that I am the patron of, certainly the first that I accepted, because I think that anyone who works with the Foundation knows just what an honour it is.
Secondly, can I say that when your children are aged three or six, you are their hero, not necessarily for anything you do, but simply for who you are.
Because you are their world - you're their dad.
Tragically, Alannah and Madeline didn't live long enough to know that their dad is a hero to all of us, to all Australians.
Mr Mikac, your words belong to history now.
Your actions, your legacy though, continue in perpetuity.
On behalf of our nation, which is stronger, which is safer because of you - thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I'm proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the opportunity to give constitutional recognition to our First Nations People in a referendum that will be held in the last quarter of the year.
It's fantastic to see you all again today. I fulfilled a commitment, there were four people missed out on photos last night, but many now have multiple photos as a result of me getting here early this morning.
It is a great forum, the Australian Council of Local Government. It's an idea that we didn't take to an election in 2007, it's an idea that I came up with when I was appointed Minister for Local Government in the Rudd Government.
To bring together in a face-to-face way the national government with local government, in order to hear from you what your needs are, what issues you're facing, your policy agenda, right across the country.
Because we have so much in common. The national government is nothing more than an agglomeration of different communities. It's not something that's abstract from the people who you represent, as diverse as they are right around the country.
Being better prepared for natural disasters, delivering essential services, driving the transformation to clean energy that is occurring and delivering secure and affordable housing for all. These are all challenges that the different levels of government are dealing with.
And it's much better if we deal with these things co-operatively, because whilst they are all national priorities, they are of course, also priorities where local government has a real responsibility.
Take Housing. The most effective solution to improving housing affordability is boosting supply. This requires co-operation between every level of government.
Which is why at the most recent meeting of National Cabinet, we put better planning on the agenda, to build on the work being done through the National Housing Accord. I'm pleased state and territory governments have committed to working with us to improve planning and zoning to unlock more supply.
You need appropriate development, ones that are consistent with the needs of local communities.
In my local community, there are great examples of good development, indeed prize-winning development in some cases, with the Mirvac development that contained a library for the local community, contained open space. There's other examples of density along the railway lines and next to railway stations so you don't need the car parking spots.
But of course, we know that when it has gone wrong you can have very bad outcomes which don't serve the local community.
So we want to make sure that good projects and developments can survive and be built because we do need to deal with the pressures that are on.
We need also to recognise that there are communities out there in the regions that are crying out for more people as well, suffering from skill shortages. We need places for people to leave in order to fulfil the jobs and tasks which are there.
So I want to work with you to get this done. I see your role as being absolutely critical in being the voice of local communities about these issues.
Our government does recognise the importance of what you do. And we back that up with our presence here, we have a whole row of ministers sitting at the front.
But we back it up with engagement, I know that there have been literally hundreds and hundreds of meetings held this week in Parliament House.
But we back it up as well by getting out and about in the community and visiting you where you are. And delivering on that is something that I'm absolutely committed to doing.
This is in the best traditions of Labor Governments.
Beginning with the Financial Assistance Grants program that was established by the Whitlam Government in 1974.
We know the difference these grants make, that's why we are bringing forward the 2023-24 allocation, to make it available to it is paid as a pre-payment.
Coming out of the pandemic, we've heard the message from local government. We thought about even 75 per cent, but we're going to allocate the full bringing forward here this morning, because I think that is an appropriate thing.
And I thank those of you who've made representations to ensure that that has occurred.
We want to give councils the certainty to be able to deliver on those issues. And I understand there's an ongoing conversation about financial assistance grants that will continue as well.
We're also providing $500 million in Roads to Recovery funding to help all councils build better, more resilient roads. And we're providing $750 million to the Local Roads and Community Infrastructure Program.
This will help councils deliver much-needed local infrastructure, including roads, community centres, parks, sports grounds, bike paths, playgrounds, and libraries.
And I must say last night, from places as diverse as Bourke and Moree, to Campbelltown in South Australia this morning, to projects in Tasmania, in Queensland. It's been quite heartening that people come up and say 'you opened' or 'you fixed the Moree Baths' or 'you opened a project that was begun as part of the Regional Local Community Infrastructure Program'.
We know that it makes a difference when that funding goes through.
The truth is that they can make an enormous difference in the quality of life for your local communities - the right projects in the right places - making sure that that's improved.
It has been quite nostalgic to come back as Prime Minister to this forum, looking at the gains that were made.
I'm absolutely convinced that in ten years' time, you will look back at the period in which Kristy and Catherine were responsible for local government, and talk about the major difference that they have made in shaping your local communities.
I'm determined to build on this record as Prime Minister. Working with you – and listening to you.
Because local governments know the priorities of local communities. You're the ones using the roads and bike paths. Your children are going to the local schools, playing community sport, learning how to swim at the local pool, enjoying the neighbourhood park.
That's why it's so important that you get that say in determining how your infrastructure funding is spent.
Firstly, because it's a way of getting more integrity and transparency and accountability into the process. Gone are the colour-coded spreadsheets. We want to listen to you about what the priorities are.
And second, because it means better value for taxpayers and ratepayers by going through local government.
An example of this that has always stayed with me from my time as Minister is the upgrade of the Einasleigh River Bridge in Far North Queensland, right up there in the Gulf.
Once every few years there were floods and the Einasleigh River Bridge would be knocked over and the communities up there, Kuramba and Normanton, would be isolated. You would have to have food and health care flown in by chopper at an enormous cost.
And then they would build back the bridge to the same standard. Because if you could have done the same thing, you get the same outcome. And some people don't seem to realise that.
So they would build it back to the same standard, which is what the rules bizarrely were. And of course, it would get washed away again few years later the next time there was a flood.
So we got costings from state governments. The Queensland Government costed it some ridiculous amount. The Mayor of the Shire there, I don't know if that Shire's here today, said 'we can do it, we've got our own costing using day labour using local resources, local contractors'.
We allocated $31 million, it was the second largest amount allocated under the Regional Local Community Infrastructure Program.
Well, not only were they able to build the bridge for that amount that was less than half what the state government at the time said it would cost.
They upgraded the bridge. It hasn't been washed away since. And they delivered it under budget.
So they came to us and said 'we've got this money left over but there's another bridge we'd quite like to have over the Copperfield River'.
In fact, the savings were so substantial they were enough to fund an entire second bridge, over the Copperfield River. So they built that too.
Two for the price of one is a good deal at the local supermarket. It's an even better deal when we're talking about the value of a bridge to protect a local community.
To me, it just underlined the importance of doing it this way. And in infrastructure projects, it's no accident that local government was put with infrastructure, because quite often it is far more efficient to go with you.
And it means too that the money that 's spent, rather than people flying in from outside to get the jobs, the money stays in the local community as well.
The story also underlines the fact that local governments are the ones on the front line of natural disasters.
Since 2020, more than 80 per cent of Australia's Local Government Areas have been impacted by disasters.
Just think about that, 80 per cent. Some multiple times.
Homes have been destroyed. Businesses severely impacted. And, tragically, people have lost their lives.
The impact of floods, bushfires and cyclones has been devastating. That's why we need to prepare better rather than wait for these things to happen.
Our Disaster Ready Fund will provide state governments — in partnership with local councils and other organisations — with support to better prevent damage from natural disasters.
Common sense solutions like in Mackay, fixing up the levee and making sure that there's greater protection there rather than waiting to see what happens again.
I refer to that old saying, that if you do the same thing the same way you shouldn't be surprised that you get the same outcome.
We need to think in advance and better prepare for that.
We're also establishing a National Emergency Management Stockpile to support states and territories when their capacity is exceeded during a natural disaster.
The Stockpile will include emergency housing, generators, drinkable water and other life-saving equipment and services, helping meet the acute needs of disaster-impacted communities.
We're also helping councils better protect communities from flooding with a $236 million investment over decade to upgrade and better maintain the flood gauge network right across Australia.
This is a big investment in flood-prone communities.
It will ensure we have a system of flood gauges that warns people when floods are coming, tells them more about what they're likely to experience and better protects our emergency services personnel.
Local governments are also absolutely critical to creating a sustainable, clean energy future.
And in so many ways, it's local government that have been ahead of other levels of government with this transition. You've been leaders in this space for a long time.
You're transitioning your fleets to electric vehicles, undertaking carbon accounting, increasing tree canopy cover and biodiversity, making council-owned buildings more energy efficient, and investing in low-emissions transport.
You're doing so much to reduce your communities' carbon footprints. And we're going to do more to back you up.
Today, I'm pleased to announce that our Government is creating a new Community Energy Upgrades Fund.
We are putting forward $100 million to fund energy efficiency projects with local government.
This will enable high-impact energy upgrades to pool heating systems, lighting for sports grounds and courts, new storage technology at community centres and libraries. Projects that will reduce Australia's emissions and cut your power bills.
We will open this program before the end of the year. And we will partner with you, the councils and the Australian Local Government Association, to get maximum value for every project.
It is great to see so many local governments have made the commitment to net zero.
Our Government is determined to seize this once-in-a-generation opportunity and transform Australia into a renewable energy superpower.
And Chris Bowen, of course, my Minister with responsibility for this significant task of economic transformation is a former mayor and understands the important role that local communities will play in this transition and he'll be speaking to you later this morning.
We want to make sure that we hold to our promise to not leave communities behind. We want to help workers find good jobs in emerging industries while keeping communities strong.
And that's why our new Net Zero Authority will work closely with local governments through this process.
As a nation, we're only as strong as our communities. And we need to make the most of this opportunity to work together and build a better future for all Australians.
Our nation will only grow and prosper if all three levels of government — local, state and federal — work together to deliver policies and programs for the community.
So I thank you for coming to Canberra this week. I know many of you have travelled a long way.
You've brought constructive ideas, you've come together in a remarkable spirit of goodwill.
All of which gives us in the Federal Government great optimism for the journey ahead.
And I look forward to working with you to build a better future for Australia.


Thank you, Premier, for that introduction, for your leadership and your many decades of friendship.
We are a long way from sharing a really dodgy flat in Queanbeyan.
Colleagues, delegates, true believers.
It's great to be back at Victorian Labor Conference, my first as Australia's Prime Minister.
And it's great that the Victorian Labor Conference is back.
***
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in a referendum later this year.
I want to thank you, Daniel, and the Victorian Government for so powerfully re-affirming your support for a Yes vote today.
It's so important that you – along with every other Premier and Chief Minister – back a Yes vote.
And – of course - so does the mighty trade union movement, and I thank you for that.
So do faith leaders and multicultural groups.
So do big employers and universities.
So does every single major sporting code in this nation.
But most importantly – the Yes cause is being championed by the voices of everyday Australians.
Because the idea of Constitutional recognition through a Voice doesn't belong to politicians or peak bodies.
It's about achieving change from the ground up - and it came from the ground up, from the grassroots, the many years leading up to the First Nations constitutional convention held at Uluru in 2017.
It is the product of literally thousands of conversations among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
Their hopes and aspirations, captured in the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
That extraordinary, generous and gracious invitation - addressed to the Australian people, in a spirit of co-operation.
Asking all of us to walk together to a better future.
Later this year, all of us can say Yes to that request.
We can say Yes to recognising and celebrating the full 65,000 years of our history.
We can say Yes to practical change that will help close the gap and improve lives.
We can vote Yes for a stronger, fairer, more reconciled and more united Australia.
And I am optimistic the Australian people will rise to this moment and will vote Yes.
****
Delegates
I am very fortunate to have a magnificent Victorian team in our Federal Caucus, led by an outstanding Deputy Prime Minister - my friend, Richard Marles.
And of course, you've probably noticed that the Victorian team has recently been increased.
Mary Doyle created history with her remarkable victory in Aston.
The first time a Government has won a seat from the Opposition at a by-election in over 100 years.
That makes it 25 out of 39 seats in the House of Representatives in addition to our four Labor Senators. A pretty good outcome.
It also added to the more than 50 per cent of women who make up our caucus, the first time that has ever happened in a national government.
Thous outcomes are a tribute to the great common sense of the people of Victoria – and it's a tribute to all of you in this room.
A tribute to the energy and passion you give as volunteers, the calls you make, the doors you knock on, the time you dedicate to the cause of Labor.
And in particular, I want to recognise the life members we are honouring this weekend.
Every one of us who has the great honour of serving in the parliamentary party know that we stand on your shoulders – and we will never forget it.
Delegates
Whenever I'm out and about with my Victorian colleagues in their electorates.
In the east or the west, in Melbourne or the regions.
In Ballarat, the home of Eureka.
In Aston, with a Labor MP for the first time in over 30 years.
In Higgins, with a Labor MP for the first time ever.
Wherever I am, I see new work underway, more signs of progress, more signs of change for the better.
I see another school being rebuilt, another TAFE being expanded.
Another level crossing being removed. I've given up trying to keep count.
New jobs in regional towns.
New hospitals in growing suburbs.
New clean energy projects up and running.
New infrastructure everywhere – Dan, surely it's time to rename it ‘The Biggest Build'.
But I see social policy as well.
My government working with Daniel's government to eliminate family and domestic violence.
New co-operation with the trade union movement and employers to make workplaces safer and fairer for all.
And new progress on an agenda of respect and equality for all Victorians. I think about all you have achieved - while facing-down one of the toughest tests that any Government has ever known.
And I genuinely shake my head that at the beginning of this year some of the commentators and people in the Opposition saying Dan was focused on the statue you get after ten years.
Because we all know there are already monuments to this Labor government that Daniel leads everywhere you look:

Good jobs
More reliable services
Healthier communities
Game-changing public transport like Melbourne Metro and the future Suburban Rail Loop

These are the monuments that Labor care about. We don't do things for ourselves. We do things for the state of Victoria and the nation - the things that change lives.
Now all this matters even more, when the going gets tough, when the outlook is uncertain and families are under pressure.
You probably noticed that after May last year and November last year, there were more than a few Senior Liberals on the TV, usually Sky after Dark, quoted in the media saying:
"Well, not a bad election to lose".
Of course, they never say that beforehand…but that's a separate issue.
"Not a bad election to lose".
That comment reveals so much about who the Liberals are and how they think.
They see hard times coming – and they run for cover.
They prefer sitting on the sidelines, taking cheap shots from the cheap seats, and saying no to anything that will help Australians.
That's why I say that they are not so much the Coalition, they are the No-alition.
Just saying no to absolutely everything.
But none of us joined the labour movement to pass the time or to occupy the space.
We are here to govern. We're here to get things done. We're here to do what matters.
To deliver for the people who count on us, especially when they are doing it tough.
Creating opportunities and supporting aspiration, so no-one is held back.
And looking after people who really need help, so no-one is left behind.
That's what drives my team each and every day.
Making sure that Australia comes through these challenging times stronger and more united and more prepared to seize the opportunities in front of us.
That's what we're focused on - working to ease the pressure on family budgets, while we strengthen the national budget.
Supporting people through adversity, while building for our national prosperity.
This is why, in our Budget, we have made the biggest investment in bulk-billing since Medicare was created.
Practical help that will see up to 11 million Australians see a doctor for free.
Including 2.8 million Victorians.
It's why we're working with State Governments like yours to deliver energy bill relief for 5 million households and 1 million small businesses nationwide.
Real help for 1.2 million Victorian families – and over 235,000 Victorian businesses.
And the Coalition voted against this support.
It's why we are rolling-out 180,000 fee-free TAFE places this year – including 55,000 in Victoria.
And we're going to deliver another 300,000 fee-free TAFE places from next year, so more Australians can get the skills they need for a good, secure job.
It's why – starting next month – 1.2 million Australian families will benefit from our plan for Cheaper Child Care.
Including over 300,000 Victorian families.
Help for family Budgets – and, together with our expansion of Paid Parental Leave - an economic reform that will boost productivity and participation.
A central part of our commitment to the full, equal and respectful participation of women in our national economy.
A commitment which has already seen:

A record high participation rate
A record number of women in full time work
And record progress made in closing the gender pay gap.

Making our society fairer – and our economy stronger.
And this week, Labor re-affirmed that we are the party of jobs, jobs and jobs.
In our first twelve months in office, 465,000 jobs have been created.
The most jobs created in the first year of any government in Australian history.
Delegates
The Labor Government I lead believes that every Australian deserves the security of a roof over their head.
Every Australian deserves the sense of connection and community and dignity and stability that a home provides.
This security gives you the opportunity to choose a career, start a family or expand yours, support your children's education, plan for the future - knowing you have a place to call home.
That changes lives. It changed mine.
And we understand that if you want more people to have access to this opportunity, if you want more people to achieve this aspiration then it's about supply - you need to build more housing.
One of the first things we did, on coming to Government was unlock $575 million to invest in more social and affordable homes.
In our first Budget we created the National Housing Accord, with the shared ambition of building 1 million new, well-located homes before the end of the decade.
In our second Budget we provided new incentives to support Build-to-Rent accommodation and significant additional resources for community housing.
And at our most recent National Cabinet, we agreed to work with the states and territories to strengthen renters' rights and to deliver planning reforms that will boost housing supply and affordability.
Because we understand this is a national challenge where every level of Government has a role to play.
In that spirit, today I am proud to announce that our Government is creating a new $2 billion Social Housing Accelerator.
And we will deliver this funding to State and Territory Governments within the next two weeks.
I want to thank the Victorian Premier for his leadership.
We discussed this a little while ago, we've been talking it through about how you can make a difference.
And thank you for your support when we had National Cabinet yesterday.
All of the Premiers and Chief Ministers signed up not just to new additional funding but to reform as well.
I thank you for your leadership.
This is new money – right now – for new social housing.
The last decade has seen the proportion of social housing decline from 4.7 per cent to 4.2 per cent of households.
We had a Federal Government that didn't even bother to have a Housing Minister for most of that time and never spoke about social housing.
There was an interjection from a rowdy bloke at the front - he said maybe it was a secret one. Perhaps that was the case.
Demand for social housing has increased almost three times as fast as the growth in population.
We are determined to work with State and Territory Governments to reverse this decline, as part of our commitment to expand housing supply.
I spoke with every Premier and Chief Minister before the meeting yesterday. But when we met virtually they all committed to ensuring that investment in housing will work alongside better planning laws, reforming zoning and freeing-up more land for new builds.
That's what this is about: real dollars, driving real change and building more homes.
And our Government is not going to wait around while members of the Coalition and the Greens Political Party call for more housing in the media while opposing it in their electorates and voting against it in the Parliament.
The Greens Party imagine that their stubborn, inflexible refusal to compromise or negotiate serves their political interest.
But – delegates - our focus is on the national interest.
They are a party of protest. Happy to promise the world, while organising a petition against every new apartment building that's proposed.
The fact is this: the Greens have blocked more houses than they've ever built.
But we are a party of Government - and we know Australians deserve the respect of practical action.
That's why, instead of playing politics, we are getting on with the job.
Bringing together states and territories and local governments and the construction industry to get things done.
Securing more housing, for more Australians, in more parts of our nation.
Delegates
We are the party that builds for the future.
Which is why, after a decade of delay and denial – we are taking action on climate change, so Australia can take its place as a renewable energy superpower.
We have an abundance of the natural resources and critical minerals that the world needs.
What's been lacking is a Federal Government with the national ambition to match these natural advantages.
Well, what a difference a year can make.
Clean energy investment is now at record levels.
Rooftop solar – for households and small business – is growing faster than ever before.
And we are working with State Governments to approve renewable energy projects.
To train workers for new jobs in clean energy technology.
And to secure the cheaper and more reliable energy that will power a new generation of advanced manufacturing in places like Geelong and Bendigo and Ballarat.
And because we are a Labor Government, we are going to make sure that the Australians employed in these growing industries – as with everywhere else in the country – are fairly-paid for their hard work.
I'm proud that in our first year in Government:
We've consistently advocated for a real increase in the minimum wage, so the lowest paid workers don't go backwards in hard times.
It was in Victoria here, standing next to your Premier, that I was asked would I support an increase in the minimum wage if the Fair Work Commission determined of $1 an hour?
And I said on that day: 'Absolutely'.
And what occurred after that in the coming days was the Coalition catastrophising if any worker ever gets additional money.
They went out there and said the sky will fall in.
Well it's a beautiful day here in Moonee Valley.
And as I was outside there, looking at the track, I saw that the sky is still there after that increase was given.
But the truth is that they have never seen a wage increase that they have supported.
We want an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
That is one of the big differences in Australian politics.
We have revitalised bargaining. We are getting employers and employees back to the table to negotiate improvements in productivity and pay.
We've made 10 days' paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave part of the National Employment Standards.
We've made gender pay equity and job security objectives of the Fair Work Act.
We've abolished the ABCC – and the Registered Organisations Commission.
And in last month's Budget, we provided $11.3 billion for a 15 per cent pay increase for aged care workers.
Delegates
At each and every turn, there are those who claim these fair and sensible reforms are somehow signs of the apocalypse.
Especially our political opponents.
If the Victorian Liberals have become a conspiracy in search of a theory.
The Federal Opposition are basically a doomsday cult.
For them, every day is the end of days.
These are the people who said, literally, energy bill relief for families and businesses was ‘Venezuelan communism'.
They said giving early childhood educators the chance to negotiate for a better deal would ‘close down' Australia and lead to general strikes.
They said our National Reconstruction Fund - investing in new jobs in manufacturing - was some kind of Trojan Horse for a union takeover of the economy.
And now, on that form line, with that track record – they are foaming and sweating about closing the loopholes in Labour Hire.
We recognise there's a legitimate role for Labour Hire in a modern economy.
But it should be used to help firms secure workers with specialist skills, not abused to drive down pay or undermine security across the workforce.
We're going to fix this – with fairness and common sense.
And we are negotiating those issues through in good faith.
Because if you have the same experience, same skills, wear the same uniform and do the same work to the same standard for the same company if you do the same job, of course you deserve the same pay.
Delegates
More and more in the modern political debate, there are those who think being a progressive candidate or a progressive party is about a state of mind, or a choice of words.
They think it's a question of their brand, their identity.
In the labour movement, we know there's only one test that counts.
We know being progressive is about making progress, making an actual difference to people's lives.
And that's what we're focused on.
Making Medicare stronger.
Making child care cheaper.
Making aged care better.
Making equality for women a national priority.
Making things here in Australia with advanced manufacturing.
Making sure that we seize the opportunities of cleaner, cheaper energy.
Making housing more affordable for more Australians.
Making sure this a more reconciled country, by recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in our Constitution – and listening to their Voice.
And making every single day count.
This is the better Australia that Australians voted for.
This is the Better Future we are building, together.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging. Thankyou to Auntie Annie for her Welcome to Country.
I will say that I'm very proud to lead a government that will give Australians the opportunity to recognise that privilege we have sharing this beautiful country over half with the oldest continuous culture on Earth, and recognising them in our Constitution in a referendum that will be held in the last quarter of this year.
I want to welcome Anne Webster, the Federal member here, and the state members who are here. Robyn, we had a chat&nbsp; - I think it was before 7, it was pretty early in Canberra - about three weeks ago, when we weren't able to proceed because of the weather because we literally weren't able to fly into here.
So I was really pleased that when I talked with Robyn, and sent my apologies, I committed to coming back as soon as possible. One of the things I try to do was always do what I say I will do.
And here we are today, just a few weeks later. I was chatting with Robyn about that when she attended the Australian Council of Local Government just a week later there in Canberra, which it was much colder than it is here. It's all relative here.
Can I also say that I'm so pleased to be here in this beautiful town. We were a bit early getting here today, we allowed for a bit of turbulence. So it meant that we got dropped off right at the other end of the city and went for a walk through and had a chat with many of the locals who stopped and were surprised somewhat that the Prime Minister was walking down the main street of Horsham.
But it's a fantastic thing. One of the great honours and privileges that I have is going out and about. I want to ensure that I'm a Prime Minister for the whole country. And that means going not just the big city, we're going to our regional cities and our regional towns, as well as our remote communities. That is why I was really pleased to take on the invitation to visit here at this absolutely fabulous riverfront system.
Our waterfronts are precious. I used to live pretty close to a river in Sydney. And it's always a centre. There's something about Australia and that egalitarian ethos that we have, that we have the public spaces that are so important. Because it says, as much as we all struggle these days with social media with that sort of individualism that's very much a part of modern society, we're social beings.
We want to gather in places. We want to have barbecues. We want to gather families and have young and old be able to enjoy facilities.
And that's why this facility here jointly funded by the Federal and the State Labor Government, as well I thank the Andrews Government for their contribution, as well as the council to make a difference here. A $3.2 million project that will really highlight the beauty of this river and the riverfront here.
You should cherish the ovals and the open spaces, the&nbsp;botanic gardens that are here. This is truly a beautiful city. And this project here enhances that even more.
I know that this revitalisation&nbsp;work along the Wimmera River will keep drawing in tourists, making a difference for people who want to explore the Wimmera Region and the many National Parks and enjoy the good company of the friendly locals. I must say, the cafes along the strip there look pretty fantastic as well.
I'm sure that the Angling Club - the mayor was telling me that along the adjuncts that are off the walk there, there's a place where people can come and chuck a line in the river. And that's a great thing as well.
I'm sure that there'll be a lot of stories here at this park in the riverfront about just how big the fish was that got away. And I'm sure that every fish will be exactly as huge as the fisherpeople say it is. So that's a good thing.
Could I just congratulate everyone associated with this project. Projects like this create jobs during construction. Although I note that the young people here who greeted me, and thank you for that, they were very proud that they participated in the artwork. That's now a part of this.
And as they grow up, hopefully they can show their kids and maybe even their grandkids - hopefully not too soon for the parents involved - they can show them that they made a contribution to the artwork that made this such a fantastic facility.
That sense of ownership that it has, by participating and engaging and involving people, is exactly the principle that we have for our engagement with local governments.
It's what we're trying to do with consultations, as well, on the Voice.&nbsp;Engaging people, giving them that sense of belonging and that sense of ownership. You've done that by engaging the local kids and that's a fantastic thing.
So congratulations, particularly to the Mayor and the council for all the work that you have done. And it's great that so many members of the local community have come out for today's opening, so congratulations.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for Constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in a referendum in the last quarter of this year.
On that note, I want to thank the AFL and the Swans for their longstanding support for Constitutional Recognition and their public backing of a Yes vote.
On Tuesday night, when the great Mark Williams was inducted into the Hall of Fame he reminded us how hard it can be for Aboriginal players to make their way to the highest level.
But how lucky are we that they do.
Over the years, Sydney supporters have had the absolute privilege of barracking for a team with superstars like Michael O’Loughlin, Adam Goodes and Buddy Franklin.
Champions of your club – but also greats of the game.
People who have made footy better with their skill on the field and their strength of character off the field.
I think what’s true for footy, is true for Australia as a whole.
In sport and art and music and literature and film, tourism, business, politics and the law, our national identity has been enriched by embracing the world’s oldest continuous culture.
That 65,000 years of shared history brings us together, it’s a source of pride for all of us and later this year, we will have a chance to recognise it in our Constitution.
I’m confident Australians will rise to this moment of national unity and say Yes.

Friends, this magnificent new Sydney Swans HQ and Community Centre, is a monument to the vision, the dedication and the hard work of so many people here today.
I’m old enough to remember when the Swans moved to Sydney and it’s fair to say it was a pretty easy ticket to get back then, not exactly Taylor Swift.
I also remember the tough times when I joined Save Our Swans to ensure Sydney retained a side in the national competition.
No outsider could have imagined your club in such a strong position, with such state-of-the-art facilities.
But the people inside your footy club have always had a belief and a passion that has seen you not just survive but thrive.
And in that same spirit I want to congratulate everyone who has played a part in bringing this outstanding new project to life.
Judging by last Saturday’s modest 171 point win, you are already seeing the results.

I’m confident these new facilities will drive even more growth through the Youth Academy as well as supporting the extraordinary surge in AFLW, inspiring the next generation of women and girls.
Something I’m proud my Government is supporting through our $2.5 million investment in Henson Park.
These new high-performance facilities are outstanding but equally important is the community access.
One of the reasons all of us love sport is because it brings people together.
It breaks down barriers, it boosts confidence, it teaches people about teamwork.
And it is a really important way of generating awareness and driving support for people and programs.
That’s why I am so pleased this will be a place that gives back to the community.
Because this is not just Swans HQ, it is a Red Cross donor centre and a new home for the Hoops Capital Academy as well as the GO Foundation and Clontarf Foundation, providing new educational opportunities for Indigenous Australians.
They say a one-percenter can change the course of a game.
But the work these foundations do can change the course of someone’s life.
You can take all pride in the contribution you are making to that.
I hope this new space brings a new era of success to all of you who call it home.


Well, thanks so much, John, for that introduction, of which I think two things sprung to mind.
One is I now know why I'm so tired.
And secondly, I think I'll take you around the country to introduce me every time I speak, because that was very, very generous.
I do want to also acknowledge here my Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus, who is doing an extraordinary job.
I want to acknowledge a former Deputy Prime Minister, we're in the former Deputy Prime Minister's club, Mark Vaile and former Speaker Tony Smith.
And I also acknowledge the members of the Victorian Parliament, Ministers and Members of Parliament who are here, and his excellency as well, the Israeli Ambassador.
I also want to pay tribute, given this is my first formal occasion since the untimely passing of Simon Crean.
I was with Simon not too long ago in Melbourne at a lunch, a birthday lunch. And he full of life and really continuing to make an extraordinary contribution to our nation as the head of the European-Australian Business Chamber.
Simon is someone who, from the time I became Labor leader, was always available on the end of the phone.
Being Opposition Leader is not a fun job. The current one I'm enjoying much more. But Simon was always is available to give his wisdom and his experience.
He was a great leader of our movement as the President of the ACTU as well as a Minister who served in four governments of Hawke, Keating, Rudd and Gillard and someone who rose, of course, to have the honour of leading the Labor Party.
But above all, he was a man of decency and integrity and honour. And I think that the stance that he took on the Iraq War was a courageous one.
I'll never forget him going to talk to the troops, to explain to them very clearly and courageously that he supported them. He just had a different view on the government's position.
So, he's someone who'll be sadly missed. I spoke with Carol, his beloved wife, on Wednesday&nbsp;and I don't think I've seen a marriage quite like it. They were so close.
It is a shock for everyone in the labour movement. I know that he was respected right across the political spectrum and I pay tribute to him today. There will be quite a send off here in Melbourne. His family have accepted the offer of a state funeral.
I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
The Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce has an important tradition of discourse with major issues. This has always been a forum which has engaged with complexity and uncertainty.
Recognising that in our modern world we are often confronted with the consequences of events beyond our borders, or outside our control.
The challenges facing our economy right now are proof of that. Outside of the GFC and pandemic, the Treasury forecast for global growth is the weakest it's been in more than two decades.
Almost every advanced economy around the world is grappling with the very difficult combination of persistent high inflation and rising interest rates. And we know that that's causing real pressure on families here in Australia.
The global supply shock triggered by the pandemic, followed by Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine, continues to impact global supply chains and energy prices.
And I want to note that – for Australia and the Government I lead – the conflict in Ukraine is not just a ‘factor’ in a list of economic challenges. It is a critical test for the international rules-based order and the right of every nation to sovereignty, security and peace.
That’s why, earlier this week, I was proud to announce. together with Richard Marles, a further $110 million in military and humanitarian assistance, another reminder that Australia will stand with the people of Ukraine and President Zelenskyy for as long as it takes.
We are the largest non-NATO contributor to this military effort, apart from Sweden, which is about to join NATO.
Of course, a period of global economic and strategic uncertainty will have an effect on Australia and our economy. How long that lasts and the form it takes are beyond the control of any single nation state.
But the way in which we respond, the way we prepare, the resilience and security we build here for ourselves, all of that is in our hands – and all of it is absolutely fundamental to our Government’s approach.
Now I am optimistic that with the right approach Australia can weather these global headwinds. The fact that we have presided over the creation of 465,000 jobs in our first year – the most of any new Government in Australia’s history since Federation – is evidence of the potential we have for positive outcomes.
We are powering new jobs and industries by investing in clean energy – setting Australia up as a renewable energy superpower and reinforcing our energy sovereignty at the same time.
We are revitalising our manufacturing capacity, so that we can make things here again and move up the international value chain.
We are investing in our people and their skills, not the least of which is through 480 000 fee-free TAFE places, so that Australians&nbsp;can take on those new jobs in emerging industries as well as in areas of skills shortage.
We are bringing together business and government to work on cyber security, broadening our digital skills base and upgrading the NBN.
We are driving overdue reform in the care and support economy – so we can be confident that all Australians have access to the quality aged care and disability care they deserve.
And from tomorrow we are delivering cheaper child care for 1.2 million families including over 300 000 right here in Victoria.
This won’t just help with the family budget but will be an economic reform. It is not welfare. It is about boosting productivity. It is about boosting workforce participation. It will assist with population growth as well. The three Ps of growth all covered off in one policy: productivity, participation, population. That's how you can grow an economy.
Whether it is boosting productivity, strengthening our supply chains or delivering energy bill relief for families and small businesses, our economic strategy is about taking pressure off the cost of living without putting pressure on inflation.
Most critically, because of our consistent focus on returning revenue upgrades to the budget and making prudent savings, we are well on track to delivering Australia’s first Budget surplus in 15 years.
A turnaround from a projected $78 billion deficit one year previously, to a surplus in excess of the $4.2 billion we projected last month, is an extraordinary achievement in the face of $1 trillion of debt inherited from the last government.
And on Wednesday official statistics pointed to inflation heading in the right direction.
Record jobs, lower inflation, larger surplus – an economic trifecta which is cause for optimism. And one which is the envy of other advanced economies.
Of course, everything we do to strengthen our economy at home is reinforced by the work we are doing to rebuild Australia’s standing in the world.
That includes stabilising our relationship with China, but also regaining the trust of our Pacific family and re-asserting Australia’s role in multilateral forums such as ASEAN, demonstrating we are back at the table as a constructive contributor to action on everything from climate change to food security.
This matters.
1 in 4 Australian jobs depend on international trade and that ratio is only going to increase as the economic transformation underway in our region, the fastest growing region of the world in human history, gathers pace.
Securing Australia’s place as a partner in this progress, depends on continuing to invest in our capability and our relationships.
All of that is what we are doing. How we do it matters as well.
We’ve made it a priority to bring people together, to build co-operation, to seek consensus. Because I’ve always believed that you get the best results when you consult people who are directly affected by the decisions you’re making.
And the best way to secure lasting change is to give people a sense of ownership, rather than impose change from above.
Which brings me to the focus of my remarks today: the historic opportunity which we will all be able to share in later this year.
And I thank Leon and the Chamber very much for the invitation to address you today.
I began this address with the acknowledgment of country. We take it for granted now. It's an important beginning.
That such a courtesy has become part of the rhythm of Australian life is a good thing.
Footy games, business events, university activities, the Parliament, we do it as a matter of course.
But it is just a beginning. We are ready as a nation to go further.
I'm proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the opportunity to give constitutional recognition to our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in a referendum that will be held in the last quarter of the year.
It will be a great moment of Australian unity as we take that next step on our journey to reconciliation.
The referendum is our chance for constitutional recognition in the form requested by Indigenous Australians at the First Nations Constitutional Convention, held at Uluru in 2017. Recognition and listening. That is what this referendum is about.
For while words are important, we give them their truest meaning through our actions. Such a sentiment won’t come as a revelation to anyone here in this room.
It is a source of pride that Australia played the role it did in the founding of the modern state of Israel. Of course it was a Labor leader – Doc Evatt who played such a central role in the United Nations. As he wrote in his memoir:
“I regard the establishment of Israel as a great victory of the United Nations.”
The friendship between our two nations has been a constant. Australia supports democracy in Israel, just as we support it across the world.
The mark of any true friendship is not just our willingness to stand up for each other, but also our candour. True friends want each other to be the best they can be.
We continue Australia’s support for a two-state solution. Israelis and Palestinians deserve to prosper in peace behind secure and recognised borders. The Government I lead will take a principled approach to these issues.
Just as that will remain firm, so will the bonds between Australia and Israel, bonds&nbsp;nourished by the long and important Jewish presence in the story of modern Australia, as well as the important economic relationship that our two nations can have, that can grow and thrive in the future.
Ours is a story that has long been intertwined.
Turn the clock back to nearly a decade before the state of Israel’s establishment and you come to Yorta Yorta leader and trade unionist William Cooper leading a protest at the German consulate in Melbourne.
William Cooper recognised injustice when he saw it. And, when the sun was setting on Europe’s final year of peace, he saw it so clearly amid the gathering shadows.
Talking to you about the Voice, it would be remiss to not mention a great champion of your organisation, community and the reconciliation movement, Mark Leibler. I was moved recently by his reflections in the Australian Jewish News. In his words:
“The story of the stand William Cooper took on behalf of our people hit me like a bolt of lightning.” &nbsp;
Mark continues:
“It had taken me 50 years to realise the extent of the continuing injustice Indigenous Australians were suffering, how they had been scarred by dispossession, disrespect and racism – the same weapons that have been used against the Jewish people for millennia.”
We cannot dismiss the weight of the past, but what will energise Australia is an uplifting sense of hope for the future.
And I believe it drove William Cooper. Nine decades ago in 1933 – five years before his consulate protest – he was addressing another injustice as he began drawing up the petition that constituted the first call for something akin to a Voice to Parliament.
Think about that. 1933 William Cooper was talking about a Voice to Parliament equivalent.
As I say: if not now, when are we going to get this done?
And that is the energy at the core of the Uluru Statement from the Heart and the gracious invitation that it represents. It extends to all of us. I know that in this room, it is an invitation that has fallen on receptive ears.
&nbsp;
****
One great source of encouragement has been the broad spectrum of multicultural groups and faith groups that will say yes to constitutional recognition this year. Leaders of Jewish, Christian, Muslim, Hindu and Buddhist faiths, and others, are all advocating a ‘Yes’ vote in the referendum.
Groups that through the sheer weight of collective experience, instinctively understand discrimination to be the anathema that it is.
Groups that just as instinctively understand that as important as tolerance is, it is a very low bar. Together, we can aim so much higher than tolerance.
Rather than merely tolerating each other, we should be lifting each other up, celebrating each other, taking pride in the diversity that makes this great country the best country on earth.
And when it comes to the First Peoples of this land, what an immense source of pride for us that we share a continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
So it came as no surprise when so many Jewish groups threw their weight so emphatically behind the ‘Yes’ vote.
Being in Melbourne today, it’s appropriate to pay thanks to the Jewish Community Council of Victoria, together with B’nai B’rith, the Ark Centre and Stand Up for supporting a Voice to Parliament.
It’s a support that has taken some powerfully worded forms, not least from Rabbi Ralph Genende, who wrote:
“We identify with and are filled with admiration for the First Peoples’ commitment to the land of their ancestors. We are both peoples of long memory. May the power and vision that impels our dreams help us promote the dreams of the first people of this land.”
Fittingly, Rabbi Genende speaks of how words from the heart speak to the heart. As Rabbi David Saperstein explains, that is a sentiment as much at home in Jewish thinking as it is in Catholic theology and 13th century Muslim poetry.
And it is undoubtedly an even broader spectrum than that.
The Uluru Statement from the Heart does speak to our hearts. A short document long in the making, it is a masterclass in spare eloquence. I keep a copy of it on the wall of my office in Parliament House. There isn’t a day that I don’t look up at it.
Sometimes I focus on a couple of lines, but often I read it right through. If you haven’t, I recommend you do. Like the Gettysburg Address, it only requires a few minutes. It literally fits on one A4 page.
In return, it will give you something that lasts a lifetime. That’s a pretty favourable exchange rate. I just want to revisit some of it. And I quote:
"With substantial constitutional change and structural reform, we believe this ancient sovereignty can shine through as a fuller expression of Australia's nationhood.
Proportionately, we are the most incarcerated people on the planet. We are not an innately criminal people. Our children are alienated from their families at unprecedented rates. This cannot be because we have no love for them.
And our youth languish in detention in obscene numbers. They should be our hope for the future. These dimensions of our crisis tell plainly the structural nature of our problem – this is the torment of our powerlessness."
What an extraordinary phrase that is: “the torment of our powerlessness”. Neither a surrender nor a resignation, but a declaration of truth and unbowed dignity
It concludes with this:
“In 1967 we were counted. In 2017 we seek to be heard. We leave base camp and start our trek across this vast country. We invite you to walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future.”
And that is an invitation. Not just to myself as Prime Minister, but to everyone in this room, to walk with Indigenous Australians to a better future.
&nbsp;
****
I feel an enduring gratitude to the work Ken Wyatt did as the Minister for Indigenous Australians in the previous government. Likewise, I admire those like Julian Leeser, who resigned from the Coalition frontbench in order to be able to campaign for the ‘Yes’ vote.
Ken has shown enormous courage in making, what must have been, a difficult decision to leave the Party that he served, as has Julian in choosing to move to the backbench as a matter of principle.
Of course, this isn't about politics. It certainly isn't about politicians. This is about people.
And about the first peoples of this land who happen to be the most disadvantaged group in our entire nation.
People striving to make themselves heard across our great nation. In the regions and beyond in the remotest corners of our vast and beautiful continent.
All those voices rising across Australia like the headwaters of a thousand creeks and rivers, all joining into a mighty and wonderful current that will converge around each one of us as we step into the booth on referendum day.
And that is how it should be. A process that began far from Canberra, returning to the people. Parliaments pass laws, but it is people that make history.
Of course, there always people who are resistant to change. But to those cling to the old saying “If ain't broke don't fix it”, I say this: It is broken. Profoundly broken.
And I declare on recognition - if not now, when?
The status quo is a chasm between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
Just consider the facts. Indigenous people have an eight-year gap in life expectancy, a suicide rate twice as high, and rates of disease and infant mortality and family violence so much worse than those of the general community.
Something that shakes me is that young men are more likely to go to jail than to go to university. In 2023.
They have among the worst incarceration rates in the world. Only four out of the 19 Closing the Gap targets are on track. 4 out of 19.
These figures are a call-out to all of us to make this a national priority.
Australians can do more than one thing at a time – and that very much includes the Government. We are focused on all elements of Australia’s wellbeing, whether it’s security, defence, social policy, the environment, or the economy, or international relations.
So much of what we do is made possible by the good health of our economy, and one of our greatest priorities will always be anticipating and tackling economic challenges, seizing the opportunities which are there, and helping Australians deal with cost of living pressures.
A healthy economy remains the door you have to get through to get to everything else. It is the fuel of reform.
But just as that is one of the foundations on which our nation stands, so is the ongoing process of reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
The idea of recognition through a Voice did not come from Canberra.
It came from Indigenous Australians themselves, from the ground up, from the people who know the difference that change can make.
In the words of Aunty Pat Anderson at the media conference we did last week after the Senate passed the referendum legislation:
“It is a universal truism when you involve people you make decisions for, you make better decisions …”
That is all that the Voice is. No right of veto. Not a funding body. Not a body that will run programs. That is all that it is.
And the referendum is just that plus recognition.
That is what this is about — listening to people, working with people, getting better decisions.
And not making the mistake of thinking that if we just keep repeating the same-old approach of doing things with the best of intentions for or to Indigenous Australians rather than with Indigenous Australians, somehow we’ll get a different result.
****
Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus is here today and I do recommend his second reading speech that he gave in Parliament. He made it very clear what the Voice would focus on: “matters specific to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples” …
… and, importantly, on “matters … which affect Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples differently to other members of the Australian community”.
So if I assure you that if the Voice was there when the Reserve Bank meets next week about interest rates they would not get on the phone to the Voice.
They don't get on the phone with the Prime Minister.
Some of these fear campaigns are frankly diminishing of the people who make them.
But what it will do is add something to how we see ourselves as a nation, but also how the rest of the world sees us.
The value of that will be beyond measure.
And it will be wrapped in the protection of the Constitution, that Indigenous Australians will - in the words of the four land councils from the Northern Territory, who visited me to present the new Barunga statement for a Yes vote for the referendum - that they would “never … be rendered silent with the stroke of a pen again”.
That's why Indigenous Australians have asked for that constitutional enshrinement.
This referendum is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to make a positive change that will outlast us. It will not take away anything from our 122-year-old democracy.
Instead, as the Solicitor-General has clearly stated, it will enhance our democracy.
And, as Noel Pearson has put it, it will be an act of faith and love.
I repeat again - if not now, when?
For Indigenous Australia, it stands to lift up their very lives.
It is a small investment with such a great return. None of us has anything to lose. But we have something wonderful and so very real to gain.
And with a Yes vote, it will lift us all.
We are always at our best when we look to the future in hope, in fairness, and with an abiding faith in our better selves.
Who do we want to be when we wake up the morning after this referendum?
I believe we will rise with a stronger sense of ourselves. A great nation that has deserved to become even greater – not just to ourselves but to the world.
And I firmly believe that we will. Because of who we have shown ourselves to be.


Well, thanks very much.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I thank Aunty Marcia for the wonderful welcome to country.
And I declare that I'm very proud to lead a Government that will give all of you, along with all Australians, the opportunity to vote for recognition of First Nations people in our Constitution in the last quarter of this year.
Vote Yes.
Well, South Sydney certainly are the pride of the league. And this magnificent turnout here today gives me enormous pride as well.
I do want to acknowledge that this hasn't just come about.
It has come about because of the work of people like Michael Daley, who went to an election committing to funding of this program here.
It goes to Matt Thistlethwaite, who was constantly in my ear as well and made sure that we made the commitment in 2013 that led to the Federal funding of this project.
And of course, the local community through local government, through Randwick City Council as well.
So, whilst governments are important though, I think that what this magnificent development symbolises isn't governments, its people power.
Because back in 1999, when I was a member of the South Sydney board, and I said at my late mum's funeral, who used to take me to Redfern Oval there and sit in the corner, watching Souths play, that I wasn't sure whether she was more proud that I was a member of the national Parliament, or that I was a member of South Sydney board. Because I think it was about it even for her. Maybe PM might have topped it, who knows, because she passed away, way back in 2002.
And the then South Sydney administration and players all came to her funeral. It said something about the nature of this club.
But in 1999, when I was meeting with various powerful figures who were telling us that South Sydney should just amalgamate, we should just go and support another club, I said to them that you don't understand that team sport.
And South Sydney Rugby League Football Club&nbsp;isn't just about what happens on the field.
It's about your sense of identity, about who you are, about belonging in a community and a society. And that this club personifies that.
This is the only club in world sport, literally, that has been excluded from a competition and has come back unchanged. The only one in the entire world.
So, I want you all to give a special clap now.
And I want it to be the loudest that you give today.
I want you to give a clap to the late Johnny Sattler who signed this in 2014.
I want you to give a clap to all of you and those who passed who marched, not once, but twice in over 100,000 people on Sydney Town Hall to demand our club be returned to the National Rugby League.
Because that says so much about Australia.
That says so much about who we are as a country.
This was the ultimate battle of the little guy versus the big and powerful corporate interests, who felt that it was all just about money.
It was about much more than that.
It was about who we are.
And the fact that so many marched with us and supported us and campaigned with us, including, yes, Chris Minns, I'm proud to say Canterbury and Newcastle and all those supporters of rugby league from Queensland and right throughout the whole country who said, 'No, we have values and their decision to exclude our club is simply not tenable'.
So, we fought our way back.
And since then, we've fought our way into winning our 21st premiership in 2014 and to being a powerhouse of the National Rugby League.
And this centre here isn't just about elite sport.
Because Souths have always been about more than that.
It's about community.
It's about the youngest kids here being able to meet with their idols, Latrell and Cody and Cam and all the team.
But also being able to play everything from rugby league to basketball, wheelchair rugby was going on in there earlier today.
But it's also about the work that Souths do in outreach.
Souths Cares is one of the great charities in this country, that creates opportunity for Indigenous Australians to close the gap.
And that's what the referendum later this year is about as well.
It's about a practical initiative to close the gap.
Giving Indigenous Australians their voice, allowing them to be heard, and allowing them to be listened to.
And that's why it's so important as well going forward.
So, to Blake and the team of Souths, congratulations on what is a magnificent achievement.
But to all of you who have made this possible, feel proud today.
Because this doesn't just happen.
This is the ultimate representation of people power in this country.
And the fact that we can be proud that in a democracy such as ours, the voices of people do matter.
Have a great day.


It’s a pleasure to be in Berlin on my first official visit as Prime Minister.
And it’s great to join you this evening to talk about the opportunities ahead.
Germany and Australia have had a diplomatic relationship spanning 70 years.
During this time, Germany has transformed itself into the economic backbone of Europe.
And Australia has become a major player in resources and energy trade, with a vibrant and diverse economy.
My discussions with Chancellor Scholz earlier today were focused on the future ...
... and building even stronger bonds between our people and our economies.
Because there’s enormous potential to be tapped.
There are few economies in the world as complementary as ours.
I am determined to transform Australia into a renewable energy superpower.
Our cooperation with Germany on hydrogen is a testament to this effort.
We’re continuing to explore opportunities to export Australian green hydrogen and critical minerals to Germany — drawing, of course, on both German and Australian technology and know-how.
Pursuing such opportunities means Australia and our trading partners can all benefit, and new downstream industries can contribute to Australian jobs and economic growth and to the global transition to net zero.
Of course, challenges abound.
We feel the same economic headwinds in Australia as here in Germany.

Forecast global growth is the weakest it has been in two decades.
Advanced economies are managing tight budgets, high inflation and rising interest rates.
Russia's illegal and abhorrent invasion of Ukraine continues to take an enormous toll.
And the social and economic impacts of climate change are more keenly felt.

These challenges remind us that strong and trusted trading relationships deliver real and tangible improvements to people’s lives.
But whenever there are challenges, there are also opportunities.
Think of the opportunities that exist between our economies.
Australia has;

deposits of all the critical minerals and resources that are essential to energy security and the green energy transition,
cutting edge technology,
skilled workers and
stability.

I encourage you to look at investment opportunities between our two countries, which I know many of you here this evening are doing.
And for our part, we are working on the framework to make closer economic operation possible.
This is why we are working hard to conclude a trade deal with the European Union: To diversify our trade, give exporters a competitive edge, and create jobs.
We’re looking to business both in Australia and Germany to be vocal in support of such an agreement.
Achieving our ambitions will depend on those in this room — on both sides of the commercial relationship.
So it’s a pleasure to meet with you this evening.
I look forward to hearing from you about how Australia and Germany can work more closely in the years ahead.


Thanks very much and congratulations to you and Muswellbrook Council on what you're doing here which is quite magnificent, and I think is leading the country.
Can I also begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting today, pay my respects to elder's past, present, and emerging. Thanks very much to the dancers and for the Welcome to Country here. We’re enriched by celebrating our history in this country that, of course, goes back beyond 1788, and will be enriched further by acknowledging it in our Constitution, which all of you will have the opportunity to vote on in the last quarter of this year.
It is indeed a great pleasure to be here with my mate, Dan Repacholi, the member for Hunter - this is my second visit here in three weeks.
I acknowledge as well, I was at Singleton Roosters clubhouse just a couple of weeks ago, a private visit that we made. And all of the families of people who are impacted there, I know that has had an impact not just on this region, but on the entire country, that tragedy. And my heart goes out to those people who are still hurting in that community, and I thank them for the very generous welcome that I had in the clubhouse on that day. It was a private visit, but it was a very moving one.
Can I acknowledge as well the state member for Upper Hunter who is here, and all of the councillors who are here, as well as the community, out in force today. And why not? Because this is an amazing celebration. The building, of course, bears the name of Donald Horne, who grew up here and became such a powerhouse of Australia's intellectual life. Telling Australia's story as he did so phenomenally, particularly in the famous book that I studied as a very young man, as did most Australians I think, ‘The Lucky Country’. He said this:
The Lucky Country isn’t so much an examination of the role luck has played in Australian life, as an impassioned call for us to be a country where intelligence and imagination are prized as much as the other good qualities that have helped make the place what it is.
What a fitting statement for the Center of Innovation here in this great regional centre&nbsp;that has helped to drive the Australian economy in the past, and will drive the Australian economy in the future if we take and seize the opportunities which are there, right before us.
This building is a perfect encapsulation of Muswellbrook, it's an act of respect for your heritage that simultaneously looks ahead to the future. We are in what is by production of course, Australia's largest coal producing region and one that has made so much possible for our nation. It has brought wealth not just to this region, but to the entire country. But there are new opportunities on our doorstep that will, if we seize them, create economic growth and secure jobs for decades to come.
I noticed in today's papers there's a bit of a discussion about productivity. Anyone who comes here to this Center and discusses what it will do, it is about just that driving productivity. Getting start-ups, and creating what begins as a small idea into a large activity that brings jobs and economic activity and growth to the region, as well as inspiring young people.
Muswellbrook, and more broadly, the Hunter have for so long been at the heart of Australia's energy story, but of course we know that change is occurring. And it's important that communities seize the opportunities and not get left behind.
The Hunter Innovation Precinct, to which the Donald Horne Building is the latest addition, is such an important part of that. Part of ensuring that we shape the future, instead of allowing it to shape us. That we seize Australia's rightful future as a renewable energy superpower, a future that's built on new technology, on innovation, on advanced manufacturing, on making things here - every Australian stands to benefit from that. That was a major part of the pitch that we put successfully to the Australian people in May of last year - a future made in Australia.
One of the things that clearly will define us is how we respond to the challenges which are there.
And during the pandemic we were reminded that if Australia just remains at the end of supply chains, and we continue to see the decline in manufacturing and making things here and our capacity to be resilient in the century ahead, then we'll go backwards.
If we though seize the opportunity to make more things here, through buildings such as this, through the incredible foresight that the council has, and that the people I've spoken with this morning have, then our future is incredibly bright.
We've created as well the National Reconstruction Fund, a $15 billion fund, to back advanced manufacturing, to back new industries to make sure that we can make things here. And I see this hub as really benefiting from that in the future because we want to make sure that regional economic growth is the key to our success as a nation.
This building will be where intelligence and imagination are prized for what they are - the key ingredients that go into making as a great nation, the ingredients that with the right nurturing help make what is the greatest nation on Earth even greater in the future, and I'm very confident that we can do that. We can do that by shaping that change, that's what this building embodies. Shaping that change for existing innovators, but also inspiring the students who will come in here over the coming weeks, months and many years ahead.
I think together with the revitalisation here of the Muswellbrook Town Center, I think Muswellbrook, this town, has a very exciting future and a very positive one. And I'm very pleased and honoured to be invited to be here today. I get a lot of invites, I’ve got to say, but when I read the pitch from the Council for what this was all about, I was determined to make sure that I was here because I can't think of anything that embodies where we need to go as a country more than what is taking place right here in the heartland of the Hunter Valley today.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respect to their elders past, present and emerging, and I pay my respect to any Indigenous people who are joining us here today.
To Carole Crean and the members of the Crean Family, to Brigadier Robert Marsh representing the Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia, Professor James Angus, the Lieutenant General of Victoria, to the Premier of Victoria, Dan Andrews and to Cath Andrews, and to Sussan Ley representing the Leader of the Opposition.
Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
We are here to mourn a great Australian who served his country and his community with humility and compassion, with integrity and intellect.
A beloved son of the Australian Labor Party whose personal qualities earned him a respect that knew no political boundaries.&nbsp;
As one of its true servants, Simon embodied so much of what truly matters at the heart of the labour movement.
That spirit of working together and standing up for each other. And above all, the sense of fairness that was forever his guiding star.
As the son of Frank Crean, who had regular encounters at home with the likes of Doc Evatt, Arthur Calwell and Gough Whitlam, Simon had the benefit of growing up observing Labor history firsthand.
He fulfilled so many roles. Secretary of the Storemen and Packers Union. President of the ACTU.
Member for Hotham. Minister and Cabinet Minister in the Hawke, Keating, Rudd and Gillard Governments. Deputy Leader and then Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. Chairman of the European Australian Business Council.
What he never was, though, was a person who believed in positions-of-convenience. He never bought into politics as a game.
His instinct was for reform, for change, for new ways of looking at problems, new approaches to solving them. To join the dots, as he was so fond of putting it.
He often greeted the world with a crinkle-eyed geniality – an apt introduction to this man of decency, kindness and boundless generosity, and I think the photo that is in the booklet at the front page today captures Simon - a photo I’ve never seen, just extraordinary.
Politics may have its share of those who believe profoundly in their right to bear grudges, but Simon wasn’t one of them.
He could fight battles against someone, yet still maintain the respect of the other. Even more uncommonly, he could keep the friendship.
That’s because what always guided Simon was principle.
When he voiced his opposition to sending Australian troops to the Iraq War he made it clear his argument was not with those who wore the uniform and served in Australia’s name, but with the Howard Government.
He rose so powerfully to the occasion in making that argument, each sentence he spoke in Parliament as fierce and as bright as a lightning strike.
His stance would be vindicated by history, yet was deeply at odds with much of the political and media climate at the time. Simon’s principles did not turn with the breeze.
He reiterated his stance in the presence of President George W. Bush, reasoning – rightly – to quote Simon, that “friends must be honest with each other”.&nbsp; President Bush was moved to describe it as a “fine speech”.
But perhaps one of the most striking illustrations of Simon’s character was the first of his Iraq speeches, when he went to speak with our troops face to face ahead of their deployment.
Though he did not believe Australia should be part of that war, he made clear to our troops that the respect and gratitude he felt for them was deep and unwavering.
Simon’s ministerial career was quite extraordinary. In portfolios as diverse as Employment, Training, Regional Development, Trade, Primary Industries, Science, Simon gave his all, characterised by inclusive engagement and a determination to make a positive difference, not just to occupy the space.
I do want to single out Simon’s passion for the arts, which he understood was an essential part of the Labor mission. It was not a side project or a mere distraction or decoration.
He knew a culturally confident nation has the strength to know itself and the imagination to enlarge itself.
His final ministerial action was the launch of the cultural policy Creative Nation. A decade later, Simon’s work provided the five pillars on which my Government’s cultural policy Revive is based. And we ensured that Simon was there at the Espy launch earlier this year.
Today we express our respect and gratitude to Simon, a man who held the same values throughout his entire career, from his early union days to his trips to Europe in the name of Australia’s economic interests.
It’s telling even if you just look at the words that bookend his distinguished parliamentary career.
In his maiden speech, Simon devoted himself to the national interest and to the creation of a “more just and equitable society”.
Then turn to his final two speeches to Parliament, which happened to both be condolences.
One for Hazel Hawke, in which Simon echoed Hazel’s request to us all, to “think about what this country could be, inspiring Australians to approach their futures creatively and hopefully”.
And the other was for Mandawuy Yunupingu, Simon urging us to sort out the unfinished business of Closing the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia. &nbsp;
Simon served his country right until the end. It was bittersweet for me arriving in Berlin last week so soon after him.
Had the circumstances been different, I know we would have compared notes. More importantly, I would have been the beneficiary of his wisdom, as I so often was.
My hope now is that our sadness can give way to a sense of celebration of a life so very well lived.
Carole and the family. Carole, the glow of the great love between you will never fade from your heart. We wrap you and all your family in our thoughts today.
May our friend and comrade Simon Crean rest in peace.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for Constitutional Recognition through a Voice, in a referendum later this year.
In the Territory, there are great local examples of what can be achieved when governments listen to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and work with them: from schools to employment programs to Indigenous Rangers.
Voting Yes for a Voice will mean recognition, listening and better results, nationwide.
It’s been great to meet with my friend Chief Minister Natasha Fyles and to see key members of her Territory Labor Government here in Canberra over the past two days.
And it’s fantastic to have all the business leaders associated with the ‘Facing North’ showcase back in the building after 3 years away.
I want to give a shout out to our Territory representatives:
Senator Malarndirri McCarthy, a tireless champion for the Territory and Indigenous Health.
Marion Scrymgour who has made such an outstanding contribution to the Parliament since her election last year.
Luke Gosling, the Member for Solomon, who, very early in his time as an MP, convinced me to swim with him in something called the ‘cage of death’ at Crocosaurus Cove.
Not something I’ll be rushing out to do again…but just one of the many attractions serving the tens of thousands of tourists who visit the Territory each year.
My colleagues and I are here tonight to join you in celebrating the Territory and its remarkable ongoing contribution to Australia’s economic strength and our national success.
We are also here because we believe in the Territory’s extraordinary potential.
Yes, as a magnet for domestic and international tourism.
But also as a supplier of clean and reliable energy, to our nation and our region.

As a grower and producer of world-class food and fibre
As a strategic hub for our national security infrastructure and technology
As a driver of innovation in critical minerals
And as an engine room for trade and jobs and prosperity – on the doorstep of the fastest growing region in human history.

We’re proud to be investing in this potential through the Middle Arm Sustainable Development Precinct, as well as important infrastructure upgrades to the Northern Territory rail network and the airports at Darwin, Alice Springs and Tennant Creek.
My colleagues and I will keep working with the Territory Government and keep engaging with Territory businesses, so we can unlock more opportunities and build a better future for everyone who calls the Territory home.
So, in the decades to come, we can all Face North with confidence.


Can I acknowledge the people of the Yolngu nation.
I recognise all their elders, leaders and families who have given so much to Australia.
In particular, I acknowledge the Gumatj clan whose lands we are meeting on today.
I also acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues from across the spectrum.
I acknowledge union and business leaders, faith and sporting leaders and all of my fellow Australians here today, Indigenous and non-Indigenous coming together.
In May this year, I had the honour of paying tribute to the life and legacy of a truly great Australian.
A man it is hard to imagine Garma without.
Even as I look out on this crowd, I somehow expect to see him looking back.
Yunupingu walked in two worlds: with authority, power and grace.
And he sought – always - to make those two worlds whole.
His very name meant: “the place on the horizon where the sea merges with the sky”.
How fitting that he devoted his life to seeking change in a spirit of unity.
Momentous national change, but also practical local change.
That was his vision for the community he helped to build, the opportunities he worked to create, the lives and country he sought to change for the better.
Not a conflict between two identities, not a clash of two cultures but an embrace of both, for the betterment of both.
Like here at Garma, the saltwater meeting the fresh, and flowing on together.
Friends
This is the very same aspiration the Uluru Statement from the Heart holds for every Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander child.
As it says, so memorably:
“When we have power over our destiny our children will flourish. 
They will walk in two worlds and their culture will be a gift to their country.”
Think about those words: ‘a gift to their country’.
Even in expressing the most fundamental and elemental hope every parent has for their child: the chance to flourish, the opportunity of a better life, even in that moment, there is still that spirit of generosity to others, the offer of a gift to us all.
The understanding that both our worlds have so much to gain from listening to each other, learning from one another, working together.
And the genius of the Uluru Statement from the Heart and all the elders and leaders and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who poured their hopes and aspirations and effort and goodwill into it is that it doesn’t just articulate the noble goal of a better future, it offers Australia the practical means and path to achieve it.
My Government supports the Uluru Statement from the Heart and its call for an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice in our constitution, which is what the coming referendum is about.
A vehicle for real and practical progress.
A committee of Indigenous Australians, chosen by Indigenous Australians, to work for Indigenous Australians in every part of our nation: the regions and remote communities, big cities and the Torres Strait Islands.
Giving Parliament and Government the advice to drive better results in health, education, employment and housing.
That’s what the Voice is about: advice.
Advice that will ensure Government benefits from the perspective and experience of the people on the ground.
So we listen to communities, make better decisions and achieve better results.
Here at Garma, you don’t need to imagine what that would look like.
You can see it, all around you.
You can share in the vision for Australia that those elders and leaders endorsed at Uluru at the First Nations Constitutional Convention way back in 2017.
Walking around this festival, you can see for yourself how much can be achieved when Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are heard and empowered.
The fantastic local schools working side-by-side with their communities to boost attendance and achieve great results.
Indigenous Rangers, managing land and sea country for thousands of generations.
Employers instilling the new pride and confidence that comes from having a good job.
Training programs and job pathways ensuring young people gain a greater sense of belonging and self-belief.
Medical services helping children grow up healthy and safe, making sure communities can get the treatment and services they need, on country.
Or the Dilak Council, who I met with yesterday.
Bringing together representatives from the 13 clans of North East Arnhem Land, connecting culture and local knowledge to government decision-making, taking responsibility for a better future.
Many of these programs and initiatives have been built-up through decades of hard work and goodwill, often run on a shoestring.
Providing generations with the basis for a better life – and more than that, giving people the skills and capacity and opportunity to thrive. To flourish.
That’s what can be achieved by listening to locals.
And something else happens when governments listen: investment is effective.
Because the funding actually gets to the people and communities who need it.
The money is invested in things that work: creating jobs and building secure homes and backing local schools and keeping people healthy.
And, friends, here at Garma, we can also see how the coming-together of two worlds enlarges and enriches both.
We see Australians of all ages and backgrounds, all faiths and traditions, all walks of life, all sides of politics, sharing in the welcoming beauty and joy of this place.
Children from Melbourne and Adelaide and Perth kicking the footy in the red dirt with Gumatj boys and girls.
Australians of all ages from every part of the country, from all walks of life, lining-up to share a meal and talk about what they’ve seen and learned and enjoyed that day.
Artists and students from all over Australia witnessing the majesty of song and dance and painting that speaks for 65,000 years of love of the land and waters.
All of us here, thinking how lucky we are, as Australians, to be part of this continuing story.
The great treasure we gain from embracing the fullness of our history, a heritage and tradition unique in all the nations of the world.
At this year’s referendum, we have the opportunity to recognise and celebrate this culture and connection in our Constitution.
And through a Voice we can ensure that the Garma spirit of learning and co-operation and shared progress is not confined to this one part of Australia and one group of Australians, for four days a year.
It is shared with our nation, to serve our whole nation.
To ensure that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people everywhere have the opportunity of a better life.
So instead of the inspiring success stories we see around us being shining exceptions, like stars in the night sky, there can indeed be a new day.
An Australia where more Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children are going to school, finishing school and finding a path to a qualification they want and deserve for a job they love.
Where more families know the stability of a roof over their head.
Where communities are safer, happier and healthier – shaped and secured by the voices and expertise and passion and vision of the people who call them home.
This is what Voting Yes represents.
A once-in-a-generation opportunity for real, overdue and much-needed change.
And that is why today I can promise all of you – and all Australians - there will be no delaying or deferring of this referendum.
We will not deny the urgency of this moment.
We will not kick the can down the road.
We will not abandon substance for symbolism, or retreat to platitudes at the expense of progress.
My friend Djawa spoke about the kangaroo. And spoke about it being one of the parts of the Australian Crest.
As I was sitting there listening to his powerful call to action and call for support on behalf of all of us, I was reminded that the kangaroo and emu that sit on the crest that sit on my letterhead are two that never go backwards. They just go forwards.
And the referendum is about whether we retreat into ourselves or have the courage to advance forward. That is what it is about.
Prime Ministers and Governments may have come and gone but Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have been clear.
The form of constitutional recognition they are seeking is a Voice.
Not our sympathy, not a symbol – a vehicle for progress, a practical tool to make their children’s lives better.
Not just something that will feel good – something that will do good, that will make a positive difference.
We can get this done, together.
And we can get this done, now.
Because if not us, who?
And if not now, when?
Together, let’s get this done.
In the months ahead, just as we will continue to make it clear what voting Yes will achieve. Australians should be equally clear about what voting No means: it is more of the same.
Not only rejecting the opportunity to do better but accepting that what we have is somehow good enough.
An eight-year gap in life expectancy, in the home of the fair go.
A suicide rate twice as high, in the lucky country.
Shocking rates of disease, in a nation with some of the world’s best healthcare.
Only four out of 19 Closing the Gap targets on track.
Surely no leader can honestly say obviously this is good enough.
Surely no leader can pretend ‘it ain’t broke, don’t fix it’.
Surely no leader can imagine that change is not desperately and urgently needed.
And that’s why, with every passing day, it becomes more and more obvious that the No campaign are desperate to talk about anything but the actual question before the Australian people.
Because even they understand that more of the same is not just unacceptable, it is indefensible.
And this is where the Uluru Statement from the Heart is also such a clear and practical appeal to the head.
To the compassion we all feel in our hearts – but also the truth we know in our heads.
Because the principle of the Voice is grounded in irresistible logic.
In the unavoidable fact that if we continue to do the same things in the same way, we will get the same outcomes.
It’s a message reinforced by the Productivity Commission, only last month.
Warning that if we continue to assume that ‘government knows best’, then things will only get worse.
Of course, to all of you and indeed to a great many Australians, none of this is news.
Over the years, people have heard these facts.
Seen images of hardship, read stories of disadvantage.
And perhaps, from time to time, they've imagined what it would be like to walk in someone else’s shoes.
Imagined what it would be like for their daughter to be at greater risk in childbirth.
Their son more likely to go to jail than university.
Their community twice as likely to be shattered by suicide.
Their friends and relatives more likely to be afflicted by diseases virtually eliminated elsewhere.
And, naturally, in imagining this, Australians will have asked themselves:
“But what can I do about it? What difference can I make?” 
Well, this year, there is a simple answer: we can vote Yes.
And friends, just as importantly, we can convince our fellow Australians to vote Yes as well.
Because that is what will decide this referendum, everyone having one vote.
Those who have thought deeply about it and those who haven't yet looked at what the referendum wording is going forward.
We know that most Australians have never got out their Constitution as bedside reading, and that's why the campaign is there to be won - because what will decide that referendum is those conversations.
That is what will deliver recognition through a Voice.
The respectful, genuine discussions Australians have with one other.
Engaging and explaining as neighbours and colleagues and friends.
As teammates in community sporting clubs of every code, because every code has embraced this cause.
As fellow worshippers in every faith, because leaders of all faiths have backed this change.
As supporters of every political party, because representatives from right across the political spectrum are campaigning for Yes and are here today.
As employers and business leaders, who understand the value and power of a Yes vote.
As members of communities drawn from every corner of the world, because those who have added to the fabric of our great multicultural society know how much it means to have your traditions respected and your contribution recognised.
And, at the heart of it all, is a conversation between generations.
Young Australians talking to their parents and their grandparents about what this moment represents for their generation and generations to come.
Explaining just what voting Yes can mean for our country and our future.
Making it clear that there is nothing to fear - and so much to gain.
And making it plain that there is indeed no time to waste.
In any democracy, there is no such thing as a foregone conclusion.
There are no guarantees of success.
But that’s not a reason to delay - it’s why we have to hold to the courage of our convictions.
At this very venue, one year ago, when I confirmed that our Government would fulfil our election commitment to hold a referendum for constitutional recognition, Yunupingu asked me, I will never forget it: “Are you serious?”
I said to him: “Yes, we’re going to do it.”
And in our last conversation, on the very day that I stood alongside the Referendum Working Group to announce the clear proposition that every Australian will be voting on, he told me: “You spoke truth”. 
Australians now have a chance to deliver this change.
To take up the gracious request of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, to advance reconciliation.
To take up the offer of the Uluru Statement from the Heart, a message extended “from all points of the southern sky”.
I read from it:
“We invite you to walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future.” 
Well, I say over coming months - don't just walk, jog and run. Because we need to get there.
The invitation is to all of us.
And all of us have a part to play.
All of us can make a difference.
All of us can get this done.
One final point, I want to make about what’s ahead.
There are some in the No camp, including the Leader of the Federal Liberal Party, who say they support Constitutional Recognition but only a legislated Voice.
I say this:
Not only does this mean rejecting the form of recognition that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have requested.
A form of recognition designed through more than a decade-long process of consultation, the majority of which occurred under the Coalition Government.
Their commitment to legislate a Voice also undermines every other argument they make against it.
Clearly they acknowledge that a Voice is needed - otherwise why legislate it?
Clearly they recognise it will make a positive difference - otherwise why legislate it?
Clearly they don’t see it as divisive or radical or any of the other noise and confusion they are seeking to inject into the referendum – otherwise why legislate it?
The only difference that all of this confected outrage is about is whether it be enshrined in the Constitution or whether, after all of this struggle going back to 1788, it can be dismissed with the stroke of a pen by a future Government.
That is what this referendum is about.
This referendum is about recognition, and it's also about listening in order to achieve better results.
That's all.
And their attempts to talk about a whole range of things, there is a new one every day, questions designed to raise more questions but to avoid the fundamental question, which is how can anyone who analyses this not say let's give this a go - let's get this done going forward?
And the reason Aboriginal and Torres Islander people are seeking recognition - in Yunupingu’s words - “through serious constitutional reform”.
Is so that the Voice can’t simply be abolished with the stroke of pen.
So it will have the stability to plan for the long-term, for the generational challenges we are facing but also the generational progress we can make, for lasting national unity.
Friends
More than 17 million of our fellow Australians are enrolled to vote in this referendum.
The highest number of voters in our nation’s history.
Including a record number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander voters.
In this decisive moment, each of us holds an equal responsibility.
And each of us has an equal opportunity
Yes, we can make history together.
More importantly, we can shape the future together.
We can vote Yes, in a spirit of unity.
We can vote Yes, with optimism and hope – not just for success at this referendum but our greater success as a nation.
We can bring our country together.
We can bring our two worlds together.
With our hearts and, yes, with our heads.
This year, on referendum day, the power to reach for a better Australia is in our hands.
Let’s seize it together.
Let’s vote Yes for Recognition.
Let’s vote Yes for a Voice.
And let’s vote yes for the better future that both will deliver, for all of us.
Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for constitutional recognition through a Voice, in a referendum later this year.
To all our distinguished Western Australian guests, welcome to Parliament House.
Before the last election, I made a commitment to visit Western Australia 10 times in my first year in office.
I’m pleased that as Prime Minister I hit the mark ahead of schedule - and have now visited 14 times in 14 months. We’ve packed a lot in.
TAFEs, child care centres, METRONET and new energy projects, hosting the Japanese Prime Minister, the Derby at Optus and – of course – Telethon.
But Western Australia is much more than Perth – which is why I’ve been to Fitzroy Crossing, Albany, Broome and Kalgoorlie, as well as bringing the whole of our Cabinet to Port Hedland.
I’m grateful for every chance I have to get to Western Australia and I’m delighted that this week Showcase WA is bringing the best of the West to Canberra.
Speaking of the best in the West, I acknowledge all my WA Labor Caucus members.
This Showcase reflects the wealth of opportunity and the world of potential in Western Australia.
And it captures a profoundly Western Australian optimism and determination to shape the future, rather than waiting for the future to shape us.
For decades, the innovation and enterprise on show in this room has been vital to the health and strength of our national economy.
And your state has also been pivotal to the transformation of our entire region.
The fastest-growing economies in human history have all been helped on their way by Western Australia.
And yet, even as we celebrate this record of achievement, we know the real prize is the future.
In 2023, our nation stands on the threshold of a transformative moment: a global energy transition more significant than the industrial revolution.
The scale of the demand – and the size of the opportunity is phenomenal.
By 2030, global battery demand will require the equivalent of 50 new lithium mines, 60 new nickel mines and 17 new cobalt mines, worldwide.
The world needs Australian lithium and nickel and cobalt and other critical minerals - and WA has them in abundance.
And the world also needs Australian jobs and skills and technology and expertise.
Exporting resources will always be important to Australia’s success – but our long-term prosperity will also depend on our capacity to value-add, to diversify, to move our nation up the international value chain.
Designing and refining the clean energy technology that will see Western Australia and Australia lead the world in the transition to Net Zero.
Being recognised not just as a wonderful place to visit but also a regional and global leader in skills and higher education, in innovation and productivity.
And of course in the years ahead, Western Australia will be essential to our national security, as well as our national prosperity.
The AUKUS agreement our Government announced earlier this year in San Diego has the workers, skills and ship-building of Western Australia right at its heart.
I’ve always been an optimist about Australia’s future and as Prime Minister, Western Australia is central to that optimism.
When you look around this room, it’s easy to see why.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we are meeting and I pay my respects to their elders, past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, in our founding document, in a referendum later this year.
I welcome Therese and Jess and Marcus and all the members of the Rudd family who are with us today.
None of us in public life could serve without our families - and you have been a source of strength and inspiration to Kevin for longer than anyone else.
Now to Jess and Marcus, of course, you have something that Therese doesn't have, because she knew what she was getting into. You were born into it. And our kids do, I think, have a focus as conscripts which can make life difficult from time to time.
So thank you for your contribution. And it's great that your grandkids are here as well. Or at least two out of the three, welcome.
To all the Parliamentary colleagues who are here, current and past, it is so fantastic looking out here.
You can draw a crowd, Kev, let me tell you.
It is an extraordinary turn out here today.
And that says a lot about the standing in which you are held and the respect that you have.
To our friends from the United States of America, it's the Australian American Leadership Dialogue function going on over the next couple of days here. I look forward to hosting you at The Lodge in a few hours' time.
You are very welcome guests here in this country.
And, of course, Ambassador Kennedy is doing a remarkable job.
To all of Kevin's former staff and friends who are here as well, it is fantastic to see you and to see, as I have over a long period of time, the long loyalty. And&nbsp;Kevin spoke about members of the family, I regard that as someone who has a very small family in terms of blood relatives, our staff do become our family and a rock in which we rely both in good times but importantly as well in the difficult times going through.
It is fantastic to see so many who are here.
I do want to give a shout-out to the artist, Ralph Heimans, who is with us here today.
Congratulations on two outstanding achievements.
Now I have to also sign off and approve on the works, so I have had the preview. And it is indeed a really powerful portrait that I think really captures Kevin.
And it's probably, without giving away too much, it's probably the only portrait to feature a pet. When you see what is about to happen, coming up, and that certainly, I just want to give you the teaser in there.
You're all thinking now, what sort of pet is in this portrait?
It is indeed an outstanding achievement.
But to you Ralph, I also want to congratulate&nbsp;you on your second achievement, which is how on earth did you persuade Kevin Rudd to sit still long enough to get this done? That's what struck me.
When Kevin spoke with me about it the time and indeed a number of Prime Ministers who followed Kevin - at least 27 and 28 have already had their&nbsp;portraits hung here.
It struck me that it was possible that you had done it over a period of a decade on the moments in which Kevin was sitting still.
Kevin, I welcome you here today and it is an extraordinary honour for me as someone who served as Deputy Prime Minister&nbsp;to you a decade ago, to welcome you here as Prime Minister today.
I welcome you here, as well as a very dear friend and comrade of such long standing value and friendship. It is one where you have been a source of advice and a very good friend for a long period of time.
But I also welcome you here, and you did make passing reference to it,&nbsp;as someone who gave this magnificent Parliament one of the finest moments I believe it's had since Federation.
And without question, without question, the finest moment that I have had as a Member of Parliament, in the first day in which I had the honour of being the Leader of the House of Representative, the first day that Parliament sat in 2008.
That Apology was spoken about for a long period of time. It was said that it would result in division, that it would result in reparations, that it would be a moment of division.
Instead what it was, was a moment of national unity.
And I pay tribute as well at this point in time to the courage and leadership of Brendan Nelson at the time, the Leader of the Liberal Party, who showed leadership at that time as well.
It was a moment in which anyone who was there will recall looking up at the galleries and seeing those Indigenous Australians like Lowitja O'Donoghue and so many others who had been through trauma and hardship, of which&nbsp;I just cannot comprehend the enormity of what they had been through.
And yet, you had patiently sat down with the Stolen Generation, not just that day, over days and weeks and months following the 2007 election. Gone to them and sat down about what they needed, about what they wanted.
And you agonised over the words, up until the point of causing me some angst that Parliament was not going to sit because you were still re-writing the words.
Because for you it was so important that it be pitch perfect.
And indeed it was.
Every word, perfect.
Leaping out from the page as a demonstration of compassion and reconciliation and a 'verbal hug' in the way that you embraced people who needed it.
A beautiful piece of work, I believe, only matched by the beauty of that one page Uluru Statement from the Heart in 2017.
We have unfinished business.
But you made a contribution which can never be taken away and can never be diminished.
At that moment, whether it be Indigenous Australians in the gallery or whether it was school students gathered at every school in the nation watching it on big screens, or the people out there on the lawns cheering, the country stopped.
And when the words finished, the country was larger.
That moment of healing and unity was made possible because of the bravery and understanding of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
But it was also made possible because of Kevin's compassion, decency and leadership.
It's the way that your Government began and it's the way that it continued.
Ratifying the Kyoto protocol on the very day that the Government was sworn in.
The largest ever increase in history to the age pension&nbsp;and Australia’s first paid parental leave scheme.
Record investments in social and affordable housing.
The abolition of WorkChoices.
The creation of the National Broadband Network&nbsp;as part of a significant rollout of&nbsp;infrastructure, including more funding for urban public transport than all the previous governments combined in the previous 107 years since Federation.
And the world's best response, bar none, to the Global Financial Crisis.
A set of policies that meant that while every other advanced economy was falling into recession, the Australian economy actually grew.
It was indeed a very challenging time to serve as Prime Minister.
But I think also it was a time in which leadership was required.
And leadership was shown.
And the&nbsp;final thing that I want to say this morning about Kevin and it’s a quality captured so well I think in the work we are about to unveil, is that&nbsp;he has always been someone who has shown a belief in Australia's capacity to show&nbsp;international leadership as well.
Not seeing us a small country, an island continent far away – but an active and constructive Indo-Pacific power, that could punch above our weight in the world because of who we are.
Our capacity as one of the great multicultural success stories in the world.
To use that to project our values to the world.
Australia acting as both architect and advocate for peace and security, for economic and environmental progress.
As Kevin once said:
“A principle encompassing not only what Australia can do for itself, but also what Australia can do for the world.”
And I saw that firsthand, at the first meeting of the G20 in London.
Over those days there, that I had the privilege along with Kevin and Treasurer Wayne Swan, of attending.
It was a time where a world was on an abyss, on the edge of a cliff, where it needed global, cohesive action to avoid that cliff.
And I say this as a source of Australian pride.
There was no person more important in that room than the leader of what's now, and I think then, the twelfth largest economy in the world.
Kevin Rudd, he was the person who I saw physically, verbally, was engaging between Asian powers including China and European and North American powers, of course led by our friends in the United States of America.
And that difference that I saw first-hand at that meeting is something that showed his&nbsp;extraordinary strategic and intellectual tenacity, as he brought together people to co-ordinate a response to the Global Financial Crisis.
That same spirit saw Kevin launch Australia's successful bid for a seat on the UN Security Council.
Of course, what we know is that Kevin's faith in Australia hasn't faded.
Neither has his belief in service to our nation.
And that's why, given Kevin's capacity in the service that he had done to the Asia society.
His book about the relationship between China and the United States, that should be compulsory&nbsp;reading for anyone who wants to understand the strategic tensions but also opportunities in our region, is so important.
And that’s why Penny Wong and I asked Kevin to accept the role of our Ambassador to the United States of America, where he is doing an outstanding job representing Australia.
So I say to Kevin, we are grateful for all your service to Australia.
We are grateful that your service continues.
And you can be proud that everyone who visits this building, including future generations, will be able to look on this portrait and know your place in our nation's history.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure to be back in Tamworth.
When it comes to bringing Australians together, this city has done some heavy lifting. For more than half a century now, you have been bringing Australians together from all over the continent.
The Tamworth Country Music Festival is recognised as one of the world’s great music festivals – and it’s your enduring gift to all of us.
And speaking of great phenomena that began in Tamworth, it’s great to see Josh Hazlewood here after a fantastic Ashes series, successfully retaining the Urn.
It means so much when an international sporting star gives back to their home town. We all start our sporting careers at our local club. For some of us, tragically, that’s as far as it goes.
But for boys and girls in regional Australia to see someone who played on their ovals taking wickets at Lords means the world.
Speaking of success on the world stage, let’s talk about Australian barley. There’s no point hiding our light under the bushel – it is the best barley in the world.
Just last week, China announced it was removing the tariffs on Australian barley. Then two days ago it was announced that two of our biggest exporters, CBH Grain and Emerald Grain Australia, can resume barley shipments to China immediately.
To get a sense of the scale of this decision, the value of these exports is around $900 million a year.
Every time you hear a dollar figure like that, look past the figures and try picturing what it means in terms of jobs, of livelihoods, and the health of communities, of families and individuals.
Of course there are many complexities involved in the decisions of a foreign government, even one as welcome as this.
But for our part, my Government is working hard to repair and maintain Australia’s relations with our friends, neighbours and trading partners.
What it doesn’t mean is saying yes to everything. Our approach to China offers a solid template – co-operating where we can, disagreeing where we must, and always engaging in our national interest.
We can have respectful dialogue without changing any of our fundamental positions – and still make progress.
A real, tangible outcome like this is good for our farmers. I’m looking forward to heading just up the road later this morning to visit Kevin Tongue’s farm. He’s just one of the many barley farmers who will be feeling the difference.
And just as it’s good for farmers like Kevin, it’s good for the communities they live in.
One in four Australian jobs are in exports, and jobs in export industries have higher than average pay. Exports are crucial to our agricultural industry.
So this decision is good for our economy and good for jobs. Ultimately, it’s good for all of us.
Positive outcomes like this one are a timely reminder that amid the challenges we face, there is opportunity and possibility.
We have the chance of an even better Australia within our reach. But if we are to grasp it, we have to let ourselves be guided by two fundamental truths.
The first is that there is so much value in the knowledge of people on the ground. People understand what’s going on in their own communities, and it’s worth listening.
The other is that we’re better off when we bring people together and work together.
That’s so much of what the Bush Summit is about.
I’d like to express my appreciation to Ben English and The Daily Telegraph for setting it up and – just as crucially – for remaining committed to it.
The Bush Summit is a rock solid part of my diary. I’ve been to every one.
As I said at the first one in Dubbo in 2019, bringing people together is such an important step because it is only together that we can rise to meet the challenges facing us. And the unavoidable truth is we’re not short of challenges.
When we gathered in Dubbo that year, we were in the middle of the worst drought in living memory.
Then began the first fires of what would become the long Black Summer.
The smoke had barely cleared when Covid hit. Then the floods came.
Now we look ahead with some apprehension to what summer will bring.
During the floods, I saw devastation that will stay with me for the rest of my life.
I heard stories of courage. Stories of loss and heartbreak – homes gone, businesses painstakingly built on dreams and hard work left in ruins.
But there were also stories of resilience and extraordinary strength.
Few things give you a sense of perspective quite like being in the presence of someone who has lost everything – but who is not only determined to stay standing, they’re making sure their neighbour does as well.
In the coming months my Government, through the National Emergency Management Agency, will work with states and territories to deliver a suite of preparedness activities to support communities for the upcoming Higher Risk Weather Season.
We have committed funding over five years through the Disaster Ready Fund to help communities protect themselves against the impacts of natural disasters.
We are addressing a broad range of natural hazards, infrastructure needs, as well as systematic risk-reduction projects.
With the country moving into hotter and dryer conditions this summer; the potential for drought over the coming years is on everyone’s minds.
Our advantage here is that Australian farmers are some of the best in the world at preparing for and managing drought.
And as a government we recognise the importance of supporting efforts to adapt to a changing climate.
We will build on the momentum coming from the farming sector and to ensure our investments are well targeted and working for farmers and regional communities.
We have engaged with stakeholders and will continue to do so to ensure that farmers and rural communities are equipped with the necessary tools and knowledge to effectively handle the heightened risk of drought.
I’m pleased today to announce an additional $38 million in funding to support the long-term trial of new and emerging agriculture practices to build drought resilience in a changing climate.
The program will support long-term trials investigating innovative and transformational cropping, grazing and mixed farming practices.
This includes looking at crop rotation, soil management, feed for cattle, and infrastructure across Australia.
This investment will build a long term evidence base to accelerate the adoption of best practices across the agricultural sector.
It will provide farmers with the confidence to invest in technologies and practices that have been proven across different landscapes and production conditions.
This program is part of the Future Drought Fund, which provides funds to strengthen drought resilience across the agriculture landscape and throughout regional communities.
The FDF is already providing grants to fund projects in the Tamworth area to promote drought resilience through better farm and land management practices.
The Tamworth Regional Landcare Association has received funding for workshops, field days and mental health training through the Helping Regional Communities Prepare for Drought Initiative.
We are supporting the Tamworth/Walcha region to develop Regional Drought Resilience Plans to prepare for and manage future drought risks.
We’re also providing funding to Farmers2Founders to increase drought resilience, including in Tamworth, by facilitating adoption of technologies that optimise profitability and productivity while enhancing soil health, land condition, and water management.
We know, that with the right approaches farmers can keep their farms more productive for longer, keep feed in their paddocks for longer and moisture in their soils for longer.
We know you’re taking every step you can to ward off the impacts of drought, and this Government will be there with you.
During the terrible months of the Black Summer, Australians did what they always do: they responded to the worst of times by being their very best.
Even the smallest communities in the bush showed such gigantic spirit, with friends and strangers alike looking out for each other, often putting their own safety on the line for those around them.
Courage and leadership like that is a reminder every government has a duty to measure up to the qualities of the people we have the great privilege of representing.
And one of those qualities is looking ahead and planning for the future.
We see that in the farming sector and all the steps being taken to take the changes we see on the horizon and turn them into opportunities. To mitigate risks and become more resilient.
Reducing risk means being ready for the next fire, the next storm, the next drought.
It means reducing emissions – not just because that’s what supply chains are increasingly demanding, but also because it make businesses more resilient over the long term.
It means ensuring soils are carbon-rich because that means they are more productive soils.
It means looking for more ore efficient fertiliser applications – because they cost less, waste less and release less nitrous oxide.
Australian farmers are ahead of the curve on so many measures. And this government will continue to work with you to encourage this innovation.
Both as Prime Minister and as a former Regional Development Minister, my dedication to regional Australia is absolute. An Australia that isn’t so top heavy with capital cities will be a nation more in balance with itself.
As with any aspect of creating a better future, good intentions alone are never going to cut it. We must improve connectivity, whether it’s with better roads, better rail or better internet.
Too many businesses in regional Australia continue to be held back by broadband which is neither fast enough, reliable enough nor good enough.
Nothing has the power to knock the tyranny of distance out of the equation like world-class communications technology.
As well as removing a major handbrake on growth and jobs-creation, it can play a vital role in healthcare, education, and help individuals feel more connected.
Bit by bit, we are reducing the need for so many of us to be concentrated in a handful of big cities. As new possibilities open up, some of the ways of working that we have for so long taken for granted will start to look a little bit retro.
We’re investing in Rewiring the Nation to bring our energy transmission into the 21st century, underpinning the reliability of electricity across Australia.
Making sure every part of the country has the power they need, when they need it.
Ultimately this will reduce power bills, taking pressure off families and business-owners alike. It will help Australian manufacturing, so much of which takes place in our regional cities and towns.
More manufacturing is good for our regions. It means more jobs and letting us become what we need to be: a country where we make things here. A country better able to stand our own two feet.
But there’s still a lot to do, and that includes better access to quality health. We’ve delivered on our commitment to make medicine cheaper.
And in late October, the Tamworth Medicare Urgent Care Clinic will start seeing patients, making it easier for the community to access urgent care and take pressure off Tamworth Hospital.
We’re planning 58 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics across Australia, with 14 of them in NSW.
Cheaper child care is another election commitment we’re delivering on – it’s good for families, it’s good for the economy. And it’s great for the kids.
Another important component in building a better, stronger regional Australia is the creation of more regional university hubs.
We want more young Australians to have the chance to go to university. At present, postcode is a significant barrier for young people getting that chance. The opportunities that are available to you in life should not be dictated by your address.
An early evaluation of Study Hubs – what were then called Regional University Centres – found that they have a good triple effect.
They attract people to the area, help locals stay during their study and give students a path to local jobs once they have finished studying.
The evidence is that in places where these hubs exist, university participation goes up. We will add 20 more in the regions.
More Australians will be able to take advantage of the lifestyle that regional Australia makes possible – and in turn, they will add to the strength of the communities they become part of.
But a lot is asked of communities like yours. We ask you to grapple with nature in a way most Australians will never have to. And in doing so, you forge strong bonds and build strong communities.
Strong communities build back faster, they problem solve together, they keep each other safe.
Risk reduction and resilience aren’t just about infrastructure.
Roads that don’t get washed away are vital, communications systems that can work across state borders and through bushfire smoke are essential, but the most critical ingredient in recovery and resilience is human relationships.
Australia’s regions are diverse, each with unique strengths and challenges. Delivering on the potential of regional Australia requires building on each region’s unique strengths.
The values and aspirations of a community inform the actions they want to take to build resilience and reduce disaster risk.
Communities know the situation on the ground better than anyone else.
Together, we can keep building a better future.


Good afternoon, everyone.
It’s great to welcome you to Kirribilli.
This is a fitting location for today’s reception — overlooking Sydney Harbour, as it flows into the Pacific Ocean.
Because it’s there that Australian, Indian, Japanese and United States forces are participating in Exercise Malabar.
As I said in Mumbai in March, standing aboard INS Vikrant, it’s a privilege for Australia to host Exercise Malabar for the first time.
And, of course, I’m grateful to Prime Minister Modi for passing the baton to Australia.
It’s an important demonstration of the strength of the defence relationship between our countries.
It is a relationship that requires the will of nations, and also the courage of individuals – those who put on the uniform and serve in our name.
They know that the life they choose is not one without risk, but they serve their nations with honour and devotion, even in the face of danger.
We pause to remember the four Australian soldiers who lost their lives last month while taking part in Exercise Talisman Sabre.
Captain Danniel Lyon.
Lieutenant&nbsp;Maxwell Nugent.
Warrant Officer Class Two Joseph ‘Phillip’ Laycock.
Corporal Alexander Naggs.
Our thoughts are with their loved ones — and their friends and colleagues in uniform.
It was a tragic reminder that there are no easy days for those who serve.
We will remember them.
And I would like to thank those who assisted in the search effort.
Some of you are with us this afternoon.
I want you to be in no doubt of our gratitude — not only for your contribution to the search, but for all you do in the service of Australia.
And to our friends from India, Japan and the United States, we thank you for your service to your countries as well.
Because peace is not a gift.
It’s never a given.
It has to be built, defended and upheld.
The entry into force today of the Australia–Japan Reciprocal Access Agreement augments collective efforts to ensure regional stability and security.
Signalling and enabling closer defence cooperation between Japan and Australia, it is a timely measure to meet the challenges of our regional environment.
As champions for peace and prosperity in our region and the world, we must remain engaged.
That’s why Exercise Malabar is so important as an opportunity for our Defence Force to partner and train with others.
It brings the practical benefits of testing and improving the interoperability of our defence forces.
It’s a statement of collaborative action and collective responsibility.
US Secretary of Defence Lloyd. J. Austin has said that Exercise Malabar is a type of rare and precious cooperation.
I couldn’t agree more.
It’s an honour to be part of a venture so rare and so precious&nbsp;in our joint effort to preserve an open, stable and prosperous Indo–Pacific.
Thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the opportunity to vote for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in a referendum later this year.
Thank you all for inviting me to join you in celebrating this anniversary of truly national significance.
150 years ago when the Iron Trades Employers’ Association was formed in Sydney there were rolling strikes and disputes between the masters and the blacksmiths, the fitters, turners and moulders in the iron trades.
But out of these clashes came foundational agreements and fundamental principles that still shape the lives of Australians – including the eight-hour day.
So, what we commemorate tonight is not just the banding-together of employers in a common cause – it is the coming-together of employers and employees, in recognition of their common interests.&nbsp;
That still holds true today.
As employers, all of you make a powerful contribution to our national prosperity.
But as an organisation, you also serve our national interest.
Contributing your ideas and advocacy and perspective to the always-evolving challenge of modernising and reforming the Australian economy.
I say on behalf of all my colleagues, across Government, not only do we respect your right to an opinion on these issues, we also value your insights.&nbsp;
Because we know that so much of what we want to achieve for Australia in the years ahead, depends on what you do as job-creators, innovators and drivers of productivity.
And I think all of us here tonight can take a measure of pride in what we have already achieved together, in extremely challenging circumstances:
Unemployment is at a record low.
The participation rate is at a record high.
The gender pay gap is at a record low.
The number of women in full time work is at a record high.
Business investment is up.
And the number of days lost to industrial disputes is down – 20% less on average than our predecessors.
Half a million jobs have been created.
There are encouraging signs that inflation has passed its peak.
And wages are growing at their fastest rate in a decade.
You have been part of all this, you have helped drive and deliver it.&nbsp;
And to me, a really important point is that these have been win-win outcomes.
For business, for workers, for the economy, for our country.
Because greater equality for women hasn’t led to worse results for men.
Improvements in bargaining have seen fewer days lost to disputes, not more.
Wages growth hasn’t come at the expense of job creation.
Nor have improvements in the skilled migration system undermined Australian jobs.
This is what I’ve always appreciated about working with the Australian Industry Group, your willingness to look for solutions – not arguments.&nbsp;
This was my approach from my first day as Labor Leader, it’s the principle I’ve held to as Prime Minister.&nbsp;
Looking for that common ground.
Because you always get more done, when you bring people together.
Because building consensus is always the best way of building to last.
And because the things that really count: growing the economy, creating jobs, lifting living standards, securing our national prosperity and planning for the future, are never zero-sum exercises.
They are about creating and seizing opportunities for win-win outcomes.
Take skills and training.
As you know, we’re delivering 180,000 fee-free TAFE places, this year.
And we’re delivering 300,000 fee-free places, from next year.
That has the potential to be life-changing for all those individuals.
But we understand it’s also a powerful resource for thousands of businesses, a much-needed investment in a skilled and productive workforce.
I’m grateful for the constructive support you have given to our policies in TAFE and training.
And all of us in the Government very much appreciate the input you’ve provided to the establishment of Jobs and Skills Australia.
Jobs and Skills Australia will help deliver on a longstanding ambition of this group building a stronger connection between Australia’s vocational education system and the future needs of employers, as well as the future demands of our economy.
The reforms we are undertaking in our migration system are in that same spirit.
Making sure that instead of a situation where a business recruits a worker on a temporary visa, invests in their workplace training, builds up their corporate knowledge and then the visa expires and the process starts again – we have a migration system that serves as a genuine pathway to citizenship.
An incentive for the individual to make Australia their home – and a system that rewards businesses who invest in their staff and their skills.
Making child care cheaper works the same way.
For too long, the cost of child care has been a barrier to parents, women in particular, returning to work.
That derails individual careers.
But it also denies businesses the benefit of talented and experienced staff.
That’s why cheaper child care isn’t just cost-of-living relief, it’s economic reform.
Or as Innes put it at the Press Club recently:
“Workable child care is an essential part of a workable workforce participation system”
We are working with you to invest in people and skills – and working with you to invest in new and growing industries.&nbsp;
That’s where the National Reconstruction Fund is so important.
A $15 billion investment in Australia’s self-reliance, in our capacity to make things here.
In greater resilience across our supply chains – a vulnerability exposed by the pandemic.
And a new, strategic approach to seizing the opportunities in advanced manufacturing, renewable energy, critical minerals, defence capability, transport, agriculture, fisheries and forestry and medical science.
I’m very pleased that last week we were able to announce the appointment of the NRF’s independent board, who will bring their commercial rigour and industry experience to the investment process.
This will deliver better value for taxpayers, a better return on investment for the country and greater opportunities for businesses like yours to expand and diversify.
Tonight, in paying tribute to the leadership you have provided for Australian jobs and industry here at home, I also want to acknowledge that your work continues on the world stage.
Representing your businesses – and representing your country.
Strengthening our Government’s efforts to make Australian firms the providers of choice to some of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
It’s a great source of pride to me whenever I visit another nation, to know Australia has played such a vital role in the economic transformation we see in the Indo-Pacific.
Australian businesses have helped build the new prosperity and progress being enjoyed by hundreds of millions of people.
Now, we have an unprecedented opportunity to drive the next wave of change.
On a scale and significance that could not have been imagined 50 years ago, let alone 150.&nbsp;
We can supply the resources and renewable energy and technology that will help rapidly-growing economies like India and Indonesia deliver on their commitments to Net Zero.
And we can also provide the expertise and research and innovation that will make this possible.
One in four Australian jobs depend on trade - and that’s only going to increase in the years ahead.
Particularly, if we pursue the most diverse and ambitious set of trade partnerships possible.
Diversity and ambition in who we trade with.
And diversity and ambition in what we trade.
Moving our nation and our industries and our workers up the international value chain.
Making more things here – and selling more things, everywhere.
And I can assure you it genuinely makes a difference to all these negotiations and discussions when you have representatives from Australian business, there on the ground, saying we are ready to invest, we are here to get this deal done.&nbsp;
Because while the process can feel painstaking, there are other times when it moves very fast indeed.
Two weeks ago, China announced it was removing the tariffs on Australian barley.
And last week, Australia was restored to China’s list of approved outgoing group travel destinations.
This is will mean tens of thousands of new holidaymakers visiting Australia, putting millions of dollars into our economy.
These are the result of the deliberate, consistent and principled approach we have taken to stabilising the relationship.
Looking to co-operate where we can, being prepared to disagree where we must – and always engaging in our national interest.
Within a week of the impediments on barley being lifted, two of our biggest exporters, CBH Grain and Emerald Grain Australia, were given the green light to resume their shipments to China immediately.
The value of these exports is around $900 million a year.
That’s a huge win for Australian farmers and Australian jobs.
It’s also a big win for China.
Because – once again – they will be getting access to the best barley in the world.
And all those points hold true for Australian wine, Australian lobster and some of our beef exporters as well, where there are still trade impediments in place.
We want to see these removed, in the best interests of everyone.
And I’ll certainly be taking the opportunity to make that point, when I next have the chance to meet with President Xi.
The final observation I would make tonight is about our national productivity and competitiveness.
Something I know Innes has made a focus of his contributions to the public debate for a very long time.
And something this organisation has championed even longer.
Indeed, as far back as 1904, the Annual Report of the Iron Trades Employers’ Association said:
“Europe and America [are] the greatest competitors against local manufacturers, and when it was considered how machinery was taking the place of workmen in both these places, especially in America the conditions of employment were so different out here that it did not permit local firms competing in any way.”
The name of your organisation has changed.
The economic competitors have changed.
The world in which we trade has changed, beyond imagining.
But the essential challenge remains.
How can Australian manufacturing and Australian industry and Australian workers find ways to compete and succeed.
The answer is not a matter of cutting pay and conditions. Or replacing workers with technology. It never has been.
The answer is boosting productivity by finding new ways for our people and businesses to get the most out of technology.
Ensuring Australian workers and employers have the skills and confidence to use technology, adapt it and embed it in the way we work and learn and care.
Investing in education and science and research, so we have the capacity to design and develop and manufacture new products, here in Australia.
Developing our cyber security capability, so businesses can protect their intellectual property and commercial data and customer privacy.
Securing the renewable energy to power manufacturing and reduce input costs.
And building the infrastructure to support this growth, around the nation.
In all this, our Government wants to continue working with you.
Through 150 years, you’ve shown what you can deliver for your members and our country.&nbsp;
In the years ahead, I look forward to what we can achieve, working together.
Congratulations on this historic anniversary.
Here’s to many more years of building a stronger, more prosperous and more productive Australia.


Well, thanks so much Alan and I also begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting today and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
And I am proud to lead a Government which will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for Constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people at a referendum later this year.
I want to acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues who are here, the executive and staff of Qantas who are here, the people from the Yes23 campaign.
And particular shout out, I think people won't mind, to a former Australian of the Year, Adam Goodes, and a hero for so many Australians, Indigenous and non-Indigenous.
The Spirit of Australia says Yes.
And the Spirit of Australia says Yes, because this will assist reconciliation in a practical way.
There is a debate in this country that will take place in coming weeks.
And I get asked about 'why is it that you support this form of recognition?'
The answer to that is very simple.
And we can go back, as Alan said, to 2014 when the Qantas livery on their planes, those planes that travel around Australia with the big 'R' for recognise is a reminder that this is the journey of which began a long time ago.
And as I said at Garma, and I repeat again today, 122 years after Federation, 56 years after the 1967 referendum, six years after the First Nations Constitutional Convention gathered at Uluru.
After an extensive process involving thousands of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves, hundreds of meetings, produced, I think, an extraordinary concise, uplifting Uluru Statement from the Heart.
On one page, a single page, a gracious invitation to non-Indigenous&nbsp;Australia to advance our country.
To do something for Indigenous Australians by showing them respect, but to do something for all of us, to lift up our nation.
If not now, when? If not us, who?
In 2023 we will give every Australian the opportunity, in coming weeks, not long to go now, to do that, to show respect, to uplift our whole nation.
And to send a message to the world that we are a confident mature nation prepared to come to terms with the fullness and richness of our history.
To be proud of the fact that we share this great island continent of ours with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
The day after the referendum, the day after, it will be such a wonderful moment.
Because the alternative is more of the same, the same that sees us achieving just four out of 19 Closing the Gap targets being on track.
We can do better, we must do better, we will do better when Australians vote for recognition.
And I say to Qantas, not just because I'm a former Transport Minister, but there is no company in Australia that immediately says Australia, like this brand of Qantas.
And you have such a fine history of having a long-standing&nbsp;commitment to the cause of reconciliation.
Qantas has a long history of doing its bit to carry the nation, to lift all of us a little bit higher, both literally and figuratively.
And that is what this is about.
I do remember the impact in the mid 1990s, when you first unveiled the first of your fleet, decked out in an Indigenous design, the striking red of the Wunala dreaming, an unmistakable sight against the vivid blue sky that defines our continent.
Another 747 followed, Nalanji dreaming, a Boeing 747 named for a Yanyuwa word, meaning our place.
A stirring image if you're lucky enough to glimpse both of them together on a tarmac somewhere around our great country or indeed around the world.
It also acknowledged the role of Aboriginal people during the dawn of Australian aviation, as Alan has said.
Whether it be the maintenance of outback air strips or early aviators making use of Indigenous knowledge of local weather patterns.
In the days before weather radar, that knowledge undoubtedly saved lives.
Whether it's through your flying artwork series or the vision spelled out in the Qantas Group's First Nations Strategy, your commitment to honouring the oldest continuous culture on earth goes on.&nbsp;
Just as a river of conversations about recognition and the Voice goes on.
Australia has been talking about this for a very long time.
And that is why it is absolutely time for us to say Yes.
For 100 years Qantas has shown the importance of extending ourselves, of reaching higher.
This Yes livery is a worthy addition to that tradition.
And it is in the Spirit of Australia, that statement about Qantas, which defines the way that we are being uplifted.
The Uluru Statement from the Heart is an invitation for all of us to join together in a better future.
A Yes from all of us, will be the most perfect response.
Yes for recognition. Yes for listening. Yes for better results.
On referendum day, we can answer that gracious request that hand outreached&nbsp;in the great Australian way.
When we meet each other, what do we do? We put our hand out.
That's what the Uluru Statement represents.
Just asking for that hand to be joined in that most Australian of way that we do when we greet each other as individuals.
This is asking us to join, to have that handshake between Indigenous non-Indigenous&nbsp;Australia.
Let's meet grace with grace by saying Yes, in the referendum.
Yes to a better future, to back up that Spirit of Australia, which defines who we are.


Anthony Albanese, Prime Minister: This is the third meeting of the Cabinet to be held in Queensland. And it's great to be back here. And most of us, of course, will spend the week here into the weekend.
The first thing I want to say is that all of us are relieved that the four Australians who were missing in Indonesia have been found.
We thank the DFAT officials and Australian government agencies who have assisted with the search and rescue efforts.
But we particularly thank our Indonesian friends, who, once again have come to Australia's support in a time of need.
And I've reached out to Jokowi, our friend, and to thank him personally for the effort.
We've got a big week.
Tomorrow we've got National Cabinet, where housing affordability and supply is very much front and centre on the agenda.
And the eyes of the nation will be on another event tomorrow, that is a significant event.
The Matildas have inspired the nation.
And tomorrow, eight o'clock, the eyes of the nation will be on them. And regardless of the outcome, but we're hopeful of a positive one, what we know is that they've inspired generations of young girls in particular, but young boys as well, to play team sport.
And we know that team sport can be so important in young people learning how to win and how to lose, the importance of teamwork, the importance of looking after each other, and it's good for health, physically, but it's also very good for mental health and good for development as young people grow up - so it is so important.
I can't recall an event that has inspired the nation quite like this one over such a long period of time.
You had Cathy Freeman’s run was pretty significant. This is a different feeling.
And Jim, I've got to tell you that I am advised that the loudest ever decibel of noise has been set at the stadium at Lang Park, not at State of Origin, but on Saturday night with the Matildas.
That really says something because Lang Park’s pretty noisy.
I was there when GI was playing for Queensland, and it was it was 30-0 at halftime, and it was pretty noisy that night.
But for the Matildas it really was something, and it was something to be present when 50,000 people stopped breathing for a couple of seconds on ten occasions for all of the spot kicks that were held the other night.
So, the whole of Australia is behind the Tillies.
And we wish Sam Kerr and that wonderful team all the best.


Well thank you Kate.
It's terrific to be here with you, with Minister Pat Conroy, with the representatives of the Pacific who are here to launch these Pacific Rugby League Championships.
I do want to also acknowledge the work of all of those who've made this happen, including the coaches, Mal Meninga and Ben Jeffries.
Welcome.
It is an honour to be here to launch these championships.
And I'm proud to announce that Australia is committing over $7 million dollars over the next two years to support these championships in partnership with the National Rugby League.
People form bonds based on shared experiences. And Australia and our Pacific Island neighbours&nbsp;have long had a passion for rugby league and for sport in general.
I was at my first meeting of the Pacific Island Forum in Fiji and it happened to be State of Origin night.
The leaders of the different nations lined up for whether they would wear a Blues or Maroons jersey.
I can report, Mal, that most of them were wearing Maroon that night, and I say that here in Queensland.
So many NRL stars have Pacific heritage.
Indeed of the Penrith Panthers starting 13 in the grand final last year, nine of the 13 had Pacific heritage.
At the international level, Pacific nations are making their mark too, with Samoa making the World Cup final last year, and PNG making it to the women's semi final in the tournament last year.
We want more Pacific players, both men and women, to come through the ranks of the National Rugby League.
And the Pacific Championships will bring together teams from Australia, New Zealand, Samoa, Tonga, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and the Cook Islands to compete in an elite level tournament, inspiring a new generation of stars, girls and boys, from throughout the Pacific, all the while contributing to Australia's bond with the Pacific family.
I'm so pleased that PNG will co-host the tournament this year, along with Australia and New Zealand, with Fiji co=hosting in 2024.
In January, I was in Papua New Guinea.
And you can't help but notice whenever you're in PNG, that it's like being in Brisbane during Magic Round.
You walk around and whether it's in Port Moresby, or we were in Wewak in the North of PNG, you see young kids and adults all wearing the jerseys of their favourite team, be it State of Origin, of course, there are lots of cardinal and myrtle you see wherever you go.
There's always a random Souths guy or woman wherever you go, including in PNG.
But this will be a really important tournament to inspire.
I've made no secret, Andrew, of my desire to see a PNG and Pacifika playing in the National Rugby League and sometime in the future.
But what this will be important, as well, is for showcasing Women's Rugby League.
We've seen a further expansion in the competition this year and that will continue in the future.
And I think we've seen with the Matildas and their success - and take the opportunity to wish him all the best for tonight in the semi final versus England - we see an entire generation of Australians being inspired.
We saw on Saturday night, at what I still call Lang Park, being completely overwhelmed.
It is the one time that I can recall being with 50,000 people who stopped breathing on ten occasions on Saturday night.
And the idea 30 years ago, frankly, or 20 years ago, that you would have had full stadiums watching women's team sport was something that would have been seen as being exceptionally ambitious.
Well that's long gone.
Now, we have women and girls playing at the elite level soccer, AFL as well as rugby league. And that is a great thing.
The tournament will be launched at Suncorp.
And that, of course, is an appropriate place because it has a long history as a meeting place.
For more than 100 years it's brought people together and help develop relationships, which is one of the things that sport is about.
And that's why the Australian Government will be working with our Pacific Island family to support this tournament.
And I thank and congratulate the National Rugby League on their vision for what they want to do to create economic activity, but also to create those relationships within the Pacific family.
This tournament will be a major contribution to that.
Thanks very much.


Thanks very much, friends.
At the outset, I want to recognise that everyone here comes to this debate in good faith.
One of the strengths of a Labor Party conference is that we not only respect each other’s right to put forward differing views, we respect the integrity and the sincerity of those views.
One of the things that distinguishes us from our components.
Delegates
From our first day in Government, we have worked to make Australia stronger in the world and safer at home.
Investing in our capability and investing in our relationships, our deterrence and our diplomacy.
And bringing both to our presence in this region.
Engaging with our Pacific family with respect, reinvesting in development assistance, working with our neighbours and partners to promote peace, security, stability and prosperity right across the Indo-Pacific.
Acknowledging the centrality of ASEAN to our north.
And supporting Ukraine in the face of the illegal and immoral invasion by Russia.
We know there is no security in isolation.
Australia has a role and indeed a responsibility to engage in our region and the wider world.
Delegates
To fulfil these objectives, to sustain and strengthen Australia’s place in the world, our Government is investing in our capabilities and investing in those relationships.
And I want to pay tribute to our Foreign Minister, in particular, for the work that she is doing.
Now delegates
A partnership with two of Australia’s oldest friends, through AUKUS, and an enhancement of the alliance that is the heart of one of the three pillars of our foreign policy.
Is consistent with the Labor values that I have been a part of my whole life.
Our US alliance.
Regional engagement.
Support for multilateralism.
As we invest and capitalise through AUKUS, we will be guided by the recommendations of the Defence Strategic Review to ensure we have the assets we need, where we need them.
That includes conventionally armed, nuclear powered submarines.
Submarines that are harder to detect and can travel further.
If you've come to the position, as I have, that Australia as an island continent, needs submarines.
Then it is compulsory, if you're serious about national security, that you then analyse what is the best form of submarines for us to have.
And I have come to the position, based upon advice and analysis, that nuclear powered submarines are what Australia needs in the future.
Submarines whose importance in our defence capability as an island continent will grow over time.
Importantly, the submarines will be an Australian sovereign capability, commanded by the Royal Australian Navy and sustained by Australian workers in Australian shipyards.
Australia has a proud record of leadership in the international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Australia and our AUKUS partners are committed to setting the highest nuclear non-proliferation standard for Australia’s acquisition of subs, in continued close co-operation with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
These are the choices of a mature nation, a nation that understands that a bright future calls for more than sunny optimism.
Delegates
The strategic complexity that we face is far removed from the bleak certainties of the Cold War.
We have to analyse the world as it is rather than how we would want it to be.
We have to bring our defence capabilities up to speed.
And AUKUS is central to that.
Delegates
We are committed to stability and the preservation of the international rules-based system in the wider region.
And as we strengthen ourselves outwards, we strengthen inwards.
Every opportunity we have to maximise resilience is an opportunity to maximise Australian jobs.
And this is a project that is expected to directly create 20,000 well-paid, secure, union jobs.
Jobs that will expand our skills base and our capacity to stand on our own feet as a nation.
And a defence program that will enhance our manufacturing capabilities and assist us to become what we must be, a theme of the last election campaign that we were elected on, we want Australia to be a country that makes things here.
Now, just as Curtin and Chifley turned their vision of an automotive industry into a reality that lifted our entire manufacturing sector, this investment will be a catalyst for innovation and research breakthroughs that will reverberate throughout Australia.
Through our economy, across our advanced manufacturing and technology sectors, creating jobs and growing businesses, right around Australia.
AUKUS takes nothing away from what we do.
What it does do though, it is enhancement, an act of clear-eyed pragmatism that works for the national interest and in the context of greater good.
We are dealing with our neighbourhood with respect, reinvesting in aid, listening to the Pacific.
We understand that climate change is a national security issue.
And we are working with others to contribute to stability and discourage conflict in the region.
Just consider the relationships that we've had in the region and the world and whether they have been improved in the last fifteen months and if there is a single relationship, with the possible exception of Putin, that has been diminished?
None.
We have a stronger relationship with our traditional allies, including the United States, than we have ever had.
We have relations with Europe, to the point whereby President Macron was backing the Matildas the other night.
But in our own region, with ASEAN and the Pacific it has been transformed.
And with China, we are working towards stabilisation.
Having adult conversations between us.
Cooperating where we can, disagreeing where we must, but engaging in our national interest.
That how serious people who are seriously concerned about Australia's national interest and understanding the importance of diplomatic engagement are operating.
Led by Foreign Minister and Defence Minister who wake up every day and think about Australia's national interest.
We are a Government with a vision that is both bold and grounded in reality.
AUKUS is the choice of a mature nation, an honest global player taking our rightful place on the world stage.
History shows us that in uncertain times, Australia finds its firmest footing with a Labor Government.
It was Fisher who formed the Royal Australian Navy.
When the world was at war, it was Curtin who forged our alliance with the United States, which remains the bedrock of our security.
When the world needed to be unified again, it was Evatt who helped drive the formation of the United Nations.
As a nation, our collective duty to peace and stability does not end at our own borders.
We have always played our part because Australia is a serious global citizen.
We step up.
With AUKUS, we are remaining true to that spirit.
And I commend the Marles position to delegates.


I would like to acknowledge all those serving men and women who are with us today and all the veterans who are with us today.
It is a great honour for me to be here with you.
I want to also acknowledge my parliamentary colleague and friend Shayne Neumann for the outstanding work that he does on an ongoing basis as a representative of this local community that he is so passionate about.
To the Mayor and other dignitaries who are here and particularly to the officials of the RSL, thank you for the invitation to share this important day with you.
Earlier this year, I joined my colleagues at the Australian War Memorial for the Last Post ceremony.
It is a solemn event, and an important beginning to each parliamentary year.
As we are surrounded by the names of the fallen, we are reminded of our debt to all who have served.
Yet even as we acknowledge that debt, and the gratitude that goes with it, it must also be said that as a nation, our relationship with our military history has been uneven.
As I said at the War Memorial, we must acknowledge those we sent to war in our name, who did their duty in our name, but whose names we failed to hold up so proudly.
Fifty years after the role of Australian troops in the hostilities in Vietnam came to an end, let us again acknowledge you.
Let us acknowledge the weight of what you lived through, what you saw, what you felt.
The nights that took on a sense of menace you never knew before, and the realisation that just as much could lie hidden in bright sunshine.
Days mapped out in a mosaic of fear and monotony, aching for home but lifted by the camaraderie with your mates.
All the while not knowing what each day might bring.
Not knowing what, or who, it might take.
We should have acknowledged you better as a nation then.
But the truth is, as a nation we didn’t.
Times have changed, though regrettably too slowly for many veterans who are no longer with us.
But we have matured enough as a nation to embrace the truth that we can disagree with a war without that diminishing the respect we feel for every man and woman who puts on our uniform and serves in our name.
Respect for your valour, your integrity and your character.
Respect for the truth that you have all paid a price – a price that some are still paying.
Respect for the fact that you live with the memory of mates who never came back, and memories of all that you lived through.
You upheld Australia’s name.
You showed the Australian character at its finest.
You deserved so very much better than you received.
Let us say to every one of our Vietnam veterans, today and every day, we honour you, we thank you and we are sorry that as a nation, it took us so long for us as a nation to do so.
Lest we forget.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the lands on which we meet and pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
Delegates
We've always been at our best as a nation when we've looked to the future with excitement and optimism – that's when we make progress.
Right now, the chance to be our best is once again calling out to us.
The chance to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians in a way we’ve never been able to before.
The chance to bring all Australians together in a moment of unity that will shine even more brightly than the desert light that fell on Vincent Lingiari and Gough Whitlam.
With a Yes vote. A Yes vote that resounds right across our continent.
No one pretends that winning a referendum is straightforward.
But just as the Uluru Statement from the Heart places such emphasis on leaving base camp, we join the Labor Party to scale the peaks.
This is not a journey that began with us.
But it is a journey we have been given the great privilege of joining.
And a part of that privilege is a responsibility to make sure all Australians hear the words that the authors of the Uluru Statement wrote for them:
We invite you to walk with us in a movement of the Australian people for a better future.
A better future.
That is both an invitation but also an embrace – arms extended around an entire nation.
All of you here in this room – and across the great breadth of our movement – have put up your hand and shown your willingness to get involved. To walk the talk. To make a difference.
I want you to get out there and campaign like you have never campaigned before. .
Explain what the clear question is before the Australian people.
Saying yes to constitutional recognition.
Saying yes to listening in order to get better results.
And I say this: if not now, when?
If not now, when?
Or saying no, therefore doing the same thing and accepting this is good enough.
Because this referendum won’t be decided by the delegates in this room – it will be decided by the people that you and other campaigners for Yes talk to around our country. Those direct conversations.
I want you to keep getting out there and having those conversations.
I want you to talk with those Australians who haven’t had a chance yet to engage with the coming referendum.
I want you to give the answer to every Australian who has looked at the stark realities of Indigenous disadvantage and asked themselves, “What can I do about it?”
Tap into that abiding instinct for fairness that is so much a part of the Australian character.
Harness that pride we feel in sharing this land with the oldest continuous culture on Earth.
And channel that spirit of unity that so perfectly defines the one country on the planet that spans an entire continent.
To change the country for the better in a way that outlasts all of us is a bold undertaking.
But we take on these things because that has always been the Labor way.
We take them on not because they are convenient - but out of conviction.
There are people on all sides of politics who support Yes. Some have had the courage to break with their party leadership and I pay tribute to them.
People from across the political spectrum have shown the character to respond to the invitation of the Uluru Statement.
To respond to those words in the statement of overcoming the torment of powerlessness.
Three powerful words that are a call to non-Indigenous Australia to respond.
To answer its grace, with grace.
The spirit of Yes is big and generous and so very Australian.
It flows through communities and across faiths, across business and unions.
Across sporting codes, every single major sporting code in the country is out there saying Yes.
The spirit of Yes is both a gift and an invitation to all Australians.
And just as the idea of a Voice came from the grassroots, it will be decided at the grassroots. By the people of Australia.
And in this, all of us have a part to play.
Winning this referendum will depend on the conversations you have, the calls you make, the doors you knock on, the people you reach.
Delegates
There is no more powerful force for change than our great Labor movement at its best – and there is no cause more deserving of our support.
Delegates, after this referendum, a bit like the Apology to the Stolen Generations,
A bit like Mabo and Wik, a bit like Native Title and the 1967 Referendum.
When all of this is done, people will look back and go 'Why didn't we do it earlier?'
Because there is everything to gain and absolutely nothing to lose.
So I say this: when you have a proposition before you where there are only winners, it's our responsibility to get out there and win this.
Let’s make Australia, the greatest country on Earth, just that little bit greater.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I’m proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the chance to vote in a referendum to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the Constitution.
I know that Arnold Bloch Leibler has a longstanding and genuine commitment to reconciliation and recognition.
You put your values into action.
Your 30-year connection with the Yorta Yorta people, representing them in their landmark native title claim, is a shining example.
Back in 2008, you were the first Australian law firm to launch a Reconciliation Action Plan.
It grew out of your decades walking alongside Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in pursuit of justice.
This year’s referendum is a chance to bring even more Australians with us as we take up the gracious invitation to walk together toward a better future.
We know when we listen to communities, we make better decisions and achieve better results.
Constitutional recognition through a Voice will ensure Government benefits from the perspective and experience of the people on the ground.
It will give us a once-in-a-generation chance to get better outcomes in health and housing and education and jobs.
To close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
As lawyers, you deal each day in logic.
So you’ll appreciate that if we continue to do the same things in the same way, we will get the same outcomes.
And we simply cannot risk more of the same.
We cannot accept that the status quo is good enough.
Mark, you’ve been involved in constitutional recognition for more than ten years.
Your role has been one of insight and influence.
In your words,
‘The proposal that will be put to the Australian people … is nothing short of a precious gift … a deeply unifying moment in our nation’s history.’
It’s this insight and perspective that has come to distinguish Arnold Bloch Leibler’s contribution to the debate.
The late Hal Wootten, QC, Supreme Court judge, and foundation president of the Aboriginal Legal Service, said:
‘Those on whom the law may bear harshly … need their champions in the law as elsewhere’.
Arnold Bloch Leibler has been that champion.
Your firm is a great Australian success story.
Your achievements have stacked up over the decades.
Your expertise refined in negotiation and strategy, commerce and contracts.
And through it all, Arnold Bloch Leibler has always served a higher purpose.
From the 1950s, when Arnold Bloch created a haven for the displaced, disempowered and vulnerable Jewish Holocaust survivors and refugees striving to build new lives in a new land to your enduring pro bono commitments.
You’ve never forgotten where you come from, you’ve never forgotten why you are here.
As your own Peter Seidel says, public interest law isn’t:
‘“After hours work”. It’s heart and soul; central to our culture as a firm.’
Thank you for your advocacy and your integrity over the decades – giving power to the powerless, and standing with the vulnerable.
For 70 years, you’ve played your part to make our society more just and more equitable.
For Arnold Bloch Leibler, there’s a lot to celebrate – and much to look forward to.
You’re an inspiration to us all.
So, happy birthday! And here’s to the next 70 years.
Enjoy the evening.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I’m proud to lead a government that will give all Australians the chance to vote in a referendum to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the Constitution.
Great to be here with my colleague Ged Kearney.
And thank you to Brian McNamee and to Joy Linton.
Not only for the warm welcome but for your leadership of CSL – one of Australia’s most essential and successful biotech companies.
You are a big part of why CSL is today a global leader, and why we can celebrate this world-class facility for research and development.
And it truly is world-class.
It’s a lab, a factory, a biotech start-up incubator, a multinational business, and a piece of Australian history, all in one stunning, state-of-the-art building.
Seven levels of laboratories.
Over 850 employees, working together, collaborating on cutting-edge science and research that helps ensure Australia remains a global leader in this field.
This building and the people who work here are full of potential, as is this entire precinct.
It’s also a storied institution with a long record of achievement.
CSL began life here in Melbourne in 1916.
You brought Australians the vaccines for polio, diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus.
As well as insulin, penicillin, and anti-venoms for Australia’s most deadly creatures.
More recently, the ground-breaking Gardasil vaccine against HPV, the world’s first swine flu vaccine, life-saving medicines and blood plasma derivatives.
All this steady work over more than a century underpinned our national health and wellbeing.
Then along came COVID.
CSL, along with the rest of the scientific community, rallied to the cause.
Your work on the AstraZeneca vaccine contributed to tens of millions of doses here and among our Pacific and ASEAN neighbours.
Australians remain so grateful for the work of our medical scientists and innovators over the past three years.
Grateful and more aware than ever of how vital your work is.
As we rebuild from COVID-19, we’re learning its lessons.
Lessons about how we shape our future, rather than letting the future shape us.
Lessons about how to make our economy fit for tomorrow, more productive, more adaptive, more resilient.
How to strengthen supply chains.
How to modernise our industrial base.
How to make more things here in Australia.
How to ensure our people have the skills, knowledge and training they need to take up the good jobs we will create.
And how to make sure Australia is higher up on the value chain in the global economy.
Our National Reconstruction Fund is key to all of this, and we’ve identified medical science as a key priority.
We’re targeting $1.5 billion of the NRF for medical manufacturing.
This magnificent facility will help position CSL, and indeed Australia, to compete in the global marketplace, boosting onshore research and advanced manufacturing.
The work you do here will be integral to Australia’s future economy.
And it will continue to be integral to Australians’ health and quality of life, as it has been since 1916.
There’s a lovely line from Thomas Jefferson, writing to the ‘father of immunology’ Edward Jenner, in 1806.
He wrote that Jenner’s pioneering work on the smallpox vaccine had
‘erased [it] from the calendar of human afflictions’ and earned the gratitude ‘of the whole human family.’
Here at CSL, the heart of your work is to ease human suffering, erase afflictions, and, fundamentally, to save lives.
For which you, too, deserve the gratitude of the human family.
It’s a huge pleasure to be here to launch this superb new facility.
And to bring with me the thanks and respect of Australians for what you’ve already contributed, what you do every day, and what you will do in this place in the decades ahead.
Thanks again, and congratulations.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am so proud to lead a Government committed to Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people through a Voice.
And I am grateful to be in the presence of a union that has thrown its considerable weight behind the Yes vote. Behind this chance of a fairer, more united Australia.
It’s an honour to be here with you all tonight. I particularly want to acknowledge the leadership of Graeme Kelly.
There were a lot of good moments during Labor’s national conference last week. Graeme, I definitely number your election to the National Executive of the ALP as one of them.
Your long career of service has been distinguished by your dedication, your energy and your integrity, all devoted to improving and protecting the rights and conditions of the very workers who do so much to keep our communities strong and thriving.
I also want to acknowledge your State President, Sharon Sewell, and the entire USU executive.
What everyone here tonight shares is one the core elements of the Australian spirit – that willingness to put your hand up, to get involved. To make a positive difference in the lives of working Australians. To walk the talk. That is at the very heart of why we’re all a part of the greater labour movement.
The USU has led from the front. You had the backs of so many of the heroes of the pandemic. Your successful negotiations during COVID kept councils running, preserving jobs and ensuring that essential services continued.
Without the USU, that profoundly challenging time would have been so much harder for so many Australians.
I also want to acknowledge the success of your campaigns against the privatisation and outsourcing of council services such as childcare centres, swimming pools, and garbage collection.
Your members truly appreciate the value of these services should not be measured in just dollars and cents. So often, they are the glue that holds communities together.
During the time of the previous Labor government, I was hugely proud when I was made Minister for Local Government. I got to see the difference an entirely new generation of local government made to millions of people.
I was even prouder when I established the Australian Council of Local Governments. At the first meeting 15 years ago, I said:
“Local government has evolved into the third tier of this federation, the level of government closest to the community … We have much to work together on.”
Since the Australian people entrusted Labor with the privilege of forming government, one of our big tasks has been repairing the damage done by our predecessors.
Re-establishing the ACLG and bringing local government back to the table was a commitment we took to the election. In June, we delivered on it. It’s important we bring the levels of decision-making in government closer.
It’s why we’re including the Australian Local Government Association in meetings of National Cabinet and the Council on Federal Financial Relations. It’s why we’ve reinvigorated the Local Government Ministers Forum.
And it’s why we have two outstanding ministers with shared responsibility for local government issues. Infrastructure Minister Catherine King and Local Government Minister Kristy McBain – a former mayor – are passionate advocates for your sector.
The work that local governments do, and the work that so many of your members do, is a public good – so it should be in public hands.
That is why my Government is systematically overturning the Coalition’s cult of outsourcing. There are times when outsourcing is necessary, but with them it was an addiction, just one more time they let ideology trump reality.
There should be good, secure, well-paid jobs in local government, and they should be publicly funded. These are important jobs – jobs that add to the health of communities in so many ways – and they should be done by local government workers.
There are also gaps that need to be filled and skills shortages that have to be addressed if we are going to be able to build the better future that Australians deserve.
Just one example is the shortage of planners. Solving that will make us better positioned to deliver the homes Australians need, in the places they want to live.
And it should all be done with the care and transparency that should characterise any spending of public money. As with everything, how we do something is every bit as important as what we do.
I very much believe that public service is a noble calling. To become part of it is to serve the community at a very fundamental level.
What we saw under the previous government was an ideology that was diametrically opposed to the whole concept of public service. Over the wasted decade that they occupied the government benches, they presided over a calculated and unrelenting hollowing out of the public service at all levels.
Their compulsion to privatise services saw them taking more and more out of public hands because to them, serving the public never mattered as much.
As a Labor Government, the rights of working Australians will always be a central focus.
For those of your members who are covered in the federal sphere, our Secure Jobs Better Pay legislation is about raising the bar raising the bar on awards, raising the bar on enterprise agreements, raising the bar on bargaining and lifting the floor for workers.
It is about getting wages moving and closing the gender pay gap. Employers are back at the bargaining table and the gender pay gap is narrowing.
As we head into spring, we are closing four major loopholes that some employers use to undercut workers’ pay and conditions. We are criminalising wage theft.
Our ‘closing labour hire loopholes’ proposal aims to ensure that labour hire workers are paid at least what they would be paid if they were directly employed by a host employer and paid under the host’s enterprise agreement.
We will extend the powers of the Fair Work Commission to set minimum standards for employee-like workers, including those in the gig economy.
And we will legislate a fair, objective test to determine when an employee can be classified as casual and ensure eligible employees can choose permanent employment if they want it.
Working constructively with unions, we’ve delivered on our promises over the past year. We’ve tackled the challenges of today while never losing sight of the long term.
And when you step back and look at the broader economic picture after our first 15 months in office, you can see the results.
An unemployment rate with a 3 in front of it. Half a million new jobs created. The gender pay gap at an all-time low. Wages growing at their fastest rate in a decade. Business investment ticking up. Days lost to industrial disputes down 20 per cent compared to our predecessors
A weight of evidence that inflation has passed its peak: good news for cost-of-living and good signs for the health of our economy. And we are well on track to delivering Australia’s first Budget surplus in 15 years.
These are the sturdy foundations built by a grown-up government, a Labor Government that understands that all possibility flows first and foremost from a robust, healthy economy.
When it comes to making Australia an even stronger, fairer country, there is no stronger combination than the union movement and a Labor government.
Together, we have already shown what this Labor Government and this union can achieve. Together, we recognise what is important, and what is right.
We recognise the challenges that face us, and the importance of shaping the future rather than sitting back and letting it shape us.
We understand that when it comes to tackling cost of living pressures, it’s essential that Australians have access to good, secure, well-paid jobs and that the source of so many of those jobs that we’re talking about tonight either remain in public hands, or are returned to public hands.
Better wages, reliable and more affordable services, all bound together by the recognition that Australia’s greater potential rides on the health of its communities.
And who better to strengthen the health of our communities than the members of the USU? There is a better future for Australia – and we can build it together.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government committed to Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, through a Voice.
And I want to thank the Business Council of Australia for your longstanding support of this cause.
For making the very straightforward point that Australia needs to do better in Indigenous health and housing and employment and education.
And that we always do better when we listen.
That’s what the Voice is about: listening in order to get better results.
I’m delighted to be here tonight, to congratulate Bran Black on his appointment as Chief Executive.
And to pay tribute to Jennifer Westacott for her leadership.
At the end of the last year, Jennifer and I had the privilege of attending the opening of the newly-restored Whitlam family home in Cabramatta.
The modest house in the suburbs that informed so much of Gough’s passion for infrastructure and urban renewal.
Jennifer gave a quite extraordinary speech that day, a speech about how those policies had changed her life. &nbsp;
But also the power of ambition and vision and ideas to change a nation.
That’s the spirit that has defined Jennifer’s time with the BCA. &nbsp;
A willingness to champion ideas, to advance the public policy debate and to advocate for an agenda bigger than any collection of individual interests – in the service of the national interest.
Jennifer, congratulations and thank you. &nbsp;
Tomorrow, the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers will be releasing the Intergenerational Report.
It speaks to the defining challenges – and the transformative opportunities of the decades ahead.
The five big shifts already underway:

The move to clean energy
The step-change in technology
The centrality of the care and support economy
Our population growing older
And Australia’s place in a region shaped by historic economic growth – but also ongoing strategic competition.

And how we need to plan and build for these changes, to ensure the future growth of our economy and the future health of our society.
A great deal of this is reflected in the BCA’s Seize the Moment report published earlier this week.
It’s genuinely heartening to see such strong overlap between the priorities of the Business Council and the agenda of our Government.
And not just in a big picture sense of seeking greater prosperity, stronger productivity, higher growth and better living standards.
Because in many ways, agreement on that, consensus on the destination is the easy bit.
What’s been lacking for too long is a consensus on how we get there.
Getting beyond agreements in principle – to achieve greater agreement on process. &nbsp;
This is where our Government has been focused on working with the employers and job-creators and leaders in this room, across a whole range of policies.
This is where the Government will work with the business community in a structured way – with a regular forum for dialogue and constructive discussion.
Focusing on those long-term objectives and realities – but also taking action together, here and now.
Already, this co-operation has provided us with a strong economic foundation:

An unemployment rate with a 3 in front of it
Half a million new jobs created
The gender pay gap at an all-time low
Wages growing at their fastest rate in a decade
Business investment ticking up.
Days lost to industrial disputes down 20% compared to our predecessors
And a weight of evidence that inflation has passed its peak: good news for cost-of-living and good signs for the health of our economy.

We can all take pride in this - and we should take confidence from it, knowing we can meet the challenges ahead.
Take climate change and clean energy.
We’ve agreed on an upgraded emissions reduction target.
More importantly, we are working together to achieve that target.
Through our new Safeguards Mechanism, an incentive for business and industry to invest in the technology and equipment that reduces their emissions.
And through programs like Hydrogen Headstart.
Because our vision for Australia as a renewable energy superpower is about more than simply increasing the mix of renewable energy in our national energy grid.
It’s about vastly reducing input costs for manufacturing, with cheaper power.
And using clean energy – such as green hydrogen - to sustain and grow large-scale, energy-intensive industry and transport.&nbsp;
So that Australia is producing and exporting green steel, green aluminium and green ammonia.&nbsp;
Not only meeting our own Net Zero target, helping our neighbours meet theirs.
And adding a new dimension to trade relationships where sustainability will matter, more and more.
I mentioned the Business Council’s place in the public debate earlier – and I was reminded of that earlier this month, with your principled defence of skilled migration and the vital contribution it makes to growing our economy and bolstering our skills base.
From our first days in Government we have been working together with business and unions to move away from a system that treats skilled migration as a temporary stop-gap and – instead – focuses on providing a pathway to citizenship.
Encouraging people to make a life in Australia, to be part of the community.
And also rewarding the many businesses who do the right thing and invest in their staff, their skills and their corporate knowledge so they don’t have to start all over again when a person’s visa expires.
That same integrated, co-operative approach is true for Jobs and Skills Australia as well.
Jobs and Skills Australia was the first policy I announced as Labor Leader and the first piece of legislation we introduced to Parliament.
It’s also the missing piece of the vocational education system aligning TAFE and training to the immediate priorities of employers and the future demands of our economy.
We are delivering 180,000 fee-free TAFE places this year – and we are rolling-out 300,000 fee-free TAFE places next year.
As well as 20,000 new university places – aimed at people in the regions and outer suburbs.
Yes, we want to make the opportunity of education available to more Australians – we also want to make sure that these courses lead to good jobs and provide businesses with skilled workers.&nbsp;
Another important point of consensus over the past 15 months has been the clear understanding that making economic equality for women a priority is not just the right thing to do and the fair thing to do – it is the smart thing to do.
Which is why so many businesses in this room have backed our reforms to child care.
Recognising their value as productivity and participation measures, effectively a retention strategy for talented staff.
The same is true for our expansion of Paid Parental Leave to 26 weeks – with greater flexibility, so that both parents are encouraged and supported to be involved in those precious early months.
And I’m very pleased to see that Seize the Moment puts a strong emphasis on maximising the strategic value of our National Reconstruction Fund.
Because the great strength of the NRF, modelled on the Clean Energy Finance Corporation is that as well as returning value-for-money for taxpayers, it enables and unlocks private capital.
Seeking out new fields of competitive advantage, driving new investments in growth areas, moving Australia up the international value chain.
Striving for greater diversity in what we trade – and diversity in who we trade with.
Yes, this is about learning the lessons of the pandemic – and guarding against inflationary pressures into the future.
But it’s so much more than an exercise in risk mitigation.
It’s about investing in the long-term resilience and diversity of our economy.
Supporting a broader range of Australian products and services, catering to a wider set of markets.
Underpinning a new wave of sustained growth and secure jobs here at home.
I know that so many of you in this room are out there realising this vision: engaging in India and Vietnam and Indonesia.
Building business-to-business connections and building Australia’s reputation as a provider of high-quality services – as well as high-value resources.
And supporting our Government’s continuing efforts to stabilise the relationship with China – in the best interests of both our nations. &nbsp;
Across all these areas: energy policy or migration reform, skills, trade - what we decide matters, for the decade ahead.
And so does the way we decide it, the how.
I can assure you, my colleagues and I don’t seek your input for the sake of appearances.
We do it because we want you involved in the design and detail.
Because that’s how we will get the best out of these programs and policies.
And that’s how we make change that lasts, that endures, that becomes embedded as a driver of success in our economy.
In particular – that’s true for productivity.
Boosting productivity is essential to locking-in our national prosperity and securing long-term improvements in our living-standards.
It’s how a middle power like Australia can compete and win in the world, on economic ground of our own choosing.
But there is no single lever to pull.
There is no one decision of Government – or business – that will revitalise national productivity on its own and overnight.
It is, necessarily, an incremental process and a cumulative one.
It’s one where we all need to be prepared to take the long view – and the broad view.
Building a modern industrial relations framework that achieves the right balance of flexibility and security.
A bargaining system that enables employers and employees to negotiate improvements in productivity and pay, with respect for each other’s common interests.
A pro-business, pro-worker system that delivers win-win outcomes.
And I’m grateful to the business community for the constructive input they’ve provided on this issue.
Of course, technology also has a huge role to play in our future productivity growth.
Embracing technology can be every bit as transformative over the next forty years, as the Hawke and Keating reforms have proven over the last forty years.
There is a role and a responsibility for Government here:

Investing in digital skills
Driving a responsible approach to Artificial Intelligence
Supporting research and commercialisation and innovation
Upgrading the NBN
And strengthening our national cyber security capability.

We are taking action on all these fronts.
But in so many ways, the big productivity gains in technology will be led by the innovation and enterprise of the firms represented in this room.
The era of Artificial Intelligence is going to present all of us with complexities and opportunities that we cannot foresee.
And we are going to need to work with each other and learn from each other to get the best out of this technology for our citizens and our customers, while safeguarding our people and firms from its potential risks.
The Productivity Commission has made it clear that maximising productivity in this space doesn’t depend on every Australian company making a world-changing breakthrough.
There are big and broad productivity gains that can be secured by businesses embracing technology that already exists, re-designing the way they work and trade and communicate to get the most out of it driving a climate where companies are competing with each other to set new standards.
And fostering a culture of innovation where Government has the opportunity to learn and adapt from businesses that are leading the way.
There’s one final point of agreement that I want to conclude with tonight.
Whenever our government, your organisation and your firms talk about the big challenges facing the economy – and the big opportunities ahead of our country it’s never in a passive way, never in a sense that this is a list of things that will happen to us, a survey of predetermined outcomes.
There’s an optimism, an urgency, a determination to shape the future – rather than allowing the future shape us.
I know that when our Government and your businesses work together, we can make change work for us.
We can secure the extraordinary opportunities in our region, in clean energy, in new technology and better skills.
Seizing the moment.
Building to last.
Shaping the future, in the best interests of all Australians.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government which will give every Australian the opportunity to come together and vote for Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people at a referendum later this year.
It’s always a great pleasure to be here in a place that has been bringing people together for so long. Bondi is known and loved across the world, and so much of the world comes together here. Above all, Bondi has a very special place in Australian hearts.
There’s something so good about the fact that one of our most famous placenames of all is one that comes to us from an Aboriginal language.
Bondi is a much-loved national treasure. One of the expressions of that love is that we never take it for granted. We have to protect it and nurture it, because even a treasure like Bondi needs a boost sometimes to be at its best.
The restoration of Bondi Pavilion has brought back the sparkle to our one of most loved buildings. Just as you can’t imagine Sydney Harbour without the Opera House, you can’t imagine Bondi Beach without the Pavilion.
The refurbishment of the Lifeguard Tower and the Bondi Lifeguard Facility Upgrade will boost safety at Bondi Beach, where there’s an average of 200 rescues a month. My Government is proud to have supported this upgrade, which has delivered a purpose-built first aid and incident response facility, enhancing health and recreation at Bondi Beach.
I want to acknowledge the extraordinary work our lifesavers do. They step up for all of us. They give their time and put their own safety on the line for the sake of others, mainly people they haven’t even met. Our lifesavers embody the best of the Australian spirit.
My Government is committed to working in partnership with local governments to deliver services and build infrastructure that delivers benefits and supports jobs in local communities. Which is why we’ve brought local government back to the table.
Together, we get things done. Together, we’ve made one of the world’s greatest beaches even better. Congratulations to everyone involved. The result is spectacular.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people at a referendum later this year.
I’m delighted to be here with all of you this morning, on another beautiful day in WA.
I acknowledge all my colleagues here this morning, particularly my outstanding Western Australian colleagues.
From my first day as Labor Leader, winning in Western Australia was at the heart of our campaign for Government.
And from my first day as Prime Minister, backing Western Australia to win in the world has been central to our agenda in Government.
Many of you will remember we launched our Federal campaign here in Perth last year, with apologies to the West Coast and Freo supporters in the house - it’s probably the happiest crowd there’s been at Optus Stadium in a while.
But my team and I have always understood that Western Australia is so much more than Perth.
This is a huge state – and it makes a huge contribution.
Hard working people in Western Australia’s regional communities are helping drive the prosperity of our nation – and shaping the transformation of our region.
The great privilege and also the fundamental responsibility of being a Government pledged to work for all Australians, is making sure your policies serve these communities and the people who call them home.
So, when floods hit Broome and Fitzroy Crossing in January, Senator Patrick Dodson and I went to meet with the locals, to make sure the right support was being delivered then and there – but also to get the right plans for rebuilding in place.
Our whole Federal Cabinet went to Port Hedland in February for community meetings – and to deliver on our commitment of a $565 million port upgrade.
Some might look at that as big money for a town with 16,000 people.
But over 3 per cent of Australia’s total GDP moves through that port alone.
And by making the right investments in renewable energy technology and the supporting infrastructure, this will continue to grow: bringing more jobs and opportunities to Port Hedland and the Pilbara as a whole.
Indeed, I visited the Rio Tinto facility in Karratha on Sunday - and the scale of those operations speaks to the size of the contribution Western Australia makes to our national economy.
In the south west, we’ve made Albany a focal point for the upgrades we are delivering to the NBN.
Connecting more homes and small businesses to the best possible fibre technology, so we can continue to break down the tyranny of distance and boost our national productivity.
I’m pleased that we have already opened three Medicare Urgent Care Clinics in Perth City, Rockingham and yesterday at Clarkson, and we’ll be opening four more in the growing suburbs of Midland and Murdoch as well as Bunbury and Broome.
Bulk-billed, open seven days a week, for extended hours.
This helps with the cost-of-living, it takes pressure off families and gives peace of mind.
But it’s also a really important way of taking pressure off emergency departments – and the people who work in them.
Nearly half of all presentations to WA emergency departments are for semi-urgent or non-urgent conditions, things that could be – and will be - resolved by a GP at a clinic.
The investments we’re making in Telehealth services for mental health work the same way.
Instead of putting the burden on people in the regions to make multiple trips in search of referrals and support, they can make a call from home.
And we will be strengthening Medicare even further in November, when we triple the bulk-billing incentive for GPs.
This is the biggest investment in Medicare since it was created – and it will help around 1.2 million Western Australians see a doctor for free.
Our investments in health are designed to complement the efforts of Roger Cook’s Government - and indeed all the states and territories.
So that we are improving services where both levels of government share responsibility.&nbsp;
Because when you look at the challenges ahead for our country with an ageing population, growing demand for housing and greater pressure on health care and aged care and the National Disability Insurance Scheme, it’s very clear that we need stronger co-operation between every level of government, so that every dollar goes to the services that make a difference to the people who need them.
And I consider the work we did at National Cabinet on Housing a valuable model for future reforms in these other priority areas.
The Commonwealth can’t dictate progress on planning or zoning or approvals.
What we have done is bring together the decision-makers, find agreement on a way forward and incentivise results by rewarding action.
Our New Homes Bonus working in concert with our Housing Accord and our National Planning Reform Blueprint. &nbsp;
Getting new building work and development underway in areas where people want to live – close to good jobs, served by reliable public transport and near their family and friends.
Employers appreciate that more affordable housing serves their interests – like all good infrastructure, it boosts productivity.
And it also gives employees and customers a greater sense of stability and confidence, which strengthens our economy as a whole.
This is what we can achieve through co-operation. When we look for solutions, not arguments.
And in that same spirit, today I am pleased to announce a ground breaking new agreement between our Government and the Western Australian Government.
A new Commonwealth-WA Rewiring the Nation deal that will provide up to $3 billion to expand and modernise the electricity grids in the South West and the North West.
New money for major projects, creating thousands of new jobs right around this state.
New infrastructure and economic development in Geraldton and Albany, Karratha and Port Hedland.
Making the energy grid work better, getting more renewables into the system – and getting prices down for families, businesses and industry.
At the turn of the 20th Century, the people of Western Australia had a vision for a pipeline to bring water to the Goldfields.
Providing an essential service to a region rich in possibility and making it possible for the whole state and our whole nation to share in its opportunities.
That same vision underpins Rewiring the Nation.
Building the renewable energy infrastructure which will power growth north and south.
The clean, reliable energy that will enable us to grow export industries, in energy-intensive sectors, while still reducing our emissions.
Unlocking greater prosperity today – and investing in sustainability for tomorrow.
That’s a priority here in WA – and it’s an urgent task for the nation as a whole.
Because in 2023, Australia has an energy grid built for a time when solar panels powered pocket calculators and not households.
A network our predecessors ran-down and neglected, watching 4 gigawatts of generation leave the system, while only 1 gigawatt came in.
My colleagues and I are working with Roger Cook and his team to turn this around.
Building on the ideas and momentum of the Pilbara Industry Roundtable to deliver the modern, efficient renewable energy network Western Australia needs and deserves.
Western Australia is helping power our economy.
Our Government is going to invest in powering Western Australia.&nbsp;
The work we are doing in energy and housing and health and jobs and skills is all designed to strengthen Australia’s economic security.
And we are investing in Australia’s capability and investing our relationships, to strengthen security, peace and prosperity in our region.
Again, we have put Western Australia at the centre of these efforts.
In March, when I was alongside President Biden and Prime Minister Sunak, outlining the details of the AUKUS agreement for our future submarines, our Treasurer Jim Chalmers was here in Western Australia, spelling-out the key upgrades to be delivered to HMAS Stirling Naval Base and the new jobs this will bring.
This is part of the comprehensive work we are doing through our Defence Strategic Review to put a focus on our north-west coast.
Western Australia has also been at the forefront of our diplomacy.
Not just because this is a fantastic place to bring international visitors, like when we hosted Prime Minister Kishida here in October.
But because WA has such a powerful, recognisable presence in our region.
The defining economic change of the past two decades has been the growth and transformation we’ve seen in the economies of north Asia.
And it’s Western Australian resources that have helped build the infrastructure, power the factories and remake the skylines of the biggest cities in the world and some of the fastest-growing economies in human history.
We showed the Prime Minister of Japan BHP’s Kwinana Refinery because that’s where Panasonic and Toyota get their nickel.
The Japanese Government – like the South Korean Government - know that Australia is one of their most trusted providers of energy, particularly gas.
And when I reflect on the work our Government has undertaken to stabilise Australia’s relationship with China, there is no question that the commercial relationships built over decades by the businesses and people in this room, have given strength to our efforts.
Because you are a powerful proof point that a fair and open trading relationship with China serves the prosperity and progress of both our nations.&nbsp;
And friends, even as all this growth and modernisation in our region continues, the defining economic change of the next two decades – and beyond - is already underway.
The move to net zero, the embrace of clean energy and renewable technology and the global race to make green hydrogen work.
Our Government’s vision is for Australia to be a renewable energy superpower and an advanced manufacturing powerhouse – and so much of that depends on Western Australia.
For example, 50 per cent of the world’s lithium extraction occurs in Western Australia.
And I know businesses in this room are already building new connections with economies that need these resources, nations seeking to industrialise and decarbonise at the same time.
Our Government has been focused on building a framework to support these efforts.
Forming new critical minerals and green hydrogen partnerships with India.
And new clean energy partnerships with the United States and Japan.
But while it is genuinely inspiring to point to technology changing the world and say that the lithium or the nickel or the rare earths it depends on, come from Australia. &nbsp;
In the years ahead, I want us to build on that. I want us to go beyond it.
I want us to be able to say that the next generation of batteries and charging technology and the innovations that will maximise their power and speed and capacity and efficiency, come from Australia.&nbsp;
Designed in Australia. Made in Australia. &nbsp;
The product of Australian skills and Australian workers and Australian research.
We shouldn’t settle for a role in the beginning and end of someone else’s story.
Instead, wherever possible, let’s work together to write our own.
From exploration and extraction, to innovation and commercialisation, to design and manufacturing.
Of course, we’re not the only country in the world thinking this way.
The United States, in particular, has embarked on massive investment in their industrial base.
But there’s a vital and inescapable difference between us and virtually every other country – we’re the ones with the raw materials.
What’s more we are a trusted provider, with a reputation built over generations and a demonstrated sense of responsibility and sustainability that will be vital in future trade relationships.
Other nations cannot invest or train or program their way to the resources we have here in Australia.
But Australia can train our people and grow our industries and broaden our manufacturing and develop our technology, to make the most of the start we’ve been given.
To build on this unprecedented comparative advantage by investing in the skills of our workforce.
At North Metropolitan TAFE, earlier this year we launched our New Energy Apprenticeship Program.
An incentive for workers in Western Australia – and around Australia – to train in the skills our country needs to build and install the infrastructure of a clean energy future.
10,000 new apprenticeships for metal fitters and machinists, structural steel and welding, electricians and motor mechanics.
And yesterday at Bentley TAFE I was really pleased to confirm that Western Australia has exceeded its 19,000 fee-free TAFE places for 2023 already, with 34,500 enrolments.
Western Australians – women and young people in particular - have absolutely jumped at the chance to learn new skills in areas of national priority.
That’s great for people – and it’s a win for WA employers too, it means we are addressing shortages in areas of high demand and strengthening our national skills base.
Which is why we are going to build on this success with 300,000 fee-free TAFE places from next year.
And just as our Government is investing in the skills and workers of the future – we want to drive greater investment in the jobs and industries of the future too.
This is where our National Reconstruction Fund is so important.
A $15 billion vehicle to unlock private capital in growth industries and build on our strengths as well as diversifying our export opportunities.&nbsp;
Moving us up the international value chain.
Value-adding in resources, mining science technologies and processing raw materials.
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries - areas where WA already sets world standards in quality.
Defence capabilities, medical manufacturing – and renewable energy technology.
All fields where Australia can compete and win in a global market, on our terms.
Our strategic approach means the taxpayer will get a return on their investment – and Australian companies will be able to seize the chance to innovate and grow.
I know Australia can do this – and I know Western Australia can lead the way.
I’ve seen what it can look like, a few months ago at the Resource Technology Showcase.
Breakthroughs in research, software and technology, driving productivity, improving safety and boosting sustainability.
Opportunities for young people to build rewarding careers in thriving businesses.
And products, services and expertise that Australia can offer the world.
Building our economic security and energy security and national security, even in uncertain times.&nbsp;
This is how we can work together to shape the future – not wait for the future to shape us.
Western Australia was central to our campaign for Government.
And Western Australia will always be central to our work in Government.
Because the workers and employers and industries of Western Australia are central to our Government’s vision for shaping the future of Australia.


My fellow Australians
For many years, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have advocated for Constitutional Recognition through a Voice.
Our Government – along with every single State and Territory Government - has committed to it.
Legal experts have endorsed it.
People on all sides of the Parliament have backed it.
Faith groups and sporting codes and local councils and businesses and unions have embraced it.
An army of volunteers from every part of this great nation are throwing all their energy behind it.
Now, my fellow Australians, you can vote for it.
The idea for a Voice came from the people – and it will be decided by the people.
Today, I announce that Referendum day will be the 14th of October.
On that day every Australian will have a once-in-a-generation chance to bring our country together and to change it for the better.
To vote for Recognition, Listening and Better Results.
And I ask all Australians to vote Yes.
Referendums come around much less often than elections – this will be the first one this century - and they are very different.
Because on October 14th, you are not being asked to vote for a political party or for a person.
You’re being asked to vote for an idea.
To say Yes to an idea whose time has come.
To say Yes to an invitation that comes directly from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
A proposal thousands of elders and leaders and communities all over our country have worked on for over a decade.
A change supported by more than 80 per cent of Indigenous Australians: Constitutional Recognition through a Voice.
A way for all of us to recognise Indigenous Australians and their history in our Constitution and a form of recognition that will importantly make a positive difference to their lives and their futures.
A practical way of dealing with issues that, despite all the good intentions in this world, no Australian Government has been able to get right before.
The Voice will be a committee of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, local representatives from every state and territory, the regions, remote communities as well as the Torres Strait Islands.
A committee of Indigenous Australians, chosen by Indigenous Australians, giving advice to Government so that we can get better results for Indigenous Australians.
The Voice is about advice.
The Parliament and Government that Australians vote for in the normal way every three years will still be responsible for decisions and laws and funding.
Just as it always has been.
With a Voice though, we’ll be able to hear directly from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities about the challenges they face in health and education, in jobs and housing, and we’ll be able to learn about the things are working in local areas, so we can replicate them and make them work right around the country.
Learning from communities in Arnhem Land where the parents and teachers co-operate to make sure children are going to school and aiming high.
Or the health services employing Indigenous nurses to deliver health checks and immunisations in remote communities.
Or Indigenous Rangers caring for our environment, with knowledge built up over tens of thousands of years.
There are local success stories out there – just imagine the progress we could make with a Voice connecting the regions with the nation.
And giving locals a say, of course, means that we save money too.
Because we’ll be making sure the funding actually reaches the people on the ground.
No more waste - better results where they are needed.
My fellow Australians
What Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people want for their children is what you want for yours.
Staying healthy, doing well at school, finding a job they love.
Being safe and leading fulfilling lives.
That’s what they are asking you to say Yes to at this referendum.
The same opportunity for their children to make a good life for themselves.
In the words of the Uluru Statement from the Heart:
“When we have power over our destiny, our children will flourish.”
That’s the change that we, as Australians, can make happen.
Of course, voting Yes won’t fix everything overnight.
We’re talking about challenges built up over generations – and they will take time to address.
But Voting Yes means we will finally have the right approach in place, so we can start finding the solutions.
We can make this change together – and then we will make it work together.
With a Voice that’s independent from day-to-day politics, so that it can plan for the long term.
And let’s be very clear about the alternative.
Because Voting No leads nowhere. It means nothing changes.
Voting No closes the door on this opportunity to move forward.
I say today, don’t close the door on Constitutional Recognition.
Don’t close the door on listening to communities to get better results.
Don’t close the door on an idea that came from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
And don’t close the door on the next generation of Indigenous Australians.
Vote Yes.
Vote Yes for Recognition.
Vote Yes for Listening.
Vote Yes for Better Results.
Voting Yes is a change for the better that all of us can make together.
We all get one vote and we all get an equal say.
And if something is unclear to you, or you haven’t even had a chance to think about this yet, I encourage you, ask questions.
Because if you’re unsure, it’s easy to find out more.
Have a listen to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders and elders like Noel Pearson and Aunty Pat Anderson, Megan Davis and Marcia Langton and Tanya Hosch and Tom Calma - trailblazers working with the next generation like Evonne Goolagong or Eddie Betts or Johnathon Thurston, or respected Liberals like Premier Jeremy Rockcliff, Ken Wyatt, Kate Carnell, Sean Gordon, Bridget Archer, Julian Leeser and Fred Chaney.
Have a read of the Uluru Statement from the Heart – just one page, full of grace and generosity, inviting all Australians to walk together to a better future.
Have a chat to the Yes campaign volunteers at your train station or shopping centre. &nbsp;
And have a look, importantly, at the words of the question – and the words to be added to the Constitution.
They are not long.
The Question is:
A Proposed Law: to alter the Constitution to recognise the First Peoples of Australia by establishing an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.
Do you approve this proposed alteration?”
Straightforward. Clear.
As are the provisions.
It's the advantage of working on it for so long.
First, the recognition. It says this:
“In recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of Australia:” 
That is what it says. Simple. Clear. Straightforward.
Then the what.

There shall be a body, to be called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice;

Again, straightforward. Clear.
The second provision:

The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice may make representations to the Parliament and the Executive Government of the Commonwealth on matters relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples;

That is the what, what will it do. That is what it will do.
Straightforward. Clear. Unambiguous.&nbsp;
Then, the how, including a clear declaration of the primacy of our Parliament. It says this:

The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to matters relating to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice, including its composition, functions, powers and procedures.

Again, pretty clear and pretty straightforward.
Recognition. Listening to advice. Parliament continuing as decision-maker.
That is the clear, positive and practical request from Indigenous Australians.
That is the hand out asking us, non-Indigenous Australia, to just grasp that hand of friendship.
And that’s what we can vote Yes for.
My fellow Australians
Our Australian story goes back 65,000 years. And what a privilege we have of sharing this continent with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
But our story is not finished yet.
It's up to all of us to write the next chapter together.
And we can start by writing one word - Yes.
In the history of our great nation, the wonderful acts of national progress and the great advances in fairness have always required hard work.
There were arguments here, when South Australia, something they are very proud of and should be, led the world in giving women the right to vote.
There were arguments made against Federation and the minimum wage, Medicare and multiculturalism.
And before the 1967 referendum, before Vincent Lingiari, before Mabo, before the Apology.
But the great story of our country, through the generations, is that Australians come together to answer these calls for change.
We rise to the moment.
Like the Kangaroo and the Emu on our coat of arms.
They never go backwards – they just go forwards.
And so do we.
And when it’s done, when we see the joy and the celebration, when we see the difference it makes to people’s lives, the only question we ever ask ourselves when these changes occur is:
“Why didn't we do it earlier?”
And it will be the same this time, when we come together and vote Yes.
Because we will have a way forward, together.
On October 14, there is nothing for us to lose.
And there is so much for Australia to gain.
There is no downside here. Only upside.
Friends
Many times when I’ve spoken about this change, I’ve asked: “If not now, when?”
This is it.
October 14 is our time.
It’s our chance.
It’s a moment calling-out to the best of our Australian character.
For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, this has been a marathon.
For all of us, it is now a sprint.
And across the finish line is a more unified, more reconciled Australia, with greater opportunity for all.
That’s why thousands of people have volunteered already, many of whom have never worked on any kind of campaign before.
This is a once-in-a-generation chance – and Australians from across the generations are working together to make it happen.
I say to all those volunteers, keep knocking on doors, making phone calls – and keep having those conversations.
With your colleagues in workplaces across the land. Because this change is supported by employers and unions alike.
With your teammates in every local sporting club. Because this is a cause backed by every single sporting code.
With your fellow worshippers in every faith, because all faiths have given their support to this proposal.
With multicultural communities, because they know what it means to celebrate and recognise tradition and culture.
Have those conversations with your family and friends, your parents and grandparents.
Because with your energy and enthusiasm, this referendum can be won.
And when Yes wins, all Australians will win.
So, in a spirit of generosity and optimism – Vote Yes.
In recognition of 65,000 years of history – Vote Yes.
With hope for a better future – Vote Yes.
Vote Yes on October 14.
Thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote Yes for Recognition, Listening and Better Results on the 14th of October.
And I thank the Minerals Council and so many of the firms here tonight for the positive and constructive role that you have played in the national conversation to date.
I acknowledge and welcome all my colleagues here tonight, from across the Parliament.
Minerals Week is a valuable opportunity for us to celebrate the contribution that all the employers and workers represented in this room make to Australia's national prosperity.
Over 14 per cent of our GDP.
Over two-thirds of Australia's export value.
And more than a million jobs.
Our Government will keep working with you, to ensure that as you continue to create good, secure jobs, you can rely on a skilled and productive workforce.
This has been the focus of our constructive engagement on industrial relations reform, on overdue changes to the migration system and boosting skills.
And while we will not always agree on every aspect of every issue, we do all agree on the overarching objective: a more productive and prosperous Australia.
I've always had great respect for the vital role your industry plays in our nation.
And since being elected as Prime Minister, I've gained a deeper understanding of the central role you play in our region.
Because arguably the single-biggest change in our lifetimes has been the economic transformation of North Asia.
And the Australian resources industry is acknowledged, everywhere I go, as one of the most significant and ongoing contributors to this unprecedented growth.
The economies of our region, the fastest-growing economies in human history, have been powered and built and modernised by the hard work of the people in this room and the Australians you employ.
Our Government appreciates that and so do the nations who have benefited.
Japan and South Korea understand the contribution that Australian resources, particularly our iron ore, gas and coal, have made to their economic development.
Just as importantly, although what we export will change as the world moves to reduce emissions, our trading partners know they can count on Australia as a stable and reliable provider of energy, metals and minerals into the future.
And when you look at the work our Government has done, from our first days in office, to stabilise Australia's relationship with China.
There is no doubt that the value and quality of Australian resources has given us a strong foundation to work from.
A real and compelling proof-point that the removal of trade impediments between our two countries, always serves the interests of both our nations.
But, above all, Minerals Week, like the work of the Minerals Council, is about looking to the future.
Because the next big wave of economic change is already underway.
And later this week, when I'm in Jakarta for ASEAN and the East Asia Summit and then New Delhi for the G20.
I can guarantee you that so many of the leaders at those gatherings will want to discuss the future of your industry.
Over the past few decades, Australian minerals have been sought-after by every nation looking to industrialise.
Now Australian minerals are vital to every nation seeking to decarbonise.
And they are doubly important for economies like Indonesia and India that are looking to do both at the same time, to grow their economies and lift their living standards while reducing their emissions.
For a long time, those two ambitions were framed as competing priorities.
A false choice between economic growth or action on climate change, between creating jobs or protecting the environment.
The work you do proves that these two goals can work together, indeed they must work together for the world's fastest-growing countries to meet their net zero targets.
The Minerals Council committed to net zero two years ago, many of your member companies well before that.
From our first day in Government, my colleagues and I have been building the framework that will enable you to deliver on these commitments.
That's what our Safeguard Mechanism is about, incentivising new technology to reduce emissions, as well as delivering the certainty and stability that enables you to plan for the future.
Because you already work on long-term timeframes, you invest in 10 and 20 year projects and Government policy should enable this, not undercut it.
That's the same approach we take to energy, including last week in Western Australia, where Premier Roger Cook and I announced the next stage of our $20 billion Rewiring the Nation program.
Up to $3 billion to finance the upgrade of the energy grid in Western Australia.
As well as Perth and the south west, this will mean major projects and new jobs and infrastructure in communities from Onslow to Port Hedland, Karratha to Newman.
And a way of ensuring your operations can be powered by reliable and affordable renewable energy.
But it doesn't end there.
In fact, the most significant contribution your industry can make to reducing emissions is not confined to Australia's shores.
We sometimes hear it said that because Australia represents only around 1 per cent of global emissions, our contribution to climate change is too small to be relevant to the world's direction.
But as Professor Ross Garnaut has made clear, if Australia can become a renewable energy superpower, then we have the potential to cut up to another 7 per cent of the world's emissions.
That's the opportunity we have.
Not just achieving our climate goals, helping other nations reach theirs.
The pursuit of net zero is going to be the great driver of the global economy over the next two decades.
Lithium. Cobalt. Rare earths. Critical minerals.
The building blocks of a clean-energy economy.
Essential to every battery, electric vehicle, wind turbine and solar panel around the world.
All of them, found here in Australia.
We stand at an extraordinary intersection of unprecedented global demand and abundant national supply.
And this is a chance Australia will only get once.
That's why our Government is determined to work with you to convert this moment of opportunity into a generation of prosperity.
I know Minister King has been consulting with all of you as we work to update the Critical Minerals List, to reflect the rapid advances in technology and demand.
We're supporting Geoscience Australia, to enable new discoveries in the 80 per cent of our continent, which is still considered 'under-explored'.
We've established the National Reconstruction Fund and appointed its independent board to invest in value-adding of our resources endowments.
Building on the important work of the Critical Minerals Facility, Export Finance Australia in creating secure supply chains here at home.
Moving Australia up the international value chain and expanding our trade relationships.
Promoting greater diversity in what we trade and greater diversity in who we trade with.
New critical minerals and green hydrogen partnerships with India.
Opening discussions with the European Union to establish a new Critical Minerals Partnership.
Forming new clean energy partnerships with Japan.
And the new 'Australia-United States Climate, Critical Minerals, and Clean Energy Transformation Compact' that President Biden and I signed in May.
So Australian projects can benefit from the billions of US dollars being invested in critical minerals and clean energy.
And of course, there are new frontiers, particularly in green hydrogen, the key to the Australia of 2030 and 2040 being not just an exporter of clean energy to our region but an exporter of energy-intensive products.
Green steel, green aluminium, green ammonia.
There's a global race to make this technology work, safely and efficiently.
Our Government's $2 billion Hydrogen Headstart program is about making sure Australian innovators can compete and win.
Shaping the future, not merely waiting for the future to shape us.
That's what drives our Government.
The belief that Australian workers and Australian businesses can shape the big economic changes underway in our world and make them work for us.
To build an economy where productivity, wages and living standards grow together and all Australians share in the benefits.
Your industry, your innovation, your continuing investment in skills and technology is absolutely central to realising this vision.
What you do is fundamental to our future prosperity, our future security and our future sustainability.
Let's keep working together, to build a better future for Australia.


When Australia became ASEAN’s first Dialogue Partner in 1974, my predecessor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam described ASEAN as “unquestionably the most important, [and] the most relevant” group in our region.
Half a century later, Australia and Southeast Asia have both changed profoundly.
We are both more diverse – and we are more engaged.
Our economies are more open, more modern – and more connected.
Our prosperity and security and stability more intertwined.
We face environmental challenges, economic uncertainty and strategic competition on a level of complexity that could not have been imagined 49 years ago.
And yet for all that has changed, a defining truth endures.
The centrality of ASEAN is vital to Australia’s future.
Because Australia and ASEAN are bound by more than an accident of geography or the virtue of history – we share a common belief in the opportunities of this region, the potential of our peoples.
And we hold a common responsibility to advance stability, peace and prosperity for every nation that calls Southeast Asia home.
To recognise the sovereignty of every country and the inherent dignity of every individual.
To ensure this is a region where each of us can shape our own destiny and secure our own future.
I am here today to affirm Australia’s belief in the power and value of ASEAN centrality.
And to match those words with deeds.
Today I announce our Government’s strategy for the most significant upgrade of Australia’s economic engagement with ASEAN for a generation.
An overdue strengthening of our engagement to reflect the speed of the transformation underway – and the scale of the opportunities ahead.&nbsp;
The strategy we outline today reflects an enduring truth: this is where Australia’s economic destiny lies.
And this is where our shared prosperity can be built.&nbsp;
This is where, working together, the peace, stability and security of this region – and the Indo-Pacific – can be assured.
The framework we are outlining today charts a course to 2040.
By which time, ASEAN’s combined economy is expected to be the 4th largest in the world.
We are building on a strong foundation.
In 2022, ASEAN accounted for nearly 15 per cent of Australia’s overall trade — greater than our two-way trade with Japan or the US.
But Australia’s economic engagement with the region has not kept pace with the growth of Southeast Asian economies.
Australia should be a larger trade and investment partner for Southeast Asia.
The ambitious plan we are sharing today takes us beyond catching-up, it positions us for what’s ahead.
Throughout 2023, Australia’s Special Envoy to Southeast Asia, Nicholas Moore, has travelled up and down the region, visiting every ASEAN nation besides Myanmar.
He’s had hundreds of conversations.
Absorbed hundreds of written submissions.
Today I am launching Nicholas’ report, Invested: Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040. 
Mr Moore has identified four key priorities:

Raising awareness – strengthening understanding of markets, sectors and emerging trends;
Removing blockages – addressing barriers to trade and investment;
Building capability – ensuring Australia and the region have the skills and knowledge to work effectively together;
And deepening investment – supporting Australian investors to identify, develop and finalise prospective deals in the region.

He’s also identified a number of key sectors which offer the greatest potential for growth, including:

Agriculture and food
Energy security and the clean energy transition
Infrastructure
And education and skills.

Australia brings a lot to the table in expertise, goods, services and capital. &nbsp;
We are a provider of first-class services, particularly in health and education.
Our fast-growing tech sector is one of the largest in the southern hemisphere.
We are a reliable, high-quality supplier of commodities, including in agriculture, minerals and energy.
We are ready to use our strength in critical minerals – as well as abundant sun and wind resources – to support a secure and stable energy transition for the region.
There are significant opportunities for our businesses in Southeast Asia’s fast-growing economies, including in infrastructure and the clean energy transition.
We will also benefit from further Southeast Asian investment and exports, which are already making a notable contribution to the Australian economy.
The foundations are there, too.
Businesses across the region are already engaging.
We’ve got Australian tech company, Powerledger, partnering with Thai solar providers to trial rooftop solar energy trading between apartment blocks in Bangkok.
There’s the Malaysian engineering company, Gamuda, working with the New South Wales Government to build the Sydney Metro West.
There’s Australian company, Aurecon, providing engineering and design services for exciting infrastructure and energy projects in Vietnam.
And Indonesia’s cutting-edge technology company Bukalapak, which collaborated with the Victorian Government to open its first international technology hub in Melbourne in 2022.
Just a few examples among many.
It’s the same story with trade.&nbsp;
Leading Australian company Cochlear has transformed the lives of over 9,000 people in Southeast Asia through distribution of its sophisticated hearing implants.
If you’re lucky enough to be served a quintessential Australian lamington, the coconut is likely to hail from the Philippines.
Our economies and our cultures are already so intertwined — in ways big and small.
But what Nicholas kept hearing during his consultations was that both sides can do more.
Australia is ambitious for what we can achieve with the region to tackle the challenge of climate change, for example.
And we recognise that it’s in all our interests to support the net zero transition.
Greater trade diversification, including through supply chains, is also in the region’s and Australia’s mutual interests.
There’s so much potential still untapped.
My government will respond to all the findings of this comprehensive report in due course.
But there are some we’re acting on right away.
Today I announce we will commit $95.4 million to support three initiatives that go to the heart of the strategy’s priorities.
We’ll form new Deal Teams, based in Southeast Asia and drawing on public and private sector expertise, to identify opportunities for Australian investors and support projects through to finalisation.
These teams will develop a pipeline of investment-ready projects and advise Australian investors on matters from regulatory approvals to finding local commercial partners.
We’ll also embark on a new Southeast Asia Business Exchange Program to boost two-way trade.
This will improve awareness of trade opportunities both in Australia and in Southeast Asia.
And we’ll set up an exchange program for young professionals, building enduring links between Australian and Southeast Asian businesses.
This will see talented young people from Australia gain experience working in Southeast Asian companies, as well as Southeast Asian professionals gaining experience in Australian businesses.
I look forward to getting these up and running.
Deepening our engagement with Southeast Asia is a priority for Australia.
But as I’ve said today, it’s also an opportunity for the whole region. In the years ahead, all of us will benefit from the security we build together.
The prosperity we create together.
The stability we preserve together.
The sovereignty we respect together.
The environmental commitments we fulfil together.
The energy transition we drive together.
We can make ASEAN’s next half-century even more successful than the last.
And we can share that success, together.


Thank you all for coming today.
And thank you Ambassador Williams and Pak Arsjad for hosting this event.
It’s great to see so many leaders from our business communities here.
Since my government was elected in mid-2022, I have had the pleasure of regularly meeting leaders in government and business from across this region.
And a common thread through all my interactions has been a sense of energy and enthusiasm to work together in new ways.
On the security issues facing our region.
And on growing our regional economies and, importantly, lifting the prosperity of our people, too.
Already, Southeast Asia is one of the fastest-growing regions in the world.
We’ve seen an enormous expansion of the middle class here in Indonesia, for example.
So when we’re thinking about market opportunities, that’s huge.
And Indonesia is just one market among many.
The Philippines, Malaysia and Vietnam are also set up to see immense growth over the next few decades.
I visited Vietnam in May this year and look forward to visiting Manila on Friday.
And all of it adds up to opportunity.
We were elected in May last year.
By June, Penny and I were here in Indonesia — with business representatives.
We had representatives of the Commonwealth Bank, Wesfarmers, Fortescue, Bluescope, Sun Cable and Thales, and the Business Council of Australia.
And in November, we appointed Nicholas Moore as special envoy to chart our Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040.
Since November, Nicholas Moore’s consultations have been extensive.
He’s visited all ASEAN countries, except Myanmar.
He’s met with more than 750 people – across business, diaspora communities, government and the private sector.
And he’s received almost 200 submissions.
If you fed into that process, I want to thank you for being a part of it.
And all that work led towards this morning, when I had the great pleasure of launching Invested: Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040 at the ASEAN Indo-Pacific Forum.
As the Strategy makes clear, Australia’s economic future is with Southeast Asia.
My government will take some time to properly consider the strategy’s 75 recommendations.
But today we’ve made a commitment of $95.4 million to get the work started straight away:
We’ll form Deal Teams to identify opportunities for Australian investors and support projects to finalisation.
A new Southeast Asia Business Exchange to boost two-way trade.
And an exchange program for young professionals to build enduring links between Australian and Southeast Asian businesses.
One area we’re particularly invested in is Southeast Asia’s energy security and clean energy transition.
Australian businesses are always telling me how keen they are to be partners in the net zero transition, and indeed many are already doing so and its good to see many of them here.
Governments in Australia and across the region can do far more to address perceptions of risk, remove barriers, and create better business enabling environments.
We want to get that communication, and those settings right.
So you can get on with it.
And do what you do best.
In Southeast Asia we have great friends and close neighbours.
Dynamic business partners, too.
Together, we can seize the opportunities ahead.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I want to acknowledge all of the veterans who are with is this evening, and all serving men and women of the ADF.
We have been so harshly reminded in recent months that the absence of war is no guarantor of safety for the men and women who serve in our name with such character, valour and integrity.
Every member of the ADF has my respect.
Another truth we must acknowledge is that the extraordinary bank of experience each veteran carries. The talent they have built up. The wisdom they have accrued. Veterans have so very much to offer.
Now in its sixth year, the Prime Minister’s National Veterans’ Employment Awards have stayed true to their original purpose.
To raise awareness of a simple fact: That veterans are every bit as skilled, dedicated and adaptable in civilian life as in the ADF.
The sooner we recognise that, the better off our workplaces our communities – and our veterans – will be.
I met an extraordinary group of veterans here in 2022.
And I’m looking forward to meeting the class of 2023.
‘Meticulous planners.’
‘Top performers.
‘Natural leaders.’
‘Driven’.
‘Committed’.
Those are some of the words used to describe tonight’s nominees.&nbsp;
Employees and entrepreneurs of proven merit.
Working in a remarkable range of industries.
In education and logistics. In administration, project management, IT and psychology.
There’s no single template for the way veterans apply their skills and experience.
And the partners of veterans are just as versatile.
They know what it means to put a career on hold, or take on an unfamiliar role in an unfamiliar place.
Their stories are about turning those challenges into futures.
Stretching themselves. Reaching for the horizon.
All the while supporting their loved ones, and their communities.
A veteran’s family is their strength.
I say to the families: I appreciate the great pride you must feel. I also recognise the sacrifice you have made. It is a burden you ultimately took on for all of us, and for that we express the depths of our appreciation.
The partners know the veteran’s path, because they’ve travelled it with them.
So, when you help a veteran’s partner and family, you help a veteran.
It’s so important that we recognise the contribution partners make to the wellbeing of our veterans.
Especially in the time after transition to civilian life — when challenges and uncertainties build.
Moving out of the ADF is a significant life event. And it’s a journey — not a moment.
The Veteran Transition Strategy that my Government launched in August is about making the transition journey the best it possibly can be.
And we’re starting off on the right foot.
Because even before they take the first steps out of the ADF, veterans are already prepared, enthusiastic, skilled and highly employable.
As leaders, planners, thinkers, and communicators, steeped in the values of the Australian Defence Force: service, courage, respect, integrity and excellence.
Tonight’s employer finalists know this.
You understand that what might be everyday tasks in a defence context, are actually a portfolio of skills and experience.
You know that when you employ a veteran, you’re not just taking on a new staff member, you’re grasping an opportunity.
Whether you’re a small business or a multinational, you know what works.
Veterans keep your businesses humming. And, in return, you offer not just jobs, but careers.
Not just a workplace, but meaningful connections.
The chance to be part of a team - and the pride that comes from shared success.
On behalf of all Australians, congratulations – and thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote Yes for Recognition, Listening and Better Results on the 14th of October.
I’d like to thank News Corp for this opportunity to come together and talk about the better future that’s within our reach – and what we need to do to ensure we grasp it.
Right now, the global shift to clean energy is Australia’s biggest opportunity for growth and prosperity.
If we act now – and get this right – we can power the world with our skills, our regions and, crucially, our resources.
Our great fortune is that the building blocks of the clean energy future are right here – whether it’s lithium, cobalt, copper, rare earths or critical minerals.
And just as our continent is blessed with an abundance of wind and sunshine, we have the minerals to build the wind turbines and the solar panels that convert them into electricity.
My Government’s vision is for Australia to be a renewable energy superpower, which will in turn help us to become an advanced manufacturing powerhouse.
It all sits at the heart of our plan to build a stronger, more resilient economy for Australia’s future.
A strong economy makes a better future possible – and energy is the spark that drives it.
The jobs, the communities, the cities, the industries, the very country that we want to create are all intertwined with how we tackle energy.
Energy security is economic security.
Energy security is job security.
Energy security is national security.
Growth in the regions.
New jobs in the suburbs.
A stronger manufacturing sector.
A better deal for our farmers and exporters.
Every one of those opportunities relies on a government prepared to do what it takes to get the energy transition right.
We’re here today because business understands this.
You get how crucial energy policy is in driving all we want and need to achieve for Australians. And how important it is that the transition is responsibly managed.
Bringing new sources of energy and new technology into the mix, all the while ensuring that Australian household and businesses have the reliable, affordable power they need.
It is emblematic of the approach our Government takes across the board – addressing immediate pressures and identifying long-term opportunities.
When it comes to the great spectrum of opportunities presented by transition, it’s worth revisiting the words of Woodside Energy CEO Meg O’Neil:
“I’ve worked around the world in the energy industry and … no country is better placed to succeed in the energy transition than Australia. … We should be an energy superpower for a decarbonising world.”
That is the future we can create. It is the future we must create.
Right now, many Australians are feeling the pressure of higher power bills. Much of this is the result of Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine, which has created short-term pressures but also exposed a decade of neglect.
A decade during which the previous government didn’t manage a single coherent energy policy.
A decade during which Australia’s population grew by 3 million, but we actually lost 3000 megawatts of dispatchable power.
A decade during which 24 coal-fired power stations announced their closures, and eight coal-fired power stations were closed, and the then government did nothing.
A government that went so far as to cover up power price rises before an election.
Last year, Australians voted for change, and they voted for solutions.
That’s why we acted in December in partnership with the states and territories to shield consumers from the worst impacts of predicted energy price spikes.
Indeed, the Australian Energy Regulator’s data shows that coal and gas price caps have halved the electricity price increases.
It’s why more than five million households and one million small businesses became eligible for Energy Price Relief Rebates from 1 July – a $3 billion commitment delivered in partnership with the states and territories.
In addition to targeted energy bill relief, the Government is funding a $1.6 billion Energy Savings Plan to ensure households and communities can take advantage of the savings from smarter energy use.
Australia’s clean energy transition is crucial for reducing emissions and addressing climate change.
In both of these ambitions, we can – as we so often do – punch above our weight.
Some argue that because Australia represents just 1 per cent of global emissions, our contribution to fighting climate is too small to make a difference.
But we have never been a country content to settle for the bare minimum. As Professor Ross Garnaut has made clear, if Australia becomes a renewable energy superpower, we have the potential to cut up to an additional 7 per cent.
So investing in renewables is good for cheaper power here, but it also means we can cut the equivalent of India's entire emissions last year.
My Government’s landmark Safeguard Mechanism reforms provide certainty on Australia’s emissions reduction trajectory and will reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 205 million tonnes to 2030.
That’s the emissions equivalent of two-thirds of Australia’s cars over the same period.
Our electricity generation mix is changing. Renewables accounted for 35 per cent of generation across the National Energy Market in the year to March 2023 – up nearly 20 per cent on the previous 12 months.
Across the world, renewables now account for 30 per cent of global electricity generation.
Last year, investment in clean energy reached a record $2.5 trillion in 2022, up nearly 15 per cent from 2021. That is a significant demonstration of continued confidence in the energy transition.
A confidence reinforced by discussion at the G20 meeting in India last weekend.
The key example of the growth in clean energy investment is solar, which in 2023 is set to attract more capital than global oil production for the first time. And no one is as rich in sunshine as we are.
I want to turn to one aspect of the clean energy future that is so rapidly morphing into the clean energy present.
Global sales of electric vehicles grew by 55 per cent in 2022, reaching a record high of more than 10 million.
In Australia, electric car sales in the first half of the year were up 121 per cent on 2022.
It seems like only yesterday that my predecessor said electric cars would destroy the weekend. Surely the first person to suggest the apocalypse would come wearing a Tesla badge.
The former government had an ideological set against them.
My Government wants to make them more affordable as a family car, just like we’re working to make rooftop solar more affordable.
That’s why we legislated tax cuts to make EVs cheaper for Australian families.
The electric vehicle revolution goes on. It is a revolution that runs on lithium – as does the revolution in batteries used to power mobile phones, homes and provide grid-scale energy storage.
Just as this good news for the world, it is a great opportunity for Australia. We are the world’s largest producer of lithium today.
It’s worth reminding ourselves just how swift the pace of change has been.
When I was Deputy Prime Minister ten years ago, no one was raising lithium with me – or for that matter nickel or vanadium. All resources that we have in abundance in Australia. If they were on the fringe then, they're certainly not now.
By the end of this decade, demand for electric vehicle battery materials is expected to grow five-fold and will require the equivalent of 50 new lithium mines, 60 new nickel mines and 17 new cobalt mines, worldwide.
By 2027-28, the export value of Australian lithium and base metals is expected to equal the combined value of thermal and metallurgical coal.
Australia’s annual lithium production could be used to make 8.2 million batteries a year – equivalent to more than a third of all cars in Australia.
But we cannot be content with simply sending it overseas for others to make the batteries. That’s like producing pristine blank pages for someone else to write their story. I know we can write our own. And we will.
Through our National Reconstruction Fund, the Government has identified value-adding in resources and renewables and low emissions technologies as priorities.
That will enable more Australian lithium to be refined domestically and more of it to be manufactured into Australian-made products – which means more jobs and economic growth across the supply chain.
The Government will shortly release its first National Battery Strategy, outlining actions for governments and industry to address barriers and opportunities to boost investment in Australia’s battery manufacturing industry.
We have already committed to invest up to $100 million in an Australian Made Battery Precinct in Queensland and $14 million in the Powering Australia Industry Growth Centre.
The electric vehicle revolution is one we can power yet further with ultra-fast vehicle chargers.
We can all take pride in the fact that the fastest electric vehicle charging stations in the world are built in Brisbane by Tritium. Tritium is a reminder that of all our natural resources, our greatest is our people.
Those revolutionary chargers being exported all over Europe and North America are designed and built by Australians. Homegrown talent powering a global revolution.
With the National Reconstruction Fund, we can back more homegrown talent.
Another area of great potential is in the export of green hydrogen produced with renewable energy.
The Government’s commitment to becoming a renewable energy superpower is targeted at stimulating investment in priority energy infrastructure.
This includes $2 billion for the Hydrogen Headstart program to make Australia a world-leading hydrogen producer by accelerating largescale renewable hydrogen projects.
And over half a billion dollars for hydrogen hubs in our regions – Pilbara, Gladstone, Townsville, the Hunter, Bell Bay, and Upper Spencer Gulf.
Australia already has the largest pipeline of renewable hydrogen projects in the world.
The Hydrogen Headstart program bridges the commercial gap for early projects, putting renewable hydrogen on a path to scale and supporting future export and manufacturing opportunities.
The installed capacity of hydrogen producing electrolysers grew by more than 20 per cent, while electrolyser manufacturing capacity grew by more than 25 per cent.
Hydrogen has many uses. Like powering vehicles, generating heat and electricity, and producing chemicals like ammonia which can be used as a zero-carbon fuel for shipping.
Pound for pound, hydrogen contains almost three times as much energy as petrol, and we will work to harness its potential.
But for our work promoting renewable energy and battery storage to have maximum impact, we must invest in transmission.
This is the critical step in connecting Australia’s businesses and households to our renewable energy future.
For too long, Australia has been held back by a national energy grid built for a time when solar panels powered pocket calculators, not households.
We want to ensure business and industry can access reliable and affordable clean energy to reduce their input costs and their emissions. This is what Rewiring the Nation is all about.
Some of the best places in the country for wind and sun – and the jobs that go with it –are off the grid today. That needs to change.
The investments we are making in upgrading the national energy grid will create new jobs on major projects around Australia. They will ensure that the next generation of Australian jobs in advanced manufacturing, technology and critical minerals can be powered by renewable energy.
As part of our quest for a grid fit for the 21st century and beyond, my Government is providing low-cost finance through Rewiring the Nation for the upgrade and expansion of Australia’s electricity grid.
We’ve announced four bilateral agreements with Tasmania, Victoria, NSW and most recently Western Australia to fast-track critical projects to unlock cleaner energy. Projects including the Marinus Link transmission project, VNI-West, Humelink and Renewable Energy Zones.
The Rewiring the Nation deal with NSW is backing eight critical transmission and Renewable Energy Zone projects, supporting more than 3900 jobs in the regions.
These transmission projects will increase network resilience and energy reliability for consumers and help put downward pressure on electricity bills in years to come.
I understand some people are concerned about what these transmission projects mean for their farms and communities. I sat down with a group of them just last month in Tamworth.
Transitioning our economy away from the fossil fuels that are making our climate unsafe and threatening our way of life is a big job. All of us have to be part of that effort.
So it’s important that people in these areas have the information they need to make good decisions for their families and their communities.
My government is determined to get the balance right.
Commonwealth work is underway to develop an evidence base to guide future community engagements efforts.
In the meantime, the Institute for Sustainable Futures has estimated an additional 12,000 workers will be required by 2025 to support the transition for the National Energy Market.
My Government will underpin this with 10,000 New Energy Apprenticeships, which will open the door to good, secure jobs.
You can see it echoed in our approach to delivering fee-free TAFE places, which has grown out of our careful work with states and territories and with business to ease the skills shortages that have been acting as such a handbrake on our economy.
The transformation is happening swiftly, but it would not be responsible to turn off the tap overnight.
AEMO forecasts gas-generated power will play a key role in our energy system to 2050.
Gas will have an important back-up role, a flexible source of peaking generation that can support the grid through low renewables periods.
And some sectors, like heavy industrial users and manufacturers, will need gas.
Our Future Gas Strategy currently under development will support long-term, responsible, data-driven decisions while working towards our obligations under the Paris Agreement.
As the world changes and the appetite for fossil fuels shifts with it, we need to consider what transformation looks like in our communities built around coal mining.
One of our biggest coal producers, the Hunter Valley, has many strengths it can build on. The Singleton local government area has strong economic fundamentals, an educated and skilled workforce, and is in the top 10 per cent of Australian LGAs for innovation.
Next door, Muswellbrook is a strong performer in technology readiness and innovation.
I had the pleasure of visiting Muswellbrook recently to open the Donald Horne Building, which houses a STEM innovation lab and an advanced manufacturing centre.
It’s the latest addition to the Hunter Innovation Precinct, the likely birthplace of developments that will help shape our future for the better.
In Queensland, communities in the Bowen Basin will continue to benefit from the global demand for high quality metallurgical coal – a crucial ingredient in the manufacture of wind turbines.
Just as more traditional forms of energy powered prosperity for generations and made so much of Australia’s story possible, the shift to new opportunities will power the future.
Global demand shifts are reshaping Australian industry and presenting new opportunities
Global capital is shifting ever more rapidly toward clean energy and net zero-aligned projects.
Innovation and investment are driving towards a new era of low-cost renewable energy that can lower the operating costs and improve competitiveness for traditional and emerging industries.
World markets are increasingly demanding low-emissions energy and materials. Australia’s abundant sun, wind and large land mass provide an ideal place to generate power more cheaply than other nations.
Along with our other resources, these can facilitate decarbonisation while giving us a competitive edge.
All of this fits together into our vision of Australia going forward.
An Australia that takes its rightful place as a renewable energy superpower.
An Australia that manufactures things here and creates jobs here.
An Australia that is able to provide a skilled workforce for companies driven by innovation.
An Australia that makes a positive difference in the world by starting at home.
When we look ahead, it is with a mix of excitement and clear eyes.
We see the challenges, and the opportunities they contain.
Above all, we see a better future for all Australians.
And that what we’re working for.
That is why we’re working for Australians every day.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
My fellow Australians and my very-soon-to-be fellow Australians.
It’s an honour to be here in this beautiful part of our country, to share in this joyous occasion and to help welcome all of you to our Australian family.
Citizenship ceremonies are one of the great traditions of our modern nation and attending them is one of the great privileges of public life.
Today, in pledging your loyalty to Australia’s democratic values, our laws and our people, you join us as citizens of the greatest country on earth and you join us as partners in the ongoing task of making it greater still: more fair, more prosperous, more equal.
Taking up Australian citizenship is an act of optimism and aspiration and also a solemn commitment to contribute, in the very best traditions of generations of migration.
Because throughout our history, people from every part of the world, drawn from all faiths and traditions have brought their hard work, their determination, their courage and their compassion to our country.
In doing so, they have added to the health and strength of our communities and enlarged and enriched the life of our nation.
Friends,&nbsp;Australian citizenship carries with it a unique privilege.
Because all of us share this ancient continent, both the north island and the south island, with the oldest continuous culture in the world.
It’s a source of powerful pride to all of us, that our Australian story goes back 65,000 years.
And starting from today all of you will help us write the next chapter.
Let it be one where there are no limits on what you can achieve, no barriers to your aspirations, nothing to stand in the way of you building a better life for your families and a better future for your children.
And let that boundless opportunity hold true for all of us, from our newest citizens, to the First Australians.
Friends, on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I say congratulations.
Welcome.
And all the very best for the future.


I'd also begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we’re meeting today and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues who are here today, Julian Leeser, and Senator Malarndirri McCarthy.
It is wonderful to share this day with you.
And wasn't that an uplifting video, a big shout out, and that is precisely what October 14 is about.
Lifting the nation up, taking out the request from Indigenous Australians, to just join with them on the journey towards reconciliation.
It is a hand out asking for it to be joined, asking for it to be joined.
And in Australia that's what we do when we meet each other we put our hand out and we expect it not to be ignored, we expect it to be joined and that's how we move forward together.
We can answer that generous and kind introduction by Indigenous Australians by joining with them and voting Yes on October 14.
We can vote Yes for a Voice, a non-binding Advisory Committee of Indigenous Australians, chosen by Indigenous Australians, to help us get better results for Indigenous Australians.
And I want to thank all the faith groups including the Uniting Church, who are all coming together, whether they be Christian groups, Islamic groups, Jewish groups, Hindus, all coming together in unison for support.
The different people, at different levels of government, I note the Mayor of the Inner West, Darcy Byrne, who's here with us today, local communities understanding the opportunity that this represents.
Because better results are so desperately needed.
And today I announce and confirm that if Australians vote Yes, in three weeks time, I will propose a broad Joint Parliamentary Committee, with co-chairs from Labor and the Coalition, to oversee the development of legislation for the Voice Advisory Group.
I indicated this when I met with Peter Dutton and David Littleproud, way back in March and I've confirmed that in a discussion that I've had with Peter Dutton, just over this weekend.
I think it's important that if Australians vote Yes, that we move forward together to put in place the legislation with as broad as support as possible, in order to show the same spirit that we're asking Australians to show by voting Yes, on October 14.
My dear friend, the Reverend Bill Crews has dedicated his life to helping people who are doing it tough.
Bill has never grown weary of doing good.
He's seen every form of human hardship and I love spending Christmas Day here with the full breadth of humanity.
But nowhere is the gap more clear than the gap which remains between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And a vote for No is a vote for what we have now, the same ,to not change, to not search for something better.
And we know now we have an eight year life expectancy gap.
We know that an Indigenous young male is more likely to go to jail than university.
We know an Indigenous young female is more likely to die in childbirth than a non-Indigenous woman.
We know that there are gaps in education and health and housing.
We know that there are diseases that have been eradicated in non-Indigenous Australia that are still prevalent amongst Indigenous communities.
And we know that we need to do better.
And when we contemplate all of this, it is our Australian instinct for fairness, just as it is the Uniting Church’s tradition of compassion that drives us to ask, what can we do?
How can we help?
For the first time in generations there's a simple answer to that question.
You can help by voting Yes on October 14.
And just as importantly, we can convince our friends and fellow Australians to vote Yes too.
I noted yesterday, that decision of that great Australian artist, Kamahl, to change his mind.
He just weeks ago, said he would vote No in the referendum.
But he went out there, looked at the question, spoke to people about what it was about and declared, how could you not vote Yes? Once he had thought about it he had the courage to change his mind.
And I think that is what we want to ask people to do over these next three weeks, to concentrate on what is actually before the Australian people in the referendum.
Not some of the fear campaign about things that have nothing to do with this referendum.
Because that's what will decide this referendum, those one on one discussions, the power and advocacy of everyday people.
The respectful conversations that can be had, the ability you have to explain the importance and urgency of a Yes vote, the difference that it can make to people.
And with this campaign, the support in the community also speaks so powerfully to the fact that there is nothing for Australia to fear, nothing to fear by recognising Indigenous Australians in our Constitution.
The founding fathers, and they were all men, when they wrote the Constitution, actually put in there a provision, Julian's far more able than me to talk about the law, but they actually put in a provision so we can sign up New Zealand as the seventh state without a referendum.
But they didn't think of putting anything in there acknowledging the full history of this country.
And I do want to pay tribute to Julian Leeser, and the courage that he has shown over more than a decade.
Because this should not be about politics.
This is about life itself, as Bill Crews has said.
The fact that voting for an Indigenous agency on matters affecting them, will also mean greater responsibility that Indigenous Australians will have for the outcomes.
And that's why we see such broad support.
No downside for any of us, only upside.
Nothing for Australia to lose but there is so much for us to gain.
We gain 65,000 years of history, we gain the inspiration of the world's oldest living culture, we gain the hope that the next generation of Indigenous Australians are going to have an equal chance to make a good life for themselves.
And while fear may be a powerful emotion, it is no match for that.
Fear never takes a country forward.
Only hope and optimism and a vision for a positive future can take us forward.
Saying No gets us nowhere.
Progress comes from courage, it comes from love, it comes from compassion for one another, from kindness for those in need, from the best of our Australian character, and the best of the Uniting Church’s traditions.
So on October 14, we have a once in a generation opportunity to bring our country together and to take it forward together.
Because while our Australian story goes back some 65,000 years, it's not a story that's complete.
We, as Australian citizens get to write the next chapter.
And we can write the next chapter in a positive and optimistic way by voting Yes, on October 14.
Voting Yes for recognition.
Voting Yes for listening to Indigenous Australians about matters that affect them.
And for voting Yes for better outcomes for our first Australians.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting today and pay my respects to their elders, past, present and emerging.
And so I'm very proud to be Prime Minister of government that is giving everyone in this room the opportunity to recognise the First Nations people of this country in our constitution with the referendum to be held on October 14 so that we can have constitutional recognition, so we can listen, and so we can get better results.
I want to acknowledge the Premier of South Australia, Peter Malinauskas and Tom Koutsantonis. Both of them have been friends of mine for a long period of time, and I acknowledge the leadership that South Australia has shown over a long period of time in leading the country with the transition to renewables, and with making sure that the economy here stays strong into the future.
I acknowledge Rowan Ramsey, the local federal member and Eddie Hughes, the local state member and Councillor Phil Stone, representing local government here.
But a particular shout out today to all the coke ovens&nbsp;workers and the other workers who've joined us here today.
Thank you for your contribution, not just to the economy here of Whyalla but to the national economy as well.
The future is indeed very bright here in Whyalla. And it's brought because of the courage of business and workers to recognise the opportunity that is there.
Today, we are gathering to mark the end of an important chapter in the life of this community and indeed in the history of our growing economy.
In doing so, we pay tribute to past generations as well of workers, who through almost every hour of fifty-five years and fifty-five days have helped to build the prosperity of Australia.
The closing of this chapter of course is not the end of the story, far from it.
It's the opening of a new chapter, that will be brighter, more prosperous, and which will see a growth in employment and Whyalla be even more significant as a focal point for not just our national economy, but as an example, as an example of what can be done to around the world.
Today speaks for our shared determination.
Commonwealth, States, business and unions for South Australia and Australia to win the global race to make green hydrogen affordable.
When I have had the privilege of representing Australia overseas, I cannot overestimate the extent to which green hydrogen dominates, dominates conversations.
When I was in Berlin recently we had a gathering at the Australian embassy there of business leaders from Germany.
An example of a country that didn't give up on manufacturing, a company that recognised that the future was being a smart economy, and value adding and being resilient.
Here in Australia, we saw in the 70s and 80s a whole lot of jobs leave Australia, and an idea that we could continue to just rely upon the export of resources and increasingly shrinking to ourselves.
We've learned during the pandemic, if we needed a reminder, that that is not good enough.
We should continue to export our resources.
But we have an incredible opportunity to have a future made here in Australia.
We have the skills.
We have the resources.
And here in Whyalla we have such an incredible comparative advantage with anywhere in the world.
With high value magnetite just near here.
With the skills and workforce that we have at this facility and a world class port, which as a result of the $100 million dollar commitment that we're making today in partnership with the South Australian Government, will be even more a potential for export.
There is nowhere you'd rather be than Whyalla.
And I remember a debate in my time in Parliament, where there was talk of Whyalla been wiped off the map.
Well, far from that.
This town will grow into the future, and will contribute not just to jobs and high living standards, good quality jobs here.
But will also make an enormous difference to the nation.
So today on a day in which my government is launching our Employment White Paper, I wanted to come here with the Premier of South Australia to make very clear, to make very clear, that we see regional employment in cities like this as being the key to Australia's future employment growth.
With skills being upgraded to support for TAFE and support for trades.
But also with seizing the opportunities which are there for Australia to be a renewable energy superpower for the world.
Driving a new generation of advanced manufacturing jobs.
Supplying the clean energy and the green steel - the green aluminium and green ammonia that the world wants, that will enable the nations in our region, the fastest growing economies in the world, in human history, to industrialise, but at the same time to decarbonise, which is necessary.
Unlocking this technology will mean not only can Australia meet our emissions targets, we can help our neighbours to meet theirs.
So friends, all this opportunity is in front of us but it's not waiting for us.
The world won’t sit back and say we want Australia to catch up or to move ahead.
We're going to have a crack and seize the opportunity which is there, and that's what this is about.
Seizing the opportunity together.
Governments working with the private sector to shape the future because unless we do that the future will shape us.
Because we know what is happening.
I’ll leave Adelaide tomorrow to go to in September, in September, a bushfire and emergency management national summit because we know what is happening with the climate, which is what is driving this economic transformation globally.
Now, Australia can either seize this opportunity this decade, for which we all position ourselves for decades ahead of prosperity, of high income, of rising living standards, of good jobs, or the world will move past us.
But here in Whyalla it represents an extraordinary opportunity.
And I do want to pay tribute to Sanjeev&nbsp;and his vision, but to the leadership of the South Australian Government under Peter Malinauskas, of course, as well.
But also I want to conclude by paying tribute to all the workers who are here for what you have done and for what you will do in the future.
Because your contribution to our national economy is significant and it will only grow.
Thanks very much


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Thank you all for being here today and for the opportunity to say a few words.
The spirit of co-operation and the sense of focus and purpose in this room – is a credit to all of you and an inspiration to our country.
We may still be in the first month of spring – but Australians are already fighting fires.
The reality of climate change presents itself in conditions which are more extreme, more unpredictable and more frequent.&nbsp;&nbsp;
And the clear consensus is that Australia is facing a fire season every bit as dangerous as that which inflicted the Black Summer of three years ago.
For months, we depended on the strength of the Australian spirit throughout that most challenging of times.
We owed so much to the courage, skill and dedication of our emergency services personnel.
You and your colleagues put your own safety on the line, for the sake of your fellow Australians.
You know the dangers you are up against, and yet you keep going.
The rest of us stand in awe of that, trying to find the words to express how grateful we are for what you do.
But we owe you – and the communities you protect - more than our admiration and gratitude.
For your sake, and for the sake of your families, we owe you our total commitment to the best possible state of preparedness.
To treat the coming fire season with all the seriousness and urgency it deserves.
And to listen to all of you, the people on the front lines, so we learn the lessons of seasons past.
So we ensure that our lines of communication move faster than any firefront
So we enable co-operation and drive co-ordination, across agencies, across borders.
And across state and federal and local government.
And to make sure this holds true not just for decision-making in the grip of the emergency but also for the long and difficult work of rebuilding and recovery
Getting communities back on their feet, getting people the support they need.
This is where it’s really valuable to have leaders in logistics, the energy and telco sectors, food and groceries, the insurance industry and so many other important non-government organisations here with us today.
Your work is vital to preparedness - and essential to recovery.
And in all that we do, we must continue to listen to locals, so help goes where it is needed most and so we are better protected into the future.
This Summit is about preparing Australia for the very worst.
But when I look out at this room, I see some of Australia’s very best.
Thank you for the service you give our nation.
All Australians are thinking of you, in the work ahead.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am proud to lead a Government that will give every Australian the opportunity to vote Yes for recognition, vote Yes for listening and vote Yes for better results on October 14.
I’m very pleased to be here to launch Andrew Charlton’s new book.
To be fair, he did put me on the cover. But the inside is even better!
Australia’s Pivot to India is a thoughtful, warm and optimistic work that educates us about the past and challenges us for the future.
We get an engaging recap of modern India’s transformation from an inward-looking, high-tariff economy, to one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
We learn the evolution of its foreign policy and strategic thinking, the move from declared, formalised non-alignment,&nbsp;to a more creative multi-alignment, with a greater emphasis on self-reliance as well as sovereignty.
And this book also confirms that while India was embarking on this journey, Australia was very much running on a parallel track.
Australia was modernising our economy and building new trade relationships but not enough with India.
We were engaging with our region and building a greater network of multilateral relationships but not enough with India.
Occasionally, governments would ‘discover’ India with a burst of enthusiasm.
But as Andrew writes, there was ‘no central core’ to the relationship.
The affection was broad and genuine but there was little depth. &nbsp;
Or as Gareth Evans says, there was no ‘ballast’.
This meant that when tensions arose, there was no way of maintaining continuity and communication.
Instead, any disagreement risked a spell in the diplomatic deep freeze.
And so, for too long, the bilateral relationship was underdone, under-explored and under-examined.
Happily as this book records that has changed a great deal in recent years.
Not only is our bilateral relationship stronger and deeper than it has ever been our multilateral engagement has gone to a new level.
We are, in Andrew’s words, building:
“A distinctive relationship that goes beyond transactional engagement and circumstantial alignment”
We see that in the revitalised Quad, the co-operation in Exercise Malabar as well as the work we are doing through the G20 on climate change and food security.
But just as importantly, we see it beyond summits and statecraft.
We see it in our people.
In communities like this one.
In a diaspora driven by aspiration.
In one of the many great little facts in this book - the top four names registered to play cricket in Australia this summer are Singh, Smith, Patel and Jones.&nbsp;
We see it in students and skilled migrants eager to embrace opportunities to better themselves.
And we see it travelling back the other way, as more Australian businesses get serious about India.
As small businesses show the leadership to take risks, invest and build connections.
With Deakin University becoming the first foreign tertiary education institution in the world, to open a campus in India.
It’s fitting that Andrew dedicates this book to his electorate and to the India diaspora because our people will be the pivot point.
Our people will be the ‘central core’ of a stronger, deeper and more diversified relationship between Australia and India.
They are not just the ballast, they are the engine.
Not just securing the relationship but taking it forward.
Andrew, congratulations on this important book.
I can promise you that as the Member for Parramatta and as a member of a Labor Government focused on deepening Australia’s relationship with India and determined to build greater peace, prosperity, security and stability in the Indo-Pacific, you are already helping write the sequel.
It’s a great pleasure to launch Australia’s Pivot to India.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m grateful to Collingwood and the AFL for the support they have shown for Constitutional Recognition through a Voice.
It’s a great pleasure to be here on a typical, low-key Friday morning for the Collingwood Footy Club.
I acknowledge all those here today who worked to make this magnificent upgrade possible.
This centre has been your famous club’s training base for two decades and it holds more than a century of Magpie history.
The famous jumpers, the flags, the cups and plenty of space ready for more.
But what we are here to celebrate today is the future.
The future of the Collingwood AFLW side and the future of footy as a whole.
Because this new Vitality Centre sends a clear message: the AFLW is an elite competition and the players deserve elite facilities.
That’s what we have here in true Collingwood spirit, side by side.
This centre also gives a home to some of the vital work that Monash University are doing in medical research and sports performance.
Helping athletes with their recovery and rehabilitation from injury but also investing in their mental health and wellbeing, which we know is so important.
Friends
The growth in women’s sport, in footy, in soccer, cricket, rugby league, is far and away the biggest change in the sporting landscape in most of our lifetimes.
You think back to 2017, to that extraordinary lock-out at Princes Park to launch the AFLW.
Of course, there’s nothing unusual about a Collingwood and Carlton game selling out but twenty years ago no-one would have predicted that it would be for round 1 of the women’s competition.
We’ve seen the same this year with the Matildas phenomenon.
Or over the road in 2020, when they had 90,000 to the MCG for the Women’s World Cup in the Cricket.
It’s been the biggest change in sport, it’s also been the best.
Inspiring a new generation of women and girls not just to reach for the elite level, but to give it a go at a local level.
Creating more opportunities to learn those valuable lessons sport teaches all of us, learning to win, learning to lose, learning to take joy in the success of a team.
And on that note, I wish both Collingwood teams good luck for tomorrow.
I’m sure there will be many in the black and white army who will be attending both games, and the barrackers will be shouting, as all barrackers should.
I wish you every success in this fantastic venue.


I keep a copy of the Uluru Statement from the Heart on the wall of my office in Parliament.
One page. Such economy of words, such generosity of spirit:
“When we have power over our destiny, our children will flourish. 
They will walk in two worlds and their culture will be a gift to their country.” 
The Uluru Statement from the Heart is a gift to our country, an invitation to all Australians.
And the referendum is the response to that invitation – to say Yes to recognition.
Yes to that in the form of a non-binding advisory group. Because listening will result in better outcomes.
A plan for positive change: so the next generation of Indigenous Australians can live a better life.
Gracious, generous, optimistic - and practical.
All those qualities are reflected in the two extraordinary women speaking to you tonight.
Professor Megan Davis and Aunty Pat Anderson have dedicated their lives to tackling the disadvantage that confronts too many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The gaps in life expectancy, in health, in employment and education. The gaps that deny Indigenous Australians the opportunity to make a good life for themselves.
Megan and Pat have given everything to this cause: their heart and soul, their advocacy and intellect, their experience and empathy - and their courage too.
Staying patient through some bizarre conspiracy theories and standing strong in the face of some shocking personal attacks.
They persevere because this campaign matters - to them, to us, to the future of Australia.
And the best way we can honour their courage and the courage of all the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who have championed this cause over generations is to get out there and have a conversation.
Talk to the millions of people who still haven’t made up their mind: your neighbours, your colleagues, your friends.
That’s how we can win this referendum – by making every conversation count.
By making it clear that there is no downside to voting Yes, only upside.
There is nothing for Australia to fear, nothing to lose – but so much for us to gain.


Well, I'd very much like to thank Uncle Colin for the Welcome to  Country and to congratulate and give a big shout-out to Briggs and everyone  who's been associated with putting on this really important festival to  campaign for a Yes.
 We have eight days to make the greatest country on earth just that little bit  greater.
 This is about just two things.
 First, recognising the great privilege that non-Indigenous Australians have of  sharing this continent of ours with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
 And the second is honouring the form of recognition that we have been  graciously requested to give.
 A form of recognition that simply says, 'We want to be listened to so that we  get better results, so that we close the gap, so that young Indigenous Australians  have the same opportunity that non-Indigenous Australians have'.
 That is what Indigenous people want in this country.
 The same opportunity for their kids as other Australians have.
 Together, this can be a moment of national unity if we vote Yes.
 So, in eight days' time, what way are you going to vote?
 Let's get this done, Australia.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much, and thank you to Aunty Matilda and the other Indigenous people who have welcomed us here this morning. And to all of my parliamentary colleagues who are here, it's fantastic so many people turning out. And it's great as well that Kate Carnell is here representing Liberals for Yes. This should be above politics. What is on the referendum ballot paper that I had the right to vote on yesterday, the first referendum held this century. Two things at stake here, recognising the first Australians in our nation's founding document, we're the only former colony on earth that hasn't done that. It shouldn't be too hard. And secondly, what's the request? What's the form of recognition that was asked for after the Abbott Government set up processes which led to the Uluru Statement from the Heart. The form of recognition is an advisory committee. An advisory committee that doesn't have the right of veto, that isn't a funding organisation, that won't run programs. An advisory committee that will do just that, give advice and make representations to government and the parliament so that we get better outcomes. Because funnily enough, when you ask people who are directly affected by policies and programs for their views, you get better outcomes. We know that through justice reinvestment, through Indigenous Rangers programs, community health programs, and there's something else you get as well. Because with that input in that agency, you also get responsibility. So you get greater efficiency as well. No one in this campaign is saying that we need to spend more money. What we're saying is, we need to listen to people so that every dollar makes a difference. So that we do close the gap, because at the moment, four out of nineteen targets aren’t being met. If we do the same thing, we should expect the same outcomes. And the fear campaign being run against this is no more legitimate than the fear campaign that was run against the Apology to Stolen Generations, or against marriage equality. This is about giving assistance to a group of people, in this case, the first Australians making up less than four per cent of the population, at no cost to anyone else. All gain and no pain is what is at stake. So I was proud to vote Yes, yesterday in this referendum. Now, Martin Luther King's got a bit of a crack here this morning in the speeches, so I'll add another one - the arc of history bends towards justice. When I was the age of some of these young folk here, there was no acknowledgement of country, there was no history taught about what occurred during the colonisation, that it does have ongoing impact on Indigenous Australians. And the progress that has occurred over those decades has enriched all of us. This is about showing respect to our first Australians, but it's also about lifting a burden off all of our shoulders that’s there. This thing called history that's sitting on our shoulders. The fact that we don't recognise the first Australians in our Constitution, but we do have provisions in there to allow New Zealand to join us as the second state. We do have so many archaic provisions in the Constitution. But what people are being asked for is really clear and simple. And when we talk to people over the next six days, that's why I'm confident we can get there and get a positive outcome. Australians are being asked to say Yes to the first clause, the recognition, in recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as the first peoples of Australia. That's what it says, simple, clear, unambiguous - that's the detail. And then, what's the form of recognition? Three points. The first, there shall be a body to be called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice. Second, it may make representations to Parliament and executive government about matters affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, that's what it will do. And the third, how will it operate? Of course, like other provisions of things, the way the Parliament works is that Parliament will have control. The Parliament will legislate, will make laws, including a really important word, including, because that what that provides is the legal certainty, including the composition, procedures, processes of the Voice - the internal how it will operate. So it can change over a period of time just like other laws are made. The constitution is just a principle that’s there. There is absolutely nothing to fear from this proposal, which is why the No campaign has been determined to talk about everything but what is on the ballot paper, everything but what people will vote for. So this week, I joined all faith groups in Australia on Thursday morning. The head of the Anglican Church in Australia, representing his bishops and clergy and faith leaders of Catholics, Maronites, Baptists, Uniting Church, Islamic community, Jewish community, Coptic Orthodox, Buddhists, Hindus, Sikhs, all joined together in their support for Yes. And to me, that was a moment of unity. And it showed what we can achieve in this country as we take it forward, this great multicultural nation of ours, as we take forward in a way that enhances all of us, which is what this is about. So, I'm very confident that we can get there, but we need to talk to not just each other. But I know you're gathered here today to go out and doorknock and I just say thank you, because it's the conversations that we have with people that will make a difference in the next six days. I'll be in Broken Hill and Port Lincoln and Mutitjulu and Uluru and Melbourne and Hobart and Perth and Adelaide and Sydney in the coming days. When I stood next to the referendum working group, I've said we're all in, and I hope you've noticed that we are. Because this is nation building. This is something that we are doing for this but also importantly for future generations. This is the first time anyone here who's forty or below has never voted in a referendum before. This is our time. This is the change that Australia deserves. So when you go and you go into that booth with the little pencil what way are you going to vote?
CROWD: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't quite hear that. What way are you got to vote?
CROWD: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: One more time.
CROWD: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: Let's get this done Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I'm delighted to be in Port Lincoln and very grateful to everyone who has made me so welcome here today.
You live in a special part of Australia, the tens of thousands of tourists you attract each year speak for the beauty of this place and I'm sure the quality of the seafood.
Your community isn't just a magnet for visitors, it's also an engine of our national prosperity.
For most of Australia's modern history, we used to talk about being at the mercy of 'the tyranny of distance'.
When those whalers and fishermen were here in the 19th Century, they must have felt completely cut-off from the world.
But a wave of economic growth in our region has completely turned that on its head.
Port Lincoln is now recognised as a gateway to some of the fastest-growing economies in human history and some of the biggest markets in the world.
And it's been a priority for me as Prime Minister, along with two great South Australians, Penny Wong and Don Farrell, to build and diversify the relationships we have in our region.
Greater diversity in what we trade and greater diversity in who we trade with.
And of course, alongside that, we've been working to stabilise our relationship with China.
The consistent, principled approach we've taken has seen trade impediments removed on things like barley and we will continue to advocate strongly for Australian beef, wine and lobster exporters.
The simple point I always make is that this is a win-win: it's in the best interests of Australian businesses to sell to this market and it's in the best interests of China to have access to the best quality products in the world, like Port Lincoln seafood.
One in 4 jobs in Australia depends on trade and that's only going to increase.
We're building the relationships overseas to support this and we're investing in the infrastructure and the energy and the skills here at home.
I promised to lead a government for all Australians, whoever they voted for, wherever they lived.
That means taking government out of Canberra and beyond the big cities.
Because you can't see the full picture from behind a desk in Parliament House.
You've got to make the time to get out there and talk to locals, to listen to communities, to hear directly from people about the challenges and the opportunities.
I'm proud to lead a Government with a sense of purpose, a Government focused on getting things done.
From day one, we've worked to strike the balance between dealing with immediate pressures and building for long-term opportunities.
Helping people with the day-to-day, cheaper medicine, cheaper childcare, strengthening Medicare, energy bill relief, while always keeping an eye on the future.
And I know that we'll always do better when we listen to locals, when we work with communities, when you can build on the strengths of places like Port Lincoln.
Thanks for having me, I look forward to hearing from you.


We meet today at a time of profound sorrow.
In the shadow of terrorist acts that are truly abhorrent.
We have seen unimaginable atrocities, targeting children.
The most innocent of lives, stolen in the most barbaric of ways.
Over 1,000 people in Israel have been killed, as many as 150 people taken from Israel and held hostage in Gaza.
This is the worst loss of life for Jewish people on a single day in history since the Holocaust.
A fact that bears such awful weight for a people who have known the horror of genocide.
The Government and the people of Australia condemn this attack by Hamas.
The targeting of civilians and taking of hostages is an affront to all Australians and we condemn these horrific acts.
The images we are seeing from Israel strike at every human heart but I know they fall heaviest on the Australian Jewish community.
I know many of you are spending sleepless nights waiting desperately to hear from loved ones.
Many of you have family and friends who are being called up to serve.
And many of you will fear a rise in antisemitism here at home.
I want to assure you, that kind of hateful prejudice has no place in Australia.
Our country is better than that – and our country is a better place because of you and your community.
And my government is committed to keeping the community safe.
Over thousands of years, Jewish people have summoned tremendous courage and resilience in the face of trauma.
It must feel almost unbearable to have to draw on those strengths again.
But I want to say very clearly: you are not alone.
All Australians embrace you in this time of trauma.
We cannot lighten the weight that is upon you, but we hold you in our hearts.
We grieve with you.
We will stand with Israel.
We always will.


Can I thank you for the welcome onto your country.
It is one of the great honours my life to be involved in this campaign.
I came here after I became leader of the Labor Party and committed right here with Linda Burney to hold a referendum in our first term for a constitutionally enshrined Voice to our Parliament, and that is what we are doing.
I thank the dancers for sharing your culture, the oldest continuous culture on earth, with those of us who are privileged to share this great island continent of ours with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
And I particularly enjoyed the last dance, a new dance, which is about Yes, the women holding the sticks representing the burden of the Yes campaign.
The burden of feeling that weight of history which is upon us, with the opportunity we have to lift that burden of history and the rising of it - above their heads - symbolising strength and rising to the occasion.
And I believe that Australia can rise to the occasion between now on October 14th.
We have just four days now in which Australia can be an enlarged country.
A country at peace with our history. A country more unified.
A country able to move forward, in the words of the Uluru Statement itself, walking together for that better future.
Your challenge here has given Australia a true masterpiece, an artwork that is every bit as powerful as the words that it surrounds and every bit as generous as the statement that it completes.
The most beautiful thing about this painting and about the words that are there in the Uluru Statement from the Heart, is that there is room left for all Australians to be a part of this painting, to be a part of the picture.
The Australian story is 65,000 years old, and we have an opportunity to write the next chapter in the coming days.
On Saturday the first Australians have a hand outstretched to us, to non-Indigenous Australia, a hand of friendship just asking to be grasped so that we can move forward to that better future together.
On Saturday, all Australians can bring the beauty of this artwork to life with a pencil by just writing three letters: Y-E-S. Yes.
That will bring this artwork to life and will ensure that all of our lives are enriched if the Australian people take up this opportunity.
So, I thank you for the invitation, as it says.
And I've been very proud to walk with you and to accept that invitation, I thank you so much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am so proud to lead a Government committed to Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people through a Voice.
And it is an honour to be here with you, in the presence of so many of the members of a union that has been such a steadfast supporter of the Yes case.
No one knows better than you that the most straightforward and effective way to get better results is to listen to the people on the ground.
As you put it so succinctly last month:
Just as a good clinician listens to their patient, a Voice to Parliament is about listening to the voices of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
And you and all of your members know all too well that health outcomes have to improve among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Right now, we live with a paradox. We are one of the wealthiest nations on Earth, yet there are Indigenous communities still suffering the brunt of diseases that have been eradicated from most of the planet.
Writing in The Australian last week, the great Evonne Goolagong Cawley spoke about how three members of her own family have died from preventable heart conditions. In Evonne’s words:
That has been the past, and it is the cruel reality of the present – but on October 14 we have the opportunity to make sure it isn’t the future.
Right across our continent, the members of the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation recognise that what none of us can afford to do is to keep doing the same thing we’ve been doing for so many decades.
Friends, there are few professions that shape our lives as profoundly as the one you have all chosen.
Your members are there at the beginning of our lives and at the end – and you are one of the essential ingredients that makes it possible to live all the years in between to the very fullest.
I could stand here and do nothing but sing your praises. I could spend the next 10 minutes finding different ways to say how vital nurses and midwives are.
But if there’s one thing you don’t need, it’s someone standing here, saying nice things to you, then walking out the door.
No matter how positive they are, words lose their weight of meaning if they’re not backed by action.&nbsp;&nbsp;
That is not the path my team has taken. If there’s something Australia has had enough of, it is governments that make announcements but don’t deliver.
Ever since we were entrusted with the great privilege of forming Government, my team and I have been repaying that trust by working for Australians every single day.
Among our priorities is ensuring that we will never see a repeat of the decade of neglect endured by our aged care sector.
This has involved implementing the recommendations of the Royal Commission into Aged Care.
And a core one of those recommendations was making sure every aged care home had a registered nurse on site 24 hours a day.
We are well along the path to making this a reality. On average, there is now a registered nurse on-site in aged care homes 98 per cent of the time.
Eighty-six per cent of facilities now have a nurse on-site 24/7.
The majority of the remaining homes are very close to 24/7 coverage.
And we expect that these numbers will continue to improve every month.
Since Labor came into Government, the average number of care minutes provided per resident per day has increased, including nearly 37 minutes of registered nurse care.
Aged care residents now receive a total of more than 1.8 million additional minutes of direct care every day. That’s 657 million minutes per year.
I am also incredibly proud of the fact that in our budget in May, we committed to funding the record 15 per cent pay increase for aged care workers. That includes a boost for registered nurses, enrolled nurses and nursing assistants on site.
This is what happens when unions, providers and governments work together. This is how we can change the lives of Australians for the better – at all stages of life.
As part of our work to expose and close the gender pay gap, we introduced the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Bill last year which included provisions that make it easier for the Fair Work Commission to ascertain when work has been undervalued because of gender.
This takes on particular importance in female-dominated sectors where lower wages have lingered like a relic from another era.
It’s a situation that’s been allowed to slide for too long by successive governments.
As a society, we cannot continue to accept the situation where certain occupations are paid below their true worth, just because a majority of the workforce are women.
Expressing gratitude to care workers for their dedication and service is in no way a substitute for meaningful action.
Our Secure Jobs, Better Pay bill will mean real progress for working women, including:

The requirement that gender equity and job security are considered when applying the Act;


A prohibition on pay secrecy clauses;


The implementation of Recommendation 28 of the Respect@Work report – that is, the positive duty to prevent sexual harassment;


The creation of two new expert panels within the Fair Work Commission dealing with the Care and Community Sector and Pay Equity;


And the introduction of a new equal remuneration principle that no longer requires the applicants to identify a male comparator when trying to prove gender-based undervaluation of work.

We are also working to take some of the pressure off nurses by making it easier for Australians to access healthcare in a timely way, and reduce the likelihood of a condition being left to develop to the point where the services of a nurse are required.
And that work starts with the great Labor legacy that is the cornerstone of our health system.
After nearly a decade of Coalition cuts and neglect, my Government is making Medicare stronger for all Australians.
We are delivering critical funding for the urgent needs of today, and – driven by the instinct to shape the future rather than let it shape us – we are carefully developing and introducing reforms for the healthcare of tomorrow.
With historic investments in Medicare, we will triple the bulk billing incentive – the largest increase to the incentive in the 40-year history of Medicare.
We’re already delivering cheaper medicines for 6 million Australians, effectively halving the costs of medicines and reducing the number of visits to the doctor and the pharmacy.
And we’re making it easier for Australians to get the care they need, by growing the health workforce and supporting all our trusted health workers to do what they’re trained to do.
We’re making a difference through our investment in TAFE. This is one area where we haven’t just kept our promise but exceeded it.
Recent figures show that fee-free TAFE enrolments have hit more than 214,000 in the first six months. That’s six months earlier than expected, and nearly 35,000 enrolments more than our target.
And the biggest winner is set to be the care sector, with courses across health care, aged care and disability care attracting nearly a quarter of total enrolments.
Prior to the election last year, we committed to rolling out 50 new Urgent Care Clinics
across the country.
I’ve had the pleasure of attending a number of openings, and I look forward to more. Indeed, this morning I will be travelling to Perth for another UCC announcement.
When we complete our rollout, we will have exceeded our target and there'll be 58 centres across the country giving Australians urgent care, taking pressure off emergency departments all over the country – and the nurses who are their backbone.
And all Australians will need is their Medicare card.
What it all adds up is a medical system where Australians don’t treat their own health as something they need to put off until it’s absolutely necessary.
Since our election last year, my team and I have spent every day working for Australia. We have kept faith with the Australian people and kept our word.
We will maintain the momentum we have built because after all the near decade of lost opportunity under the previous government, there is so much to do.
And you are very much at the heart of it.
When I had the honour of addressing you during the election campaign last year, I touched on the bigger picture of which nurses and midwives are part.
I talked about how taking care of each other is at the heart of how we see ourselves as a people and a nation, but also about how we need to get our health system right for the proper functioning of the economy.
No economy can come close to realising its potential without a healthcare system worthy of the name. Stronger health care is a precondition for a stronger economy and, in turn, all the life-improving reforms that a stronger economy makes possible.
And a proper healthcare system cannot be everything it can be until the hardworking health workers of this country have a proper partner in government.
A government that has your back just as you have the back of every single Australian in your care.
A government that’s always ready to walk the talk.
Because that is what matters most in the end.
I say to you and to all your extraordinary members: You have our thanks. You have our respect.
And there are so very many times when you have our awe.
But, most importantly, you can take more than just our word for it – you have our actions.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Dr Cathy Foley says ‘science is humanity’s superpower’.
It’s my great honour to be with all of you tonight, as we celebrate the super heroes of Australian science. &nbsp;
Some of our nation’s leading scientists and science teachers.
People advancing the frontiers of discovery - and inspiring a new generation to discover a love of science.
The breadth and the quality of all the nominees gathered here tonight speaks for just how important science is to the whole of our nation’s future.
Science is vital to solving the biggest challenges we face — from pandemics to climate change.
And science is central to unlocking the next generation of opportunities – creating new jobs, powering new industries, boosting our productivity and helping us embrace new technologies.
In a world of rapid change, science is essential for Australia to compete and succeed as a smart, skilled and productive nation.
Science will ensure that Australia can shape the future – rather than letting the future shape us.
This is why Ed Husic holds the twin portfolios of Minister for Science – and Minister for Industry.
It’s why science, technology and innovation will be high on the agenda during my visit to Washington DC next week.
And it’s why our Government is currently updating Australia’s science and research priorities.
Because a great deal has changed since these were last published in 2015.
And these updated priorities — together with the National Science Statement — will provide a clear vision and direction for Australian science going forward.
So that we can better align our efforts and investments for the benefit all Australians.
Part of this is strengthening the culture of research and discovery.
Encouraging more Australians from all walks of life to study science at school and to pursue it at university.
And recognising the valuable role that basic research plays in Australia’s scientific strength - because not every transformative breakthrough begins with a commercial product already in mind.
Scientific discovery is – by its nature – a journey into the unknown. So we need to nourish a research and investment culture that’s comfortable with the idea that the destination won’t always be mapped out.&nbsp;
And equally, we have to make sure that we have the supporting structure in place so that when the next Australian scientist discovers the next cochlear implant, or cervical cancer vaccine, they don’t have to look overseas for the next step, the commercialisation and manufacturing opportunities.
One of the most fundamental lessons of the pandemic was the need for greater resilience and self‑reliance in our economy, the capacity to make more things here.
So we can back our innovators, translate and commercialise our innovations, build the industries and jobs that support them here at home, and then export them to the world.
This is vital to our economy – and it’s crucial to repaying and rewarding the efforts of our scientists and innovators.
For example, as you know, Australia has been a global pioneer in quantum research for decades.
Our Government wants to translate that advantage into thriving quantum industries that boost our economic competitiveness and help solve our biggest national challenges.
That’s why Minister Ed Husic released Australia’s first-ever National Quantum Strategy in May.
And our National Reconstruction Fund will target $1 billion towards critical technologies like quantum.
We’ve also prioritised the development of a National Battery Strategy to help boost investment in battery technology in Australia.
And we are exploring the enormous potential of Australia’s vast reserves of critical minerals and rare earths.
Biotechnology is another area of tremendous potential.
And I’m delighted that Australia will be one of very few countries in the world with an end-to-end mRNA manufacturing capability.
All of this is about ensuring that discoveries we make in Australia – become products made in Australia.
Friends, whether you are being honoured here tonight as an outstanding scientist or an outstanding educator of scientists.
I want to conclude by saying that Australia is lucky to have you.
Thank you for everything you do - and congratulations to you all.


Well, thanks very much, Kevin, and to Ambassador Kennedy, as well.
Welcome. It's fantastic to have you here with us.
And to Brad and Steve, and other representatives who are here. What a fantastic announcement.
This is completely in sync with what my Government's direction has been. How do we, in the words there, seize is one of my favourite words. We are confronting an ever-changing world. And countries will either move forward and seize the opportunities to create the jobs of the future, to expand in terms of our economic growth, to take advantage of where we are in the world in the fastest growing region in the world in human history just to our north, or countries will go past us.
And this investment will help make sure that doesn't happen.
This is a very significant $5 billion announcement with, of course, three important components.
I mean, the first is the investment in AI infrastructure that will make an enormous difference.
Digital infrastructure is critical to not just the way our economy functions, but the way that we live, the way that we work, the way that we enjoy the delivery of social services, the way that we lift up the education and capacity of our people.
And this investment will make an enormous difference, growing its local data centre footprint from 20 to 29 sites with benefit for Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne.
And I spoke in advance with the Premier of Victoria, new Premier Jacinta Allan, and the New South Wales Premier, Chris Minns, as well as ACT Chief Minister, Andrew Barr. They are very welcoming of this investment that will make a significant difference.
Secondly, as well, your investment in people, in partnership with TAFE New South Wales, that facility there at Meadowbank is indeed a terrific way to train 200 people in the first couple of years, but also, importantly 300,000 Australian through your Global Skills Program. As you've said, we need to invest in infrastructure but we also need to invest in our human capital to lift it up as well. And giving people skills will have an enormous benefit.
And thirdly, something that has been a real focus is the issue of cybersecurity. And this partnership and collaboration with the Australian Signals Directorate is very welcome indeed.
This will improve joint capability to identify, prevent and respond to cyber threats.
We know that this is having an impact on all companies. We know as well, that this is about individuals and the protection of who they are.
We need to get this right.
Because for many people will look at what is happening in this ever-changing world with data being collected on every aspect of our life, not just credit cards, but other details, health data, everything else, all the aspects of the way that we live, work and play being collected.
People want to know that their privacy is being protected at the same time.
In addition to that, of course, it represents an economic threat.
We've spoken about the three great threats for why we need to become more resilient in Australia as part of my future made in Australia's strategy.
And the big three threats are, of course, a future pandemic event.
The second is conflict.
We live in a world where, unfortunately, we're seeing conflict take place in a number of destinations around the world. And our own region is not immune from risk.
The third is a cyber event that literally has an enormous impact on our economy.
So, this investment, getting ahead, will make an enormous difference as well.
I have every confidence in Rachel and her team at ASD do an extraordinary job.
But this will uplift the capacity for them to do that job. And I really welcome this investment.
I know that my Minister, Ed Husic, is very excited by this. We announced, prior to the election, our support for the Tech Council's target of 1.2 million jobs in this area by 2030.
Now, that's critical.
It's also about the nature of those jobs. These are high-paid, secure jobs in the future. So, when we're skilling people up for them, we're skilling them up for a prosperous economic future as well as individuals as well as being able to contribute to the economy.
And when you look at companies in these sort of tech spaces, companies like Atlassian and Canva coming in, they did not exist, literally, when Kevin and I were PM and Deputy in 2013. Some of these were not heard of. They are now some of the largest companies in Australia and operating globally, as well.
The other thing that this does, and it's important as part of this visit here, is help the relationship between Australia and the United States.
The United States is Australia's most important two-way trade partner. And Australian investment in the United States has grown substantially in recent time, but we continue to welcome this investment here.
So, to Microsoft, we really thank you for this investment.
We thank the Ambassador for the role that he's played in this.
And we look forward to seeing the results, which I'm sure will be successful for the company, which I know will be successful for our nation.


Distinguished guests, Your Excellencies.
It is an honour to be here to open what all Australians should consider as a slice of home away from home.
Every one of our embassies is a piece of Australia in another land – but this is no ordinary land.
President Biden once referred to Australia as a great comfort zone for the American people. He spoke of an “easy mateship”.
The feeling is deeply mutual.
My great predecessor Prime Minister Bob Hawke described it as:
An ease of contact, a readiness to trust, and an enjoyment of each other’s company which readily transcends differences.
Through the decades, through all the changes in the world, the friendship between Australia and the United States has stood so tall it even extends beyond our planet.
We are both nations of stargazers. Even our flags remind us to look up at night and be inspired.
But while we all look to the stars, the US is actually going to them – with some help from your friends Down Under.
The only footprints on another world are American. But when Neil Armstrong planted the very first one, it was Australia that beamed that giant leap to the world.
The only human-made objects to have reached interstellar space are American – but when there’s a hiccup, like there was in August, the only way to talk with both the Voyager probes and get things back on track is a radio dish in Canberra.
And many millennia from now, the first human-made object to approach an alien star system will be American.
For our planet’s sake, I hope you make a good impression.
But just as we look up, we also keep our feet on the ground.
Our embassy here is an important part of that.
This beautiful new building will carry the spirit of the old embassy, which served us for so many decades – from the depths of World War II when our alliance was forged.
Like the stars above us, the Australia-US alliance was born in darkness, during the Second World War – but it has lit our way ever since.
Ours is a true friendship and true friendship is built on honesty – which means we have the strength and the freedom to tell each other what needs to be said, even if there are times when the message isn’t as instantly loveable as an episode of Bluey.
It’s a friendship built on mutual respect, admiration – and, ever since Mark Twain first tried coming to grips with the Australian accent, moments of mutual incomprehension.
But just as true friends draw strength from what they have in common, they take joy in each other’s differences.
And we bridge the gaps with diplomacy, the true heart of foreign policy.
President Biden emphasised the importance of the US leading not just by the example of its power, but by the power of its example.
Australia’s power occupies a different tier in the world, but we are guided by a similar spirit.
It is a spirit embodied by our host, Ambassador Kevin Rudd
I had the honour of serving as Kevin’s Deputy Prime Minister.
And as long as I have known him, he has had a belief in Australia that is even bigger than our continent.
Kevin’s ambition for our nation is carefully underwritten by his understanding of the potential that we all share as Australians, and what we need to do to reach it.
It’s an ambition that is matched by his view of our place in the world, and the positive and constructive role that we can play.
Of course, no ambassador stands alone. Every embassy is a community, a team of extraordinary talent.
A team that brings to bear a great collective experience, instinct, sensitivity and strength.
Every interaction I and my team have had with you has been such a pleasure, and it gives me the greatest confidence that Australia’s presence in Washington is in your hands.
It’s a presence that is enhanced in the embassy gallery by an exhibition of Aboriginal art from the very heart of our continent.
Bearing the name Irrititja Kuwarri Tjungu, it celebrates 50 years of Papunya Tula Artists.
Each artwork is extraordinary. Gathered together, they are a profound expression of power, grace and beauty from members of the world’s oldest continuous culture. I am glad they are here to be seen, appreciated, and loved.
In Australia, we’re marking another 50th anniversary – that of the Sydney Opera House. It is worth noting that its very first performer was American – the great Paul Robeson.
Demonstrating true American momentum, he didn’t wait for the Opera House to open, but turned up when it was still a building site and sang to the construction workers, who sat on the scaffolding and hung on every word.
I don’t know if any Australian singer returned the favour as this new embassy was being brought into being. But I think we can all agree on the quality of the finished product.
From this moment, our face to the United States of America is this splendid building.
It gives me great pleasure to declare it open.


I’m delighted to be here today to help showcase Australian innovation.
And to celebrate the progress that the partnership between Australia and America is delivering for both our countries – and for the wider world.
Whether it’s new defence technology promoting peace and security.
The capacity for quantum and artificial intelligence to boost productivity across our workforce and drive prosperity in our economy.
Medical breakthroughs changing and saving lives.
Or clean, green technology helping the world make the transition to net zero.
The people and technologies we see around us – will shape the decades ahead of us.
In all these fields, the closer Australia and America work together, the further we will go together.&nbsp;
Co-operating on research, drawing on complementary expertise, building on shared experience – and striving for breakthroughs.
Pushing each other, to expand the boundaries of discovery.
That is the great success story of all the people and firms at this showcase.
It is one of the growing strengths of the partnership between the United States of America and Australia.
And there is a world of opportunity for us still to explore - particularly in fulfilling the new third pillar of our alliance: climate and clean energy.
Australia is proudly home to the building blocks of the clean energy economy: rare earths and critical minerals, lithium, cobalt, copper.
We want to be a renewable energy superpower.
A leader in green hydrogen – and the green steel and green ammonia it enables us to produce and export.
A central focus of our engagement with the Biden Administration this week is building stronger connections between Australian critical minerals and clean energy technology and American markets, investors and innovators.
And we are investing in more sustainable, reliable and transparent supply chains with the United States as well, so both our countries can deliver on our shared clean energy ambitions.
Of course, in this time of uncertainty and conflict – it’s important to recognise that innovation plays a pivotal role in building a more secure world.
That’s why today I am proud to announce that Australia will deliver an additional $20 million of defence assistance to Ukraine, in the form of innovative and locally-developed industry equipment.
Australian innovation will equip the brave people of Ukraine with some of the best capabilities in the world.
This new package includes:
Counter-drone systems from DroneShield.
De-mining equipment from Minelab.
Ultra lightweight portable X-Ray equipment from Micro-X.
Deployable 3D printers from Spee-3D: the capacity to print replacement parts, for damage sustained in combat, while you are in the field.
I want to thank our Australian defence industry partners for the support they have provided.
And I want to thank them for the difference this equipment will make for the people of Ukraine.
In the same spirit, I want to welcome a very significant commercial agreement announced this week:
Australia’s Ferra Engineering and Boeing have agreed a new strategic partnership for the supply of 1000 Joint Direct Attack Munition.
At its heart, this showcase celebrates the exchange of knowledge and ideas across international borders.
This ability to learn from each other and work with each other, the flow of talent and investment, research and education, so much of this depends on the international rules-based order.
But innovation is not just a dividend of peace, prosperity and stability – it’s a contributor to all three.
Innovation strengthens our capability in defence – and it strengthens our multilateral and regional relationships too.
It creates jobs, drives economic growth and lifts people out of poverty.
It helps deepen and diversify trading relationships.
And in clean energy, it’s innovation and technology that means some of the fastest-growing economies in the world can decarbonise and industrialise, at the same time.
At a moment when our world faces profound challenges – your work is central to finding the solutions.
And at a time of economic transformation – your work is vital to seizing these opportunities.
Thank you for the part you play in shaping the future: for Australia, for America, for all of us.


President Biden, First Lady Dr Biden
Thank you for the great honour of this invitation – and the wonderful warmth of your welcome.
Mr President
When you and I stood together in San Diego in March, the USS Sterett and USS Missouri behind us, we were surrounded by the examples of America's power.
To stand with you here in Washington DC is to witness the power of America's example.
The ideas and ideals that your great democracy was built on.
The 'self-evident truths' that every American generation strives to give deeper meaning.
And the peace and freedom that America seeks to defend around the globe.
The principle that every country – big or small – should be able seek to shape its own destiny and secure its own future.
Where the sovereignty of every nation is respected – and the dignity and liberty of every individual is recognised.
Where peace is secured not by fear of force or strength of arms alone – but through the collective commitment and the shared responsibility of the international community.
That is the heart of our alliance. The soul of our partnership.
Not a pact against a common enemy – a pledge to a common cause.
A shared belief that freedom, peace and equality are not just American ideals or Australian values – they belong to all humankind.
That is why Ukrainian soldiers are driving Australian-made Bushmasters as they drive back an illegal and immoral invasion.
And it is why all Australians condemn the atrocities, terror and pitiless brutality of Hamas.
And – Mr President – we applaud the personal resolve you have brought to this troubled part of the world.
You have spoken with moral clarity – and you have stood up for a simple principle.
The principle that every innocent life matters, Israeli and Palestinian.
And that in any conflict, every effort must be made to protect civilians.
American leadership is indispensable – but it is not inevitable.
It takes a leader to deliver it.
It takes wisdom to show empathy, courage to provide humanitarian assistance – and true leadership to seek peace.
Because protecting innocent people is not a show of weakness – it is a measure of strength.
Mr President
Our nations' steadfast alliance has grown and thrived through 15 of my predecessors – and 13 of yours.
In Australian public life, it meets the number one measure of a great idea - both political parties try and claim credit for it.
But it is not – and never has been - the leaders at this podium who determine the strength and success of our alliance.
It is the people we serve.
Presidents and Prime Ministers can praise our countries' shared values, we can sign agreements to advance our common interests.
But it is our citizens who make the words a bond.
It is our people whose courage and ambition, hard-work and aspiration, give life and weight to all we share and all we strive for.
Sometimes we casually refer to 'average' Americans or 'everyday' Australians. But what they do every day is anything but average.
It's our people making the breakthroughs that are seeing Australia and America co-operate in new technology like never before.
From quantum computing and medical science, to agriculture and defence.
It's our people driving unprecedented collaboration in our creative industries, in art and film and music.
From Barbie to Bluey.
It's our people partnering to unlock the possibilities of clean energy and critical minerals.
The new third pillar of our alliance: a plan for both our nations to seize the transformative economic opportunities of clean energy and a plan to help every nation meet the global challenge of climate change.
It is our people who will train together – side by side - to service the next generation of our submarines and defence technology.
And it is our people that we honour, when we remember the generations of Australians and Americans who have fought and fallen together.
Our Veterans and all those who have given the cause of peace their last full measure of devotion.
And, Mr President, in reflecting on this century of service, I'm reminded of a sentiment you have shared before from an American soldier talking about his time in Iraq.
"You know when there's an Australian with you, they'll always have your back". 
A generous thought from a man of courage and character, Major Beau Biden.
Mr President
You have known far more than life's ordinary share of loss and grief.
And you have been called to serve at a time when sadness and strife have cast a long shadow on our world.
You understand that the task for all of us is to draw on the strength that hope instils.
To look to the future not just with optimism for better days but with the determination to build a better world.
And while we do indeed face testing times.
Our friendship is tried and tested.
Our people are up for the challenge.
Our alliance has been shaped by history – and it is ready to shape the future.
So, with optimism and determination.
Let us pledge to make this a time when 'hope and history rhyme'.
Let us write the next chapter in our alliance, together.


Well, thank you very much to Mr President and First Lady Dr Biden.
I must say, I only have one regret about tonight, which is – I'm not quite sure how I top this for date night with Jodie at anytime, anywhere in the future.
It's all downhill from here, my darling.
Ladies and gentlemen.
We live in a world that does keep changing. Yet one thing that keeps the ground firm beneath us is the great constant that is the American spirit.
America has never been held back by the unknown or slowed by trepidation.
You stride boldly towards the future, excited by all of its possibility.
In every field of human endeavour, your nation is energised by a ceaseless curiosity and the confidence to follow it.
It is a spirit that Australians identify with. With a small population but a very big imagination, we punch above our weight – all the while drawing inspiration from our friends across the Pacific.
We stand as close as we have ever been.
And I think, after this week, closer than we have ever been.
We are firm allies, strengthening defence cooperation through AUKUS, and creating more economic opportunities for our peoples and our region.
Australians are always ready to play our part.
Most importantly, our nations are close friends. Friends who admire each other's qualities.
I think we get each other.
And President Biden and I had our first meeting before I'd even selected, of course, a Cabinet.
I was elected on the Saturday and by Monday I was off to the Quad Leaders' meeting.
And I do want to thank the President for your warm welcome and that rather extraordinary beginning on the front foot in those first days of my Government.
Friends who draw strength from all we have in common, but we take joy in our differences as well.
Friends who look to the future together without losing sight of the moments in the past that bind us together.
Mr President, speaking as one man with Irish ancestry to another – although I am also, of course, half Italian, so you don't have to guess my religion – I know you won't object to me quoting a Dubliner.
The familiar words of William Butler Yeats – "Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold" – are now more than a century old.
Yet they speak to us just as clearly now as the long contest between democracy and authoritarianism plays out its newest chapter.
But to capture the essence of the bond between our two nations – in all of its warmth and its easy strength – I turn to another of his poems.
Think where man's glory most begins and ends
And say my glory was I had such friends
So allow me to make a toast to such friends.
Because Australia has no greater friend than the United States of America.
So, to the President and First Lady.
To the history our peoples have made together.
But, importantly, the future we will build together as a peoples.
To friendship.


Madam Vice President
Secretary of State Blinken
Distinguished guests
We meet today at a time when our world faces a set of profound challenges.
Far and wide, we are confronted by threats to peace and tests of the international rules-based order.
And here in United States we can see the weight of global leadership that your nation carries.
I came to Washington this week to continue the work of facing our alliance to the future.
Strengthening our economic partnerships in cloud computing, innovation and through a new Technology Safeguards Agreement.
Working with President Biden to turn the Climate and Clean Energy compact we signed together in May into a commercial reality, with new progress on critical minerals and supply chains.
But – above all – in these challenging times, I stand here in Washington as the leader of America’s steadfast ally.
That’s what the friendship between our nations means.
We stand together, in the cause of peace.&nbsp;
We work together to build a more free, stable and prosperous world.
Eight decades ago, Australia looked to America when our own need was most dire.
We recognise the world is looking to you now.
And we know it does not look in vain.
American leadership will meet this moment.
And as allies we will face the future together.
Ladies and Gentlemen
It remains a remarkable tribute to your nation – including many people who worked from this very building that in the aftermath of the Second World War, America did not seek to rebuild a world governed by strength of arms, fear of force or the will of one great power.
Instead – as President Truman said – you sought a ‘just and lasting peace’.
Understanding that peace would only last, so long as it was just.
That is why your forebears worked with ours – to give life and shape to the United Nations.
To help build a post-war world of rules and rights, of essential freedoms and basic fairness.
Where every country – big and small – could shape its own destiny and secure its own future.
Where the sovereignty of every nation is respected – and the dignity and liberty of every individual is recognised.
Where peace is secured not solely by the presence of the great powers but by the sovereign acts of middle powers and small nations and the collective responsibility of the international community.
Of course, that vision and those values have not gone unchallenged.
We see this now in Ukraine, where Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion seeks to subjugate an independent nation and oppress a free people.
Australia may be half a world away from Ukraine, but we are proud to be one of the largest contributors to its military and humanitarian needs.
We stand with Ukraine to support its courageous people – and to defend a fundamental principle.
The right of every sovereign nation to peace and security.
And the responsibility of every sovereign nation to respect the rules that hold the world together.
Be it in Europe, in the Indo-Pacific – or indeed the Middle East.
Australia unequivocally condemns the atrocities committed by Hamas and the destruction their acts of terror have inflicted on innocent lives in Israel and Gaza.
And we stand with our international partners in calling for access to life-saving humanitarian assistance to civilians in Gaza.
In my time here, I’ve had the opportunity to personally thank the President for the courage and leadership he has shown. &nbsp;
As a true friend of Israel, not only did he stand by them in this terrible time.
He offered wisdom as well as solace.
Calling for all parties to allow safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access and safe passage for civilians.
And the President used the power of his office to assert an undeniable principle: every innocent life must be protected. &nbsp;
Israeli and Palestinian.
That is American leadership in action.
Generations of this leadership have been instrumental in shaping a world which is more prosperous, more open, more free and more inter-connected than our forebears could have imagined.
Australia has benefited from this – and Australia has helped build it.
From my first day in office, when I flew to Japan to take part in the Quad, the Government I lead has made it a priority to reinforce the architecture of our region - investing in our capabilities and investing in our relationships.
Strengthening our vital links with Japan and Korea, as a proven economic, security and energy partner.
Deepening our engagement with Indonesia, Singapore, Philippines, Vietnam and across South-East Asia.
Taking our strategic partnership with India to a new level, both bilaterally and through the Quad.
Strengthening the bond we share with our Pacific Islands family, where for more than half a century, Australia has been the region’s single largest economic and development partner.
Investing in our multilateral engagement: the Pacific Islands Forum, ASEAN and the East Asia Summit, and as founding members of APEC, the G20 and the United Nations.
Because, as a constructive middle power with global interests we understand the value and importance of dialogue.
Which is why Australia strongly supports the Biden Administration’s efforts to maintain open lines of communication between the United States of America and the People’s Republic of China.
As a great American President and the father of the current US Ambassador to Australia, proved 60 years ago, during the Cuban Crisis, the true measure of a superpower’s strength is the ability to pull the world back from the brink of conflict.
Once again, that has become the test of our time.
China has been explicit: it does not see itself as a status-quo power.
It seeks a region and a world that is much more accommodating of its values and interests.
This is where it is the responsibility of every nation that has benefited from the stability and prosperity of the international rules-based order through the last three-quarters of a century, to work together and protect it.
Securing the sovereignty that confers every nation’s right to determine its own destiny.
Protecting the freedom of navigation which is central to our shared prosperity.
Upholding the human rights which are central to every individual’s life and liberty.
And working together to maintain peace – not just in the Taiwan Strait but wherever it is at risk.
This means investing in our capabilities to prevent competition escalating into conflict.
And investing in our relationships to maintain the dialogue that safeguards stability.
This is where Australia, like the United States, has been working to stabilise our relationship with China.
We are clear-eyed about this.
We are two nations with very different histories, values and political systems.
Australia will always look to co-operate with China where we can, disagree where we must and engage, in our national interest.
Our approach has been patient, calibrated and deliberate.
And that will continue when I visit Beijing and Shanghai next month.
Secretary Blinken – you and so many of your colleagues today devote your energy and intellect to building a more stable and secure world.
Striving for peace is hard work.
It demands new effort and new resources, new creativity and new resolve.
But whenever we consider the costs, the obstacles or the difficulties of this course – we need only consider the alternative.
Because the closing-off of economies, the collapse of diplomacy, the cutting of ties, the burden of conflict and the devastation of war are catastrophic for the world.
That elemental understanding was the basis of the alliance America and Australia signed, 72 years ago.
Ours was not a pact against a mutual enemy.
It was a pledge to a common cause.
These were the words to which we put the names of our nations.
“Reaffirming desire to live in peace with all peoples and all Governments and desiring to strengthen the fabric of peace in the Pacific area”.
And it is in this same spirit Australia has struck the new trilateral AUKUS agreement with the United States and the United Kingdom.
A decision we have taken that is anchored in our own national sovereignty – and in the sovereign interests of the United States and the United Kingdom.
From early in the next decade, Australia will take delivery of US Virginia-class conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines.
This will be the first time in 65 years, and only the second time in history, that the United States has shared its nuclear propulsion technology.
It speaks for the intersection of our interests, the deep trust underpinning our alliance – and the reality of the world in which we live.
AUKUS is an unprecedented level of partnership, conceived for a time of unprecedented challenge.
This technology offers Australia a new level of deterrence and a new capacity to contribute to the stability of our region and the security of our partners.
For Australia, the rationale for AUKUS is straightforward: we want to contribute to strategic equilibrium in the Indo-Pacific.
We are not looking for conflict – we are seeking to prevent it.
Making it crystal clear to any aggressor that the risk of conflict far outweighs any potential benefit.
The past few weeks have reminded us all that American leadership often means walking a lonely road and shouldering a heavy burden.
As a friend, Australia walks beside you and as an ally we help you carry the weight - especially when the going gets tough.
Of course, there will always be challenges here at home that seem more pressing, more relevant and more real than the concerns of other nations far away.
It is natural – indeed it is understandable – for some to greet any new call for American global engagement with ‘why us, why now, why there, why again’.
But the promise of America has never been fulfilled in isolation.
The greatness of America has never been confined to your borders.
And the people of Australia are not looking for a free ride.
We are a middle power - and a leader in our region.
And Australians always pay our way.
We pull our weight.
We do our part.
We always have.
We will always will.
That’s one of the points I took the opportunity to make to key members of the House and the Senate in person today.
The AUKUS bills before Congress represent a multi-billion dollar boost to America’s industrial base – and a game-changing manufacturing opportunity for Australian workers.
It will mean Australians and Americans can work and train side-by-side in allied shipyards.
And beyond submarines, AUKUS will enable seamless co-operation between our two nations in defence science, technology and industry to help meet the new strategic challenges of our time.
Ladies and Gentlemen
This is not my first time in this famous building.
In my 20s, I was invited to take part in a State Department Program.
Obviously the US intelligence community saw something in me.
I asked to see the ways different groups interacted with American democracy.
I got the full spread: the National Rifle Association, the Sierra Club, Planned Parenthood.
Yet for all the diversity of views and arguments across the different issues, there was also a unifying belief.
A sense that ideas mattered – and participation mattered.
Showing up. Taking part. Making a case.
It spoke for a common faith in the power of people and also a shared respect for the responsibility of government.
Those are founding principles of both our democracies.
They are ideals that the United States – and the State Department – seeks to share with people from every part of the world.
Citizens who want to help solve the humanitarian challenges their nations are facing.
People who want the world to act on climate change.
People who want to see the jobs and prosperity of new economic growth shared across their society.
And people who believe – as we all do - that the best way of achieving these goals, is a system where representatives derive their power from the consent of the governed.
Of course, this is not easy or predictable.
But only dictatorships pretend to be perfect.
Democracies are proud to be human.
We serve a work in progress.
A continuing search for a more perfect union, a shared desire to build a better world.
And that’s why all of us know that preserving democracy isn’t just a matter of celebrating it.
We have to nurture it, nourish it, strengthen it, renew it and defend it.
Making sure it has a practical meaning for the people it serves – and making sure it is ready for the future it seeks to shape.&nbsp;
Everything that is true for our democracies, holds true for our alliance.
In a time of conflict, uncertainty and rapid change – there is always the temptation for nations, democracies and citizens to look back.
To search for reassurance instead of seeking renewal.
But as important as our rich history is, our alliance is focused on the future.
Advancing the vital interests we share - and building on the universal values we hold.
Democracy and peace, freedom and fairness.
They are our North Star, our Southern Cross.
They bring us together. They light our way – and they can still light the world.
That is why ours is an alliance with a bright future.
Because it is an alliance for a better future.
Ladies and Gentlemen
It is my honour today to conclude with a toast:
To a friendship of great warmth and a partnership of true purpose.
The people of America.
The people of Australia.
An alliance for the future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure to celebrate the upgrade of this extraordinary facility with you today. To quote the great Annie Lennox, sweet dreams are made of this.
Speaking as someone who grew up across the street from a factory that made chocolate biscuits, the aromas here almost have a touch of home.
A touch of home is something that the name Darrell Lea has for Australians.
You’re a home-grown success – a proud Australian creation that has gone on to triumph across the world. Ever since Harry Lea first started making toffees and candies out the back of a fruit shop in Manly in 1917, it’s been quite a journey.
Harry and his wife Esther opened their first confectionary shop in Haymarket in 1924.
Then in 1936, Darrell Lea’s first factory opened just near the then four-year-old Harbour Bridge.
And along the way, you’ve become a part of the Australian story.
After nearly a century, Darrell Lea isn’t just still going, you’re thriving.
And as I can see around me, your future looks bright – and it is part of a future that all Australians can share in.
I believe in a future made in Australia. I believe in a country that can better stand on its own feet because it is a country that makes things here.
But that’s a future that isn’t simply going to happen of its own accord. Darrell Lea understands that. Just as you have never taken your place in the Australian story for granted, you aren’t sitting back and waiting to see what the future brings.
You are working to shape your future.
When we talk about making things in Australia, you walk the talk. I’m told that no single manufacturing site anywhere in the world makes more liquorice, rocky road or liquorice all-sorts than you do right here.
This is the outcome of renewed investment and a state-of-the-art facility.
It’s the product of innovation, investment and excellence, and a willingness to anticipate change and evolve.
We’re looking at a future made right here in Ingleburn.
If the appetite for Darrell Lea continues to grow internationally – and that’s what you’re all working so hard towards – it is a future we will increasingly export to the world.
The Government I lead understands that the future is built on the right mix of partnerships, skills, infrastructure and capacity.
So that industry has what it needs to thrive and succeed – lifting the local community and the national economy alike.
Right now, there are hundreds of people working round the clock here at Ingleburn.
Skilled and passionate members of the Darrell Lea team who, on top of everything else, create a remarkable one billion chocolate bullets a year.
I have always said that the greatest asset we have is our people, and you prove that every day. You are the future of this business.
A workforce to support and grow, strengthen and develop.
The success of Darrell Lea lies in your hands.
Like every great Australian business, you deserve a government that measures up to your dedication. A government that has your back.
Which is what this Government is recognising and sustaining through our recently announced five-year National Skills Agreement.
A national partnership for national priorities, it will deliver for critical, emerging and existing industries.
Investing in TAFE-led vocational education and training will tap the reservoir of potential and build the skills base of our national workforce.
And make sure that Australians have the skills for the jobs of today, and tomorrow.
A future made in Australia is an investment in industry, the economy and our nation.
It’s a future Darrell Lea is pursuing with purpose here at Ingleburn.
I congratulate everyone involved in this wonderful rebirth.
When we talk about the sweet smell of success, you’re the people who make it the literal truth.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I am so pleased to be here today, to celebrate a world-leading example of Australian innovation.
The most efficient commercial-sized solar cell, in the world.
The global race for affordable and reliable renewable energy has never been more intense, or more important.
And leading on efficiency is a tremendous source of competitive advantage.
It means lowering costs - and reducing emissions.
As we see here today, it also means accelerating a new generation of advanced manufacturing, powered by renewable energy and creating tens of thousands of new jobs, right across our nation.
The milestone we mark today reflects years of dedicated work by so many of you here.
It represents more than a billion dollars of commercial investment in Research and Development.
I am proud to lead a Government that has backed your efforts through ARENA, the Clean Energy Innovation Fund, and Main Sequence Ventures.
All part of our $40 billion commitment to new clean energy industries.
And while it is right and important to celebrate the breakthroughs that have brought you this far, I know all of you are focused on taking the next step.
Manufacturing this technology at scale, so we can boost supply for businesses and households.
This how Australia can seize its chance to be a renewable energy superpower – and a net-zero economy.
High-efficiency rooftop solar is absolutely central to reducing our national emissions, rebuilding our national energy grid and taking pressure off family budgets as well.&nbsp;
Australians understand this, 3.5 million households have embraced rooftop solar - because it works.
It’s a way of doing the right thing by the environment, while cutting your power bill.
And we know that when you combine rooftop solar with battery technology – whether that’s in the home, or through the community batteries our Government is rolling out - the savings are even more significant.
Rooftop solar reduces household bills by up to 57 per cent.
Solar plus storage takes that to between 75 and 100 per cent.
This also takes pressure off the national grid, when rooftop solar output goes up, wholesale demand – and wholesale prices – go down.
This is where your hard work serves Australia’s national interest.
Making more efficient rooftop solar, more affordable.
And helping more families access cheaper power, closer to home.
Above all, making the most of this outstanding technology and this extraordinary opportunity, depends on our ability to make things here in Australia.
That’s where our National Reconstruction Fund comes in – investing in manufacturing, strengthening our ability to turn world-leading Australian ideas into world-beating products.
This time last week, I was in the United States.
And across the days of discussions we had with President Biden and members of his Cabinet, as well as leading US business and industry representatives, I can assure you there was an extraordinary level of American interest in Australia’s Critical Minerals.
Our continent is home to the building blocks of the clean energy economy, the resources the world needs.
The copper and lithium and vanadium and cobalt that are essential to every solar panel and wind turbine and battery.
The point I made to our friends in America, is the same one I make here at home.
Yes we have the supply – but we have so much more to offer.
Exporting resources will always be an economic strength for Australia.
But by investing in skills and manufacturing and innovation, we can diversify our economy and diversify our trade links.
Building our economic resilience, moving Australia up the international value chain and creating more good jobs here at home.
This is a moment of transformative opportunity – and your ideas, your investment and your technology will help Australia to seize it.
Congratulations on this great milestone, I have every confidence there are bigger and better successes ahead.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It’s great to be here in Melbourne again and to be back at a conference that has always grappled with the big challenges and this year looks ahead to a ‘defining decade’.
More and more, this means looking beyond Australia’s borders.
Because in a global economy that has never been more inter-connected, the decisions and conditions in Washington and Beijing, Brussels, New Delhi and Jakarta affect Australian farmers and producers, our miners and manufacturers, our industries and institutions and as our hosts from the University of Melbourne appreciate, our higher education sector as well.
Our Government’s approach is shaped by the inescapable fact that the global outlook is more uncertain now than when we came to office 18 months ago.
We can’t avoid that reality, nor can we frame a strategy only for best-case scenarios.
We have to deal with the global economy as it is.
This means meeting the uncertainty in the world, by investing in our economic security and strengthening our resilience here at home.
For our Labor Government, the starting point for this will always be job creation.
In our first 16 months, over 560,000 jobs were created.
This set a new record for any first term government in Australian history – and before we hit the halfway mark.
And of course, it’s not just the chance of a job that matters - safety, security and fair pay are all fundamental to the dignity of work.
That’s why we’re closing loopholes around insecure work, delivering reforms to revitalise bargaining and taking action on gender pay equity.
We have backed increases in the minimum wage – and funded an historic pay rise for aged care workers.
We’ve narrowed the gender pay gap to its lowest point on record– and we’re not done yet.
And instead of deploying low wages as a deliberate design feature, we’ve got wages growing at their fastest rate in more than a decade – with real wages growth on the horizon at last.
Just as importantly, we’ve put the Budget back onto a sustainable footing.
Our responsible approach to both revenue and spending has turned the $78 billion deficit we inherited into a $22 billion surplus.
The Treasurer, the Finance Minister and all of us are proud of that unprecedented turnaround and pleased to have delivered the first budget surplus in 15 years.
But we did not pursue a surplus for the sake of it.&nbsp;
We know a stronger Budget position serves as an important buffer against international shocks and it helps put downward pressure on inflation.
Our Government understands the cost-of-living is the number one pressure on Australian families, which is why help with the cost-of-living is our number one priority.
Getting the Budget onto a stronger foundation and getting wages moving again are essential elements of this.
So too is the targeted support we have been rolling-out over the past year.
When I spoke to this Conference exactly a year ago, the week after our October Budget I explained the two key reasons behind our decision to return over 90 percent of revenue upgrades to the bottom line, rather than funnel them into one-off measures.
First, because we understood that a stronger budget would better protect us against uncertainty in the future.
Second, because spraying money around in search of a headline, as our predecessors so often did, would make the problem of inflation worse not better.
That’s why through the past year, we have focused on providing responsible cost-of-living relief that delivers an economic dividend.
Taking pressure off families, without putting pressure on inflation.
Helping people through adversity, in a way that builds for our future productivity and prosperity.
This is what ties together the $23 billion in cost-of-living relief our government is delivering.
A targeted and comprehensive plan that has actually taken half a point off inflation through the year.
Starting with cheaper child care.
Making child care more accessible and affordable is an economic reform that boosts productivity and participation for working women in particular.
It has also delivered real and immediate help for around 1.2 million family budgets, since July.
Child care costs decreased by 13 per cent in the September quarter.
Without our reforms, it is estimated they would have increased by 6.7 per cent.
It’s the same story for Energy Bill Relief.
We brought together State and Territory Governments to agree on $3 billion in direct help for over 5 million households and 1 million small businesses.
And we coupled this with action to shield industry and households from the worst of global price spikes.
As a result, the Australian Energy Regulator has found that average wholesale electricity prices for the September quarter were less than half those seen at the same time last year.
But if our opponents had succeeded in blocking energy bill relief – as they sought to do, all the way along – then households would be paying hundreds of dollars more than they are today.
That’s the difference between taking action – and saying no.
Between making a positive difference – and relentless negativity.
We see it in housing too.
We know there are pressure points across the housing market at the moment – for renters, mortgage holders and aspiring home-owners.
That’s why we brought together the States and Territories to agree on the most comprehensive set of housing reforms in a generation - to boost supply, deliver a better deal for renters, unlock new land and accelerate approvals.
Alongside which, we have delivered the biggest increase in Commonwealth Rent Assistance in 30 years.
And the biggest investment in affordable and social housing for more than a decade, with our $10 billion Housing Australia Future Fund which I’m pleased to say commenced yesterday.
This is all about helping with the cost of living now – and building more affordable, well-located homes for the future.
In health care, our two waves of reform on Cheaper Medicine have seen Australians save over $180 million on 16 million cheaper scripts.
The Medicare Urgent Care Clinics we have opened in suburbs and regions around Australia have already seen over 59,000 presentations.
Importantly, those are 59,000 visits not made to hospital emergency departments under pressure.
And just yesterday, the biggest investment in Medicare in its 40 year history took effect.
A tripling of the bulk-billing incentive that will help over 11 million Australians see a doctor for free.
This is vital help for individuals and important peace of mind for families.
But strengthening Medicare also strengthens our health system as a whole, supporting our GPs, backing preventative care and taking pressure off our hospitals.
Keeping our people healthy, keeps our economy strong.
And ensuring access to reliable, affordable and quality healthcare is fundamental to my vision for an Australia where no-one is held back and no-one is left behind.
So too is the support we are providing to the most vulnerable in our society.
Including an increase in Jobseeker across the board, with extra help for the long-term unemployed and older Australians looking for work.
And a long overdue expansion of the single parent payment for around 60,000 families, including 52,000 single mums.
No-one left behind means helping those most in need.
No-one held back is about ensuring every Australian has the opportunity to pursue their aspirations.
That’s what expanding Paid Parental Leave is about – greater flexibility and fairness for parents seeking to balance family and career.&nbsp;
And that’s what fee-free TAFE represents.
Yes, it’s valuable help with the cost-of-living, a saving in the thousands of dollars.
It’s also about removing a barrier to aspiration, helping people gain new skills, or re-train for new opportunities.
It’s a chance Australians have grabbed with both hands.
So much so that the 180,000 fee-free places allocated for this year were all filled before September.
Enrolment in these priority courses has now passed 215,000.
Importantly, there are another 300,000 fee-free places being rolled out next year.
This is alongside the new National Skills Agreement we struck with the states and territories last month, the first agreement of its kind since 2012.
A fact that speaks for a decade of neglect in vocational education – and a milestone that shows the priority our government puts on every stage of education.
This brings me to the final element of the work we are doing to make Australia’s economy more resilient and more secure in these uncertain times.
The investments we are making in our future growth and resilience.
Job creation, wages growth and a stronger budget bottom line are vital here and now.
So too is the help we are delivering in health, child care, housing, energy bill relief and direct support.
But our Government never takes its eyes off the future.
That’s why we have made equality for women a central economic priority – because it is central to our future economic success and essential to boosting productivity.
It’s why one of the key outcomes of my visit to the United States last week was building greater collaboration in innovation, cyber security, AI and cloud computing.
Including securing an additional $5 billion investment by Microsoft in Australia and a commitment to train more Australians in new technologies.
It’s why I’m travelling to China this weekend, the next step in the patient, calibrated and deliberate approach we have taken to stabilising our relationship.
It’s why our Government is seeking to build on the tremendous competitive advantage Australia has in resources and critical minerals and convert that to a world-leading position in renewable energy, technology and advanced manufacturing.
That’s the focus of our National Reconstruction Fund - making more things here. A future made in Australia.
Even in the past couple of days, I’ve seen what this looks like for different industries in different parts of the country at the revamped Bundaberg brewery, the re-opening of the Darrell Lea factory in Ingleburn and new Sundrive solar cells coming off the line in Sydney.&nbsp;
Australian businesses backing themselves to sell high quality products and technology to the world.
Moving our nation up the international value chain, boosting our self-reliance and safeguarding us against future instability.
This also requires us to ensure that Australian discoveries and innovations can be taken through the process of commercialisation, here.
So breakthroughs made in Australia, become products made in Australia.
And so we can build greater depth and diversity in our trade partnerships.
Exporting a broader range of products, to a wider spread of markets.
Strengthening our people-to-people connections in our region, including a greater presence for Australian universities especially in nations where the economic relationship has been underdone for too long, whether that’s India or the rapidly-growing economies of ASEAN.
Our nation is no longer at the mercy of the tyranny of distance, we now hold the opportunity of proximity.
And our government wants to make this count.
In areas such as battery manufacturing and using green hydrogen to produce green steel and other products, we are determined to do just that.&nbsp;
I said at the outset that what happens in the world, affects us here in Australia.
We cannot isolate ourselves from the challenges and uncertainties we see around us.
What we can do, what we must do - is invest in our nation’s capacity to meet them.
Because being engaged in the global economy doesn’t mean outsourcing our destiny.
It means backing our people, by helping with the cost-of-living and investing in the skills, knowledge and technology that our workers and businesses need to compete and succeed.
It means strengthening our resilience and self-reliance, so we are better protected from future shocks and better positioned for future opportunities.
There are profound challenges ahead of us, no-one doubts that.
But equally no-one should doubt Australia’s capacity to meet them.
Our Government will continue to do everything we can to help people under pressure, here and now.
While doing everything we must to build our economic security into the future.
That’s been our focus every day of our first 18 months in Government, working for Australia.
And it will remain our focus every day we have the privilege of serving the people of Australia.


State funeral for the Honourable Bill Hayden AC
It is an honour to stand here as Labor Leader, and as Prime Minister, and pay respect to all that Bill Hayden did – for his party, and for the country he loved.
Bill gave the Australian Labor Party the chance of a future. Patiently, humbly, courageously, he gave Labor fresh relevance and new focus.
He made it possible for Labor to return to its core mission of governing in the national interest and lifting the lives of Australians.
Some giants cast a shadow, but Bill Hayden wasn’t one of them. With his quiet strength of character, this legend of the labour movement shone the light that let us see the road ahead.
As we mourn him in death, we celebrate what his life meant in all of its integrity, substance and consequence.
We take heart from all Bill made possible, and every life he changed for the better.
We rejoice in all that he fit into his nine decades – as Governor-General, Minister for Social Security, Treasurer, Foreign Minister and Labor Leader.
As a husband, as a father.
And we give thanks for all he gave to this country he loved so deeply. Not just the scale of his contribution, but its enduring power.&nbsp;
The truth is Bill Hayden didn’t just light the road ahead, he did so much to lay its foundations.
We can be grateful that this child of the Depression turned police officer joined the Australian Labor Party to advance his values.
There must have been times when life in the Labor Party struck Bill as more challenge than solution.
In the aftermath of 1975, he was the last Labor MP left standing in Queensland. He served as Leader through six hard years in Opposition, only to be denied at the last moment the chance to lead the party to an election many believed he would have won.
Understandably, much has been made of how narrowly the prime ministership evaded him. Bill himself ensured its immortality with the most famous dog in Australian history until Bluey.
He may never have resided in the Lodge, but Bill Hayden was the fulcrum on which the Labor Party’s fortunes turned for the better.
In the days since Bill’s passing, just how much we owe him has been so perfectly encapsulated by Paul Keating – and it is an honour to follow him today.
It is a measure of the calibre of both men that even in the very early days, they so completely recognised the qualities in each other – and, crucially, the potential.
As Paul has put it, Bill’s leadership made the turn to “Labor Mark II”, which laid the foundation for the social and economic reforms that created three decades of economic growth and delivered Australia a new era in education, foreign affairs, environmental policy and, of course, universal healthcare.
But before Mark II, Bill had to deal with Mark I.
A party slowly emerging from two decades of opposition after the Split, the high of the 1972 Whitlam election victory, followed by an all too brief time in office, then devastated by the Dismissal.
With clarity, discipline and intellectual rigour, Bill could envision the road along which Labor would have to travel if it was to survive.
As he told Labor’s national conference in 1979, “We will not find our future in the past.”
He knew that earning the public’s trust on economic management was the entry ticket to becoming a credible opposition. And he knew that to be a government that truly meant something, the actions had to speak louder than the words.
As a reforming Minister for Social Security, Bill introduced Medibank, Australia’s first plan for universal healthcare. &nbsp;
As a former police officer who knew all too well how poverty can trap women in violent relationships, he introduced Australia’s first single mother’s pension.&nbsp;
As Foreign Minister, he laid the groundwork for the plan that would finally bring peace to Cambodia.
He was ahead of so many with his advocacy for gay rights.
And, crucially, he empowered a new generation of talent, planting the seeds of what would grow into an extraordinary legacy of reform.&nbsp;
Every step of the way, he had his clear eyes on a stronger future, always seeking out ways to translate his love for Australia into the reality of an even better Australia.
A humble man in a field rich with ego, he never lost his faith in our party’s capacity to improve our country. Nor did he ever doubt Australia’s ability to make a difference in the world.
And throughout all the ups and all the downs, he never lost his sense of humour.
He never lost sight of what mattered.
On behalf of the Labor family, I express my deepest sympathies to his family, who so generously shared him, especially his beloved Dallas.
Dallas, you and Bill were each other’s great fortune.
To Georgina, Ingrid, Kirk, and to all other family members, our sincerest condolences.
We give thanks for the life of a remarkable Queenslander.
A great Australian.
And a profoundly good human being.
May Bill Hayden rest in peace.
Ends


It’s a great pleasure to be in your company here in this most extraordinary of cities.
It is a very particular honour to be here as Prime Minister 50 years after Gough Whitlam became the first Australian Prime Minister to visit China.
Establishing diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic was one of Prime Minister Whitlam’s priorities when he came to power, followed by the signing of the first trade agreement between our two countries.
It was a turning point in the long story between our nations.
And the beating heart of our relationship is conversation. Australians and Chinese, talking to each other.
Few things help that better than travel to each other’s countries. To get a glimpse into each other’s lives and cultures, to see the places we have built, and the landscapes that have helped to shape us.
That is just one of the reasons tourism is so important.
In 2019, China was Australia’s No 1 tourism market. With the travel between China and Australia resuming this year we are so excited about the return of Chinese travellers – you have been greatly missed.
That’s why we launched our tourism global tourism campaign here. Our message to travellers is to ‘Come and Say G’day’ – to experience our unique natural beauty, to taste the flavours of Australia and, of course, to meet our people.
We look forward to welcoming you to Australia.
Tourism, of course, is one facet of the economic ties that are the keystone of our relationship.
China is our largest trading partner and will remain so for the foreseeable future, even as we – like all countries – work to diversify our trade.
Since the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement’s entry into force, Australian exports to China have more than doubled – while Chinese exports to Australia have increased by 78 per cent. This has benefitted businesses and consumers in both countries.
Our economic relationship has raised living standards for both of us.
Indeed the story of China’s development is extraordinary – and I’m proud to say Australia has been a part of that story.
Chinese consumers have long been enamoured with Australian goods and services – from our resources, to our high quality foods, to our education system.
Consumers here have high expectations – and they know they can be confident Australia will meet those expectations.
The ongoing strength of our economic partnership means we have a stake in China’s future success.
Foreign investment from China will also continue to contribute to Australia’s growth and the creation of Australian jobs.
Australia is committed to free, fair and open trade. And just as we welcome companies from all over the world, our companies want to compete on a level playing field no matter where they do business.
It is in both our countries’ interests for any impediments to be removed. Importantly, progress has been made, and I am pleased by China’s recent decisions on Australian barley and hay, and that we are now on a path to restore our wine trade.
But there is more work to do.
I am here to talk to my counterparts about where we can co-operate:

To tackle climate change
To innovate to deal with shared challenges in our agriculture sectors, and
To build on our longstanding collaboration in the arts sector.

As we look to the future, we must always bear in mind how much we can do together.
In the 50 years since our two nations resumed their conversation, the relationship has grown and changed. But it remains a relationship based on respect, maturity, and mutual benefit.
Australia will co-operate where we can, disagree where we must and engage in our national interest.
Engaging is crucial. We will keep talking because dialogue is fundamental to building understanding and making our respective views clear.
Dialogue with China is vital to helping secure peace, prosperity and security in our region and globally, and to navigate the challenges and opportunities our region will face this century.
Our two nations have shown what we can do when we work together. We have shown it in the past, I know we can show it even more compellingly in the future.
Ends


Premier of the People’s Republic of China, Your Excellency Li Qiang.
Excellencies,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be with you at the China International Import Expo today.
This is my seventh visit to the People's Republic of China, but my first as Prime Minister of Australia.
And it is wonderful to be back here in this extraordinarily beautiful global city of Shanghai.
And I am delighted to see so many Australian business represented at this important event, and to be in the presence of people – from both sides of the relationship – who make success possible.
This year we mark three important 50th anniversaries.
The Whitlam Government’s establishment of Australia’s first embassy here in the People’s Republic of China.
The signing of the first trade agreement between our two nations.
And 50 years ago to the day, Gough Whitlam became the first Australian Prime Minister to visit China.
In the half century since, both our economies have transformed and modernised and diversified in ways that our predecessors could not have imagined.
Both our nations have benefited from a region that has grown and prospered, become more open and interconnected – a region that has been stable and peaceful.
Both our societies have gained from tourism and educational exchange, from innovators and small business operators.
And our trade in goods and services has nearly doubled since the China Australia Free Trade Agreement came into force – making more and more high quality Australian products available to consumers in China, and providing key inputs for Chinese businesses.
When we consider all the good that has flowed from those decisions half a century ago, it is a triple anniversary well worth celebrating.
It is just one chapter in what is a big and deeply exciting story.
And that story is that this region is growing faster than any other in human history.
And thanks to both Australia’s privilege of proximity, and our dynamism as a nation, we are well placed to add to the quality – and to the staying power – of that growth.
Our engagement benefits Australia but it also benefits our region.
As Australians, we take our place on the world stage seriously, with a strong emphasis on the contribution we can make in the Indo Pacific.
Whether it’s our iron ore, our beef, our technology, or our greatest asset – our people – Australia has so much to offer.
We are a key supplier of energy to Asia, including China, Japan and South Korea.
We export natural resources right around the Pacific Rim.
We have a global market for our agricultural products.
We are a provider of first-class services, particularly in health and education.
Our fast-growing tech sector is one of the largest in the southern hemisphere.
We are a reliable, high-quality supplier of commodities, including in agriculture, minerals and energy.
And we are ready to use our strength in critical minerals – as well as our abundant sun and wind resources — to support a secure and stable energy transition for the region.
All of this is so important. It is the lens through which we see so much of the future – for us as a nation, and for all of us as a region.
Australia’s relationship with China is a key part of all of this.
It is a mature relationship, energised by the complementary nature of our economies.
Along with the other economies in our region, Australia and China have prospered thanks to the certainty and stability that is made possible by rules-based trade.
Every country has a role to play in advancing trade that is both sustainable and inclusive. These are goals we can achieve through our domestic policies, and through fostering open and inclusive regional and international architecture.
There is, of course, also an important role for government to play in creating the right conditions for business to innovate and thrive, and helping business take advantage of market opportunities.
We do that by eliminating unnecessary barriers to trade and investment by fostering a level playing field and by working towards inclusive economic growth.
These are principles that have long been the foundation of Australia’s economy, giving it a dynamism and a resilience that has helped it weather some serious storms.
And even in this time of global uncertainty, Australia’s trade in goods and services reached a record level in 2022-23.
But it is not a success we guard jealously or try to keep to ourselves. It’s a success we want to share with the rest of the world. That is why Australia promotes free trade and open markets.
It’s why Australia will continue to be a constructive player in global economic architecture. Like China, we value our place at the table in the G20, APEC and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership.
And it’s why we continue to highly value the World Trade Organisation, whose role as an independent and respected umpire benefits us all.
The framework of trade rules provides certainty and opportunity for redress if problems arise.
The success of economies cannot be guaranteed, but we know that international trade benefits the lifting of global living standards.
And we know that constructive economic engagement between countries helps to build relationships and understanding – both of common interests, and where there are differences.
That is why the Government I lead will continue to work with China.
As the business people in this room understand so well, it is in all of our interests to have a relationship where there is dialogue.
I look forward to seeing the businesses represented here at the China International Import Expo building even stronger ties between our nations. You’ve already shown us what is possible.
Ends


PRESIDENT XI JINPING, PRESIDENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: Prime Minister, it's so nice to welcome you to Beijing.
And the Ministers and other members of the Australian delegation.
Before taking office you visited China many times.
After taking office, you've been working to stabilise and improve relations with China.
This visit shows the great importance you attach to relations with China.
Mr Prime Minister, your visit this time is of double significance.
This year, you celebrate the 50th anniversary of the first visit to China by an Australian Prime Minister, The Honourable Edward Gough Whitlam.
In China we often say when drinking water, we should not forget those who dug the well.
The Chinese people will not forget Prime Minister Whitlam for digging the well for us.
And now, we are embracing a new 50 year in China-Australia relations.
So, your visit this time is highly significant, as it builds on the past and ushers in the future.
Last year, we met for the first time in Bali, Indonesia.
We had a very good conversation.
You said back then that between Australia and China, there are extensive common interests and the two sides should advanced cooperation in a more harmonious way to achieve mutual benefit.
And that left me a deep impression.
This is also what we want.
Mutual benefit.
Back then, we both agreed to engage with each other in a more mature way between the two countries.
Now, with joint efforts of both sides, we've been resuming our exchanges in various views and worked out some problems.
Now, the China Australia relationship has embarked on the right path of improvement and development.
I'm heartened to see that.
A healthy and stable China-Australia relationship serves the common interests of our two countries and two peoples.
It also meets the common expectation of countries in our region.
It is important that we keep moving forward the comprehensive strategic partnership between our two countries.
Thank you. Those are my opening remarks.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well, thank you very much President Xi for your very warm welcome here in Beijing.
This is my seventh visit to China, but my first as Prime Minister.
And I regard it as a great honour to be welcomed here in the Great Hall of the Peoples.
Allow me to first express my very deep and sincere condolences on the passing of former Premier Li Keqiang and acknowledge his great contribution to the bilateral relationship between the People's Republic of China and Australia.
President Xi, as you said, it is almost a year since we met in Bali.
At that time, both in the formal meeting and in the other discussions that we had, we agreed that we would take the relationship forward in the mutual interests of both of our countries.
And the progress we have made in advancing our relationship over that time has been unquestionably very positive.
Trade is flowing more freely to the benefit of both countries.
We've started a range of dialogues and the tempo of bilateral visits is increasing.
We can, of course, today take up the opportunity to explore how we can have further cooperation between our two countries.
This is indeed a historic time for me.
50 years ago, to this very day, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was here in China, the first Australian Prime Minister to visit.
And this morning, I visited the Temple of Heaven to retrace the steps that Mr Whitlam took at that time.
As you said very well, I do like China's phrases, he dug the well from which the people of Australia and the people of China have been able to drink to our mutual benefit.
It is also 50 years since the first trade agreement was reached between our two countries.
And that relationship has been positive.
It was motivated by his view of Australia's place in the region, but also about the important position of China, and that cooperation between our two peoples would be natural and beneficial.
And can I say that in that 50 years, the remarkable achievement of China in lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty deserves respect and praise.
Australia, along with other countries in the region, has an interest in continued stable growth in the Chinese economy, and its ongoing engagement with the world.
And I believe that we can all benefit from the greater understanding that comes from high level dialogue and people to people links.
And that a strong relationship between our two countries will be beneficial into the future.
Where differences arise, it's important that we have communication.
From communication comes understanding.
So, President Xi, can I thank you very much for the invitation from the Premier and the Government of China to visit. And for your warm hospitality here and in Shanghai, which coincided with the world's largest trade event there.
I look forward to another productive exchange today.


CHAIRMAN ZHAO LEJI, CHAIRMAN OF THE NATIONAL PEOPLE'S CONGRESS STANDING COMMITTEE: The Honourable Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, it's a great pleasure to meet with you.
On behalf of the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China, I wish to extend a warm welcome to you.
During your first term, as senator, you visited China twice.
After you took office as Prime Minister, you're dedicated to stabilising and developing China Australia relations. I do appreciate that.
China and Australia are both important countries in the Asia Pacific.
The sound and steady growth of China Australia relations meet the fundamental interests of our two peoples.
It is also conducive to promoting peace, stability and prosperity in the Asia Pacific and beyond.
Over the past year, with our joint efforts, China Australia relations have continued to improve and develop.
Our exchanges in various areas gradually resumed and has shown good momentum of growth.
This has not come easily. And thus we must cherish it all the more.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of Prime Minister Whitlam's visit to China. Next year will be the 10th anniversary of President Xi Jinping's state visit to Australia and the establishment of a comprehensive strategic partnership of our two countries.
So, now we're at a new starting point.
China is ready to work with Australia to improve and develop our relations.
To enhance mutual trust, strengthen exchanges, expand cooperation, consolidate a friendship, so as to deliver greater benefits to our two countries and peoples.
Now, I wish to hear your views and suggestions, Mr Prime Minister.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well, thank you very much, Chairman Zhao, it is a pleasure to be meeting you here in Beijing today.
I appreciate the warm welcome I’ve received in China.
Allow me to first express my deep condolences at the passing of former Premier Li Keqiang and acknowledge his great contribution to the bilateral relationship between Australia and the People's Republic of China.
My visit is about taking forward our important partnership. Our proximity, our economic complementarities and our close people-to-people ties have brought many benefits to both our countries.
My visit here marks the anniversary of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam’s first visit from an Australian Prime Minister here to China.
As you have said, This is not my first visit, this is my seventh visit to China.&nbsp;But it is my first as Prime Minister, and I'm very honoured to be here.
The visit of Prime Minister Whitlam carried great significance, it symbolised the potential of the relationship and the beginning of engagement.
That engagement has brought benefits for both of our countries.
And Chairman Zhao, I'm very pleased to be able to be here to convey that directly to you.
I hope we can continue in that positive spirit embodied by Prime Minister Whitlam's visit for the next 50 years and beyond.
There is so much we can do together - including to address shared challenges such as climate change and environmental management.
There will be differences, but these will need to be navigated wisely and with respect.
I believe that we all benefit from the greater understanding that comes from high-level dialogue.
Chairman Zhao, I very much look forward to our discussion today.


I rise to pay tribute to Helena Carr, who passed away suddenly while travelling in Europe with her beloved husband and life partner, Bob.
Helena did not hold public office, but she was held in great respect and esteem by all who knew her.
Among those who gathered at St Mary’s Cathedral in her memory today were Premier Chris Minns, former prime ministers Paul Keating and Malcolm Turnbull, and, fittingly, a host of former premiers. Not least Mike Rann, who flew from Europe to be present.
Given Helena’s modesty, we can only wonder how she might have reacted.
It was a modesty matched by equally innate talents.
At one point in her impressive career, she was managing director of security printing firm Leigh-Mardon, which at the time had 1100 employees and an annual turnover of $160 million – and that’s in 1990 dollars.
Likewise, her shyness was coupled with a great inner strength. Once, when an overwhelmed Bob was tempted to pack it in as opposition leader, it was Helena who put him back on track.
That didn’t mean she had an appetite for every aspect of political life.
In 1991, amid speculation that Premier Nick Greiner was about to call an election, Helena was told to get ready to stand by Bob’s side.
As Helena recalled to me, she walked up Martin Place praying Nick wouldn’t do it. That particular prayer was destined to go unanswered.
Election campaigns were not something Helena was naturally inclined towards, but she threw herself into it anyway, a happy warrior standing by Bob’s side through all the slings and arrows.
It was a path she kept following, including for the seven years Bob served as Opposition Leader, his decade as Premier, then his period as Senator and Minister for Foreign Affairs.
As a product of Catholic schooling myself, I can only imagine that some of Helena’s strength came from the nuns who taught her.
First at the convent school in Taiping, Malaysia, then at Our Lady of Mercy College in Parramatta, where she was welcomed by the girls and nuns alike. Helena would have been deeply touched that some of the nuns from OLMC attended today’s funeral.
Even after all these decades, it remains remarkable to think Helena was among the first generation of Asian migrants to win permanent residency as the old White Australia policy disintegrated, a process that began under Harold Holt, and finalised under Gough Whitlam.
Indeed, four of her five siblings and their families have settled here.
Helena made friends easily at school and at university, excelled at every undertaking.
We are lucky that Helena chose this country. Malaysia’s loss was Australia’s gain, and Australia’s gain was Bob’s greatest fortune.
Bob and Helena Carr made a whole world together.
Amid the tragedy of Helena’s sudden passing, Bob channelled his grief into a public tribute, a powerful declaration of unconditional love at a time when there is too much hate in the world. In it Bob wrote:
She was the light of my life, the little friend always there. No one ever smiled more, or with more spirit. It is inconceivable I could have won office for my party and held the premiership for over 10 years without the steadiness of her companionship, her sense of fun and her lambent eyes. …
The light has gone out of my life. I know many have faced this challenge, the loss of a life partner, the journey no one wishes. One reason to trying is my sense she is there telling me to go on for her.
Perhaps it’s fitting that the last opera she saw – on that final, perfect day with Bob in Vienna – was Donizetti’s The Elixir of Love.
Wrapped up in the beauty of the music, the great theme at its heart is the triumph of sincerity. And it leaves everyone – cast and audience alike – uplifted into happiness.
So perfectly Helena.
May we all hold on to her glow. And may Helena Carr rest in peace.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, great to catch up, again, Justin and great to have an informal chat last night. We have economies that are so similar. We have a bit in common as well about our histories and our culture and our values, I think are very similar. We appreciate the fact that you're big investors in Australia as well through your pension funds, big investors in our infrastructure, and there's a huge opportunity as our economies transition. Historically, we've both been very, very much benefited our growth from fossil fuels. But we're in a global transition to clean energy economies and Australia and Canada both have great resources and critical minerals and the things that will drive the economies in in this century. We can talk as well about how that cooperation can occur as we go forward. And tragically, just as we're working on the transition and the response to climate change, we're also talking occasionally about the cooperation that we have about the reality of climate change with the wildfires you've just had and the fact that Australians, I'm very proud that Australians were there once again to help Canada, just as Canadians have been in Australia. We are very worried about our upcoming summer. We have all the conditions that were there prior to 2019-20. And indeed, the fact that that period has gone means you've got the growth that just about the right size, elements, conditions to really be concerned with very dry, hot period coming up for us. But many of the companies that are engaged in our countries are the same ones, of course, Rio Tinto and companies like that dealing with the same issues going forward. And of course we meet at a time where we continue to have uncertainty in the world. I know that your foreign minister and my foreign minister have a great relationship, talking about the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the impact that that's had on inflation and the global economy, but also now in the Middle East as well. The concern that we have from the terrorist attack by Hamas and then our concern about the humanitarian impact that is occurring in Gaza as well and how we find that long term solution, clearly the international community have to play a role in providing a lasting peace in that troubled part of the world so we have a lot to talk about today. And it's always great to be able to catch up.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It’s wonderful to be at the Ethnic Business Awards tonight.
I’ve attended many of these galas over the decades — and, let me say, it always feels like coming home to a great extended family.
I look around this room and I see high achievers and people who inspire.
First among equals are Joseph and Angela Assaf, who worked so hard to get this event off the ground, and have kept it going ever since.
Many of you know Joseph’s remarkable story.
His journey from Beirut to Darwin in 1967 – what an extraordinary change that must have been.
And the mix-up at the airport in Lebanon, which meant he landed in Australia wearing another man’s shoes.
Joseph knows about walking a mile in another’s shoes – quite literally.
He knows the migrant experience.
He understands the uncertainty that turns to hope,&nbsp;the loneliness eased by community,&nbsp;the risk answered by success.
And he sees the potential in those who have lived it.
I know that potential, too.
In my first 18 months as Prime Minister, I have crisscrossed this country.
I’ve stood in the red dust of the Pilbara.
On factory floors from Ingleburn to Bundaberg.
In places of industry, manufacturing, education and commerce.
I’ve spoken to people where they live, work and dream.
And I’ve seen what a future made in Australia looks like.
A future of seizing opportunity — not being at the mercy of chance.
Of responding to challenges — not being defined by setbacks.
Of joining up intelligence, imagination and drive and letting the sparks of innovation ignite our economy.
Of shaping the future – not being shaped by it.
I see that future every year at these awards.
This gathering brings together our nation’s greatest resource: our people.
And acclaims our greatest national asset: our multiculturalism.
Telling the stories of business owners.
Celebrating their origins and achievements.
Applauding the families and communities they live among.
And creating an enduring record of entrepreneurial spirit.
It’s a record built on the thousands of stories that the Ethnic Business Awards has shared over the decades.
Stories that are the soul of this evening, and the heart of multicultural Australia.
Stories that includes the strong, diverse and growing portfolio of enterprises run by Indigenous Australians.
For more than 10 years, these awards have recognised the achievements and raised the profiles of a growing number of Indigenous Australian–owned businesses.
Operating in industries across Australia in mining and project management, in education and training, in electrical and engineering.
These business champions are making a remarkable and ongoing contribution to Australia’s economic strength and our national success.
Like all the award winners throughout the decades, tonight we honour people and businesses for making a positive difference.
Hard-working people, from every part of the world, who are providing much-needed services training and up-skilling our workforce, and offering women opportunities to lead and thrive in every industry.
The Ethnic Business Awards are guided by a few core principles.
That success follows where recognition leads.
That connection and inclusion are nourished by knowledge and understanding.
And that the joy we find in our diversity is what makes us the nation we are today.
Never just settling for tolerance – that’s far too low a bar – but celebrating each other, and taking pride in the breadth and the cohesion that are our greatest strengths.
It is a strength we can never take for granted, but must hold on to and protect.
The world is in a turbulent place right now. Our values are being tested. Many in our diverse community are feeling worried and anxious.
That's why the role you all play as leaders is so important. We have a responsibility to bring people together – and moments to come together like this matter.
They matter to all Australians.
I know that I’ll leave here tonight inspired, as I do every year.
So congratulations to you all.
Thank you for everything you do.
Thank you for your energy. Your drive. And your vision.
You make our nation stronger.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Abram Goldberg OAM for his words and his presence.
I am grateful for your invitation to be here with you today to open the Melbourne Holocaust Museum. It is an honour as great as it is solemn. And its importance cannot be overstated. Especially now.
This Museum stands because we must never forget the Holocaust. Not the scale of it, not the depths of its cruelty. A savagery that was long in the planning and cold in its calculation.
It is to the great credit of all who shared the vision for this Museum, the architects who made it possible, and the builders who made it real.
Within its walls, quiet dignity co-exists with awful truths, each one of them giving meaning to the words we keep repeating: Never again.
Those are words that stand on the foundation of memory.
But memory must be a conscious act – as this museum is. Like a flame, memory must be carefully tended and nurtured. And it must be passed on.
In the words of that great scholar of Judaism, Jacob Neusner:
Civilisation hangs suspended, from generation to generation, by the gossamer strand of memory.
If only one cohort of mothers and fathers fails to convey to its children what it has learned from its parents, then the great chain of learning and wisdom snaps.
If the guardians of human knowledge stumble only one time, in their fall collapses the entire edifice of knowledge and understanding. 
The guardians of knowledge have been so surefooted here.
For many Australians, the Holocaust is family history.
And it became part of our nation’s story.
Some 9000 Jewish refugees from Central Europe found asylum in Australia before the outbreak of World War II.
Among them was Gerda Cohen, the grandmother of the member for McNamara, Josh Burns. And the composer George Dreyfus, who is the father of the Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus. I’m very pleased to say George is with us today.
We consider how much that generation alone has contributed to the story of modern Australia.
Then consider the contribution that generations of Jews have made to Melbourne, the city that is home to the highest per capita population of Holocaust survivors outside Israel.
Acts of philanthropy, humanity and generosity, all driven by a powerful instinct to elevate and expand the life of this great, multicultural city.
It is an instinct that has been coupled with an equally innate desire to support community and support education, nourishing the aspirations of the next generation.
Then consider how much the Holocaust robbed from the world. How much energy, how much potential, how much inspiration and talent.
Such a vast multitude of life. Along with six million Jews – a number that falls across the decades like a shadow – this museum tells the story of the other victims of the Nazi regime.
There was no pity. No mercy. No humanity.
The scale of what happened – of what was done, what was perpetrated – means that for Jewish people especially, the Holocaust is not softened by the passing of time. It does not recede into history. It does not offer the one, slender comfort of distance.
Since the atrocities of October 7, Jewish Australians have been bearing a pain you should never have had to bear again. And you are feeling fear. Anxious that the long shadows of the past have crept into the present.
That should not be happening in a land that offered refuge then – and embraces you now.
As the conflict continues, antisemitism is on the rise. But we will not let it find so much as a foothold here. Australia will always denounce it and reject it utterly, just as we do all forms of racism and prejudice.
My Government is acting to make it clear there is no place in Australia for symbols that glorify the horrors of the Holocaust. And there is no place for those who seek to profit from the trade in these evil symbols, or use them to promote their hatred.
We owe it to our multicultural society, our Jewish community, and our survivors.
I turn to the words of Holocaust survivor Peter Gaspar, who lost 40 members of his extended family. And I quote:
The Holocaust didn’t start with gas chambers and murders and executions. It started with stereotyping, prejudice, discrimination, hate speech …
Those are words to heed. Every day.
What the Holocaust Museum so powerfully reminds us is that when we maintain meaningful contact with the past, we give ourselves our best chance of ensuring it doesn’t become our future.
To make the words ring true as we repeat them: Never again.
This Museum keeps memory alive for every visitor who steps through its doors.
I am honoured to declare it officially open.


Thank you, Prime Minister Modi, and good evening.
The G20 is the premier forum for global economic cooperation on shared challenges, and for pursuing strong, sustainable and inclusive growth.
Growth to lift living standards, to create secure, well-paid jobs, and to generate opportunities for all our people.
The greatest foundation for strong, sustainable and inclusive growth is peace and stability.
We see all too clearly what happens in the absence of that foundation. The New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration expresses our deep concern about the immense human suffering and all the other adverse impacts of wars and conflicts around the world.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine must end. Australia is also deeply concerned by the conflict in the Middle East.
Australia has consistently called for the release of hostages, for humanitarian access, and for the protection of civilian lives.
We have wanted to see the next steps towards a sustainable ceasefire which cannot be one-sided.
What we see today is progress towards each of these goals and we welcome it.
Recent and ongoing circumstances are a reminder of that unshakeable equation: that insecurity in one part of the world affects us all.
Our inter-connectedness as a community of nations goes beyond traditional security.
If we are to achieve strong, sustainable and inclusive growth, we must rise to meet the challenge of climate change.
But amid all the discussion of the climate threat, Australia also sees the opportunity it presents in the form of a future powered by clean energy. We see the sustainable growth that is possible for all economies if we work together and navigate the energy transition wisely.
Prime Minister Modi, I congratulate you for focusing attention on this important issue.
We must accelerate climate action.
In Australia, we have legislated our emissions reduction targets.
We are making transformational investments in cleaner energy, and laying the groundwork for our future as a renewable energy superpower.
And we are supporting global efforts, as well as more targeted regional efforts, to respond to the climate finance needs of our neighbours. This includes supporting the newly established, locally built Pacific Resilience Facility.
This is a new mechanism that the countries of the South Pacific, including the smallest and most vulnerable island states, have built to respond more directly to their adaptation needs.
Australia also recently entered a ground-breaking agreement with Tuvalu, the Falepili Union, to provide assistance with climate adaptation.
These global and local efforts are crucial. But we can make them even stronger if we reform the multilateral economic architecture to better meet the challenges of our times.
The New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration commits us to work together to deliver better, bigger and more effective Multilateral Development Banks.
MDBs that work better as a system – coordinating finance, sharing best practices and pooling risks.
MDBs that better harness their own balance sheets, and crowd-in the capital, innovation and efforts of the private sector.
All in the interest of making it easier for countries to get access to support they need.
The New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration offers us a path forward to address these important global economic and development issues.
I want to thank you again, Prime Minister Modi, for your leadership.
I look forward to continuing the agenda with President Lula throughout Brazil’s presidency. 


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, thanks for joining us.
And it gives me enormous pleasure to welcome you to the first Executive Cyber Council, an initiative of our Cyber Security Strategy that we've put in place between now and 2030.
Clare and I attended a meeting here, would have been six months or so ago, I think, at the beginning of the year, with members of the business community where we discussed this process, which is the end period.
So, I want to welcome the business leaders, the people from ASD and other institutions as well who are here and thank you for your participation on it.
We need to be very positive, I think, about the future.
But we need to be pragmatic about it as well.
We know that in today's world with fast moving technology, it provides enormous opportunities for productivity benefits, the growth of AI, all the things that have transformed our lives and made it easier, but in other ways have left us far more vulnerable, as well, which is why we need to be very clear-eyed about the challenges, but also the opportunities that lie ahead of us.
In February was the roundtable here with industry peaks. And we spoke about the importance of government working with business and civil society to tackle the immense challenge that we face and to build up cyber resilience.
Since then, there have been events that are well-known to all of you. But more importantly, I think, with respect to all of us, well-known to people out there who are customers and who've been impacted directly.
So, there's a much greater consciousness about where we're at now and what we need to do going forward.
And it's very clear that there's no room for complacency when it comes to this.
And the Government's vision is certainly that what we want is not just for us to keep up, we want us to be ahead of the rest of the world in this response. Because the other thing is, is that there'll be business opportunities from new products and from new developments as well if we get this right in our region.
And given the natural advantages that we have, with the workforce that we have, the skills that we have, the secure, legal framework that we have as well and a political system that is stable, we have, I think, a great deal of advantages.
Cyber security, of course, isn't just about privacy violations.
We know that can be devastating for people. We saw that with the health sector at one stage. We saw last week the disruption that can occur with our infrastructure as well going forward, which is why we had the heads of our security agencies as part of this process.
So, we must maintain, adapt and evolve our cyber security.
And as in so many other areas of national life, business has a vital role in this.
But we want to also be showing Government leadership, which is why our Ministers here are going to lead this.
As I said, acting to meet the challenges will also create opportunities.
Opportunities for new products to emerge from innovations which create jobs and economic benefit.
And this is whenever we discuss these issues more and more, it is at the forefront.
There's a G20 Leaders Meeting tonight, virtually commencing at 11pm. There are some disadvantages in being located where we are in the world. Anyone who wants to pop along to that are welcome to come where I'll be online into the early hours of the morning.
But it is something that's really recognised.
When we talk about our national security and our national interest, we increasingly talk about defence and military assets in the traditional sense.
But increasingly, we're talking about cyber as well because of the economic impact that it can have.
So, thank you, to everyone here for the skills and knowledge and experience that you're bringing here.
This is a very serious group of people. And I thank you for your participation.
I thank Clare for her leadership in this.
And I thank the agencies who are here as well for the work that they do. You will have seen a significant increase in funding for the security agencies, particularly ASD, but also other agencies as well who are represented here.
And that's because we regard this as an absolute priority.
So, thank you very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Lieutenant General Simon Stuart, Chief of Army.
Vice Admiral Mark Hammond, Chief of Navy.
Members of the Diplomatic Corps.
Representatives of the Silentworld Foundation.
Shadow Minister for Defence, Andrew Hastie for whom I know tonight holds special meaning.
And most importantly, all of you with a personal connection to those whom we commemorate this evening.
It is a privilege to be here with you tonight, in a place dedicated to the memory of all those who have served our nation to join in honouring your loved ones and forebears.
To pay respect to their service and sacrifice and to fulfil the solemn promise Australia owes to all those who gave their tomorrows for our today.
We will remember them.
The Australian War Memorial was conceived and designed in recognition of that duty.
And so many of you here tonight have done so much to live up to those words, to demonstrate the eternal value and enduring meaning of Lest We Forget.
Whether it be the extraordinary achievement of finding the final resting place of the Montevideo Maru or the many years spent advocating for a rightful place for this tragedy in our national story and a fitting place for commemorating those lost.  
Yours has been a long search for due recognition and a long vigil in service of your loved ones’ memories.
Australia – and at least 14 countries who lost some of their own on 1 July 1942, so many of whom are represented here tonight - owe you and your determination a great debt.
Thank you all.
On the 28th of April 1942, in the midst of a Japanese bombing raid on Port Moresby one bomber dropped four mailbags instead.
They fell from the sky trailing white streamers, inside were 395 letters from Australian members of Lark Force.
These soldiers had been sent to the town of Rabaul in the then‑Australian territory of New Guinea in 1941 by a Government that knew if an invasion came, a force of this size would have little hope of holding it back.
The letters were from those who survived that brief and overwhelming battle against the Japanese forces in January of 1942.
Prisoners of war and civilian internees.
All malnourished, many gravely ill.
Captive in some of the most brutal conditions imaginable.
Yet their only thoughts were for those at home.
Providing words of reassurance and hope, love and comfort.
“Please do not worry about me, as I am alright.”
“Don’t know when I’ll be able to write again, but keep your chin well up my beloved.”
“Look after yourself. I love you. Kiss Vicki for me.”
“I hope this letter will stop you worrying yourself.”
“Keep the old bike in good nick, as I will need it again.”
“Don’t worry. Cheerio.”
These letters were written by factory workers and farmhands, sporting stars and members of the Salvation Army Band.
They were addressed to wives and sweethearts, brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers in Claremont and Middle Park, Murrabit and Traralgon.
By the time they worked their way through the censors and the wartime bureaucracy and arrived in letterboxes and on doorsteps in September of 1942 all the men who wrote them – and hundreds more - were already gone.
For what must have been an unbearably long time after that, there was only silence.More than 1000 dead.
Australia’s worst maritime disaster, in our nation’s darkest hour – and nothing but rumours to go on.  
Even peacetime did not bring peace.
Earlier this month, Vicki Freeman told the ABC she remembered her mum taking her down to the wharf, to watch the troopships coming in.
The tears in her mother’s eyes, as she looked for the husband she knew was missing, but still hoped to find.
Doss Heffer, who was only three years old when her father Don left for war in 1940, spoke about how she and her sister would say to each other:
“Maybe he’ll come home…maybe he’ll walk through the door.”
It was not until October of 1945, more than three years after those last letters from Rabaul arrived that official telegrams informed families their loved ones: “became missing” on July 1, 1942 and were presumed dead.
Not until 2012, through the release of archival material by the Japanese Government, that the names of those aboard could be confirmed.
Not until the 22nd of April this year that the final resting place of these lost souls was known at last.
I want to conclude with two final accounts that date from after those extraordinary letters home were written.
The first comes from a witness who watched as the Australians boarded the Montevideo Maru on the 22nd of June 1942, bound for a prison camp.
He said:
“They were half starved and ill….with a smile and a cheery wave for those remaining, the stronger supporting the weaker; arm in arm.”
The second story belongs to the last living member of the Japanese crew.
Who, 60 years after that fateful day, spoke of how, as the ship sank groups of Australians clinging to pieces of wreckage in the water, sang Auld Lang Syne for their brothers already below.
Until the end, their thoughts were of others.
Tonight, let us declare again that those lost on the Montevideo Maru shall not be forgotten.
We shall bring them to mind.
We honour them.
We will remember them.
Lest We Forget.


Mr Speaker,
Sixty-two years ago, today, the 29th of November, 1961 was the day thalidomide was withdrawn from sale in Australia.
Every day between then and now, Australians affected by thalidomide have been owed an apology.
Today, at long last, Australia will say sorry.
I want to acknowledge and welcome all the thalidomide survivors and their families here with us in the Parliament.
I extend that same respect to all those watching from afar, here with us in spirit.
You have been survivors from the day you were born.
More than that, you have been advocates, organisers, champions and warriors.
Time and time again you have summoned remarkable resolve, you have shown an extraordinary strength of character.
Yet for so long, parliaments and governments have not proved equal to this, or worthy of it.
Too often, we have let you down.
Today, your presence lifts all of us up.
And together, today, we mark an absence too.
At the conclusion of these proceedings, we will join in a minute’s silence to remember and honour all those this tragedy took from us far too soon.
Because this apology will forever belong to those Australians, as well.
Mr Speaker,
Thalidomide was recommended to pregnant women to help with anxiety, insomnia and morning sickness.
All over the country, expectant mothers were assured by doctors and chemists and advertisements that this drug was perfectly safe, for them and for their baby.
Even though in Australia at that time, there was no meaningful or worthwhile way of knowing if this was true.
There was no system for properly evaluating the safety of medicines.
And the terrible cruelty of thalidomide was that far from being safe.
Just one dose was enough to cause devastating harm.
Just one dose was enough to inflict a lifetime of damage on an unborn child, or indeed cause premature death, either in utero or in the early years.
A survivor named Patricia put it like this:
“Thalidomide is like tossing a stone into the water: it causes a ripple effect. The drug didn't just destroy me; it rippled onto my parents, my siblings, my family, my ambitions, my relationships, my jobs, my earnings, my health—my everything.”
Those ripples ran through lives around our nation. 
Bullying and teasing at school.
Trauma and sadness at home.
Exclusion and rejection when looking for work.
A constant battle against declining health and increasing need.
Hidden struggles and invisible pain.
The thousand different ways that ordinary tasks can be ordeals.
And mothers and fathers and families haunted by a lifetime of undeserved regret.
A regret that could never be reasoned away, because it was fuelled by that all-powerful all-consuming instinct every parent knows that inescapable sense of responsibility for your child’s health and happiness.
So let it be said today, and recorded for all time: these parents, these mothers, did nothing wrong.
These parents did not fail their children. The system failed them both.
Which is why, as so many survivors have requested: the Apology we offer today embraces and includes their parents and their families as well.
Mr Speaker, 
Today, on behalf of the people of Australia, our Government and this Parliament offers a full, unreserved and overdue apology to all thalidomide survivors, their families, loved ones and carers.
This apology takes in one of the darkest chapters in Australia’s medical history.
When expectant mothers, through no fault of their own, were exposed to a drug with devastating effects that were realised far too late.
To the survivors: we apologise for the pain thalidomide has inflicted on each and every one of you, each and every day.
We are sorry.
We are more sorry than we can say.
We are sorry for the harm and the hurt and the hardship you have endured.
We are sorry for all the cruelty you have had to bear.
We are sorry for all the opportunities you have been denied.
We are sorry for the battle you have had to fight – over decades - for fair support and due recognition.
And we are sorry that there are so many who deserved this apology, who have not lived to see this day.
We offer our respect to their memories, and we extend our deepest sympathies to their families and friends.
To the mothers and fathers, today we apologise because you were failed too.
We are sorry you have endured decades of knowing your children’s lives are harder than they should have been.
We are sorry you have suffered your own hurt, even though what happened is not your fault and it never was.
We say sorry, not imagining that these words can resolve the anguish or remove the pain.
We understand an apology does not balance years of inaction and inadequate support.
We know the toll of thalidomide is still felt today, we know it will still be felt tomorrow.
We promise your legacy – and your example - will never be forgotten.
A National Apology was the first recommendation of the 2019 Senate Inquiry, chaired by former Senator Rachel Siewert.
I thank her and the other committee members from across Parliament for their important work.
I recognise the initiative taken by former Prime Minister Morrison and the support his government provided.
But without question, the heroes of those proceedings are the survivors and their families who shared their stories with such searing honesty.
The people who put, on the parliamentary record, a hard truth too long denied.
Their courage demands that at the heart of this national apology must be an acceptance of Australia’s moral responsibility.
So, today, as we express our sorrow and regret, we also acknowledge the inescapable historical facts. 
The fact that even after the grave dangers of this drug were known, importing thalidomide was not prohibited.
Selling it was not banned.
Products and samples in surgeries and shops were not comprehensively recalled or entirely destroyed.
Saying sorry does not excuse this, or erase it. 
There are no words that can undo what has been suffered.  
There is no sum of money that can square the ledger.
But our Australian commitment to a fair go for all, demands that we try.
That’s why the former Government established the Australian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program.
A lifetime support package which includes a one-off lump sum payment in recognition of pain and suffering, as well as ongoing annual payments.
To date, 148 survivors have received this support.
Today, I can confirm our Government is re-opening this program to ensure that anyone who may have missed the previous opportunity to apply does not miss out on the support they need and deserve.
Further to this, for all survivors who currently receive the annual, tax-exempt payment - and any new applicants who qualify for it.
I want to make it clear that from now on, rather than these payments being locked at a particular level, we will act to ensure that support increases through indexation.
One of the Australians who spoke to the inquiry was a woman named Mary.
In November 2018, she said:
“I wasn't really meant to live outside of infancy, and there have been many days throughout my life when I wish I hadn't.”
Imagine that.
And imagine what it takes to share those words with people you’ve never met.   
Mary was one of many survivors who requested a meaningful and public apology from Government.
She also spoke about a ‘lasting memorial’.
As the remarkable Lisa McManus put it:
“Permanent recognition in a place of prominence”.
A monument to acknowledge all those Australians who died prematurely.
To recognise the pain and suffering of survivors and their loved ones.  
And to stand as a tribute to their courage, resilience and perseverance.
A way for Australia to honour all they have endured.
Tomorrow, in Kings Park on the northern shore of Lake Burley Griffin the Minister for Health and Aged Care will formally dedicate the National Site of Recognition for Thalidomide Survivors and their Families.
It will offer a space for reflection and contemplation.
Along with a gateway of glass bricks, chosen by the artist to represent the ripple effect across lives.
And an information display that will tell the story to every visitor.
As survivors have requested, this will be much more than “a plaque in a park”.
It will be a prompt for our collective conscience, a call to our nation’s heart.
It will remind every member and senator and public servant and passer-by of the moral obligation that each of us hold: as representatives, as decision- makers and as Australians.
I conclude today by saying to the survivors, their families and loved ones, here with us and all of you watching or listening around the nation and even overseas.
The people of Australia are offering this apology to you.
And make no mistake, we are offering this apology because of you.
You deserved this apology.
And you made it happen.
Because you fought for what was right.
Because you spoke the hard truth, until it was heard.
Because you knew you deserved better.
And because you continued to demand better - from your government, your Parliament and your country.
For six decades you have had to carry this cause.
Now the challenge is on all of us here, to do better for you.
Together - I know we can, I know we must, I know we will.
I commend the National Apology to all Australians impacted by the Thalidomide Tragedy, to the House.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Parliamentary colleagues, distinguished guests.
Catherine Dovey, Nick and Tony Whitlam
Men and women of the Whitlam Institute and Western Sydney University.  
It’s a great honour to follow the many distinguished Australians who have delivered this Oration, beginning with Prime Minister Gillard in 2011.  
Gough famously warned us against assuming he was immortal.
But this event is just one of many ways in which he remains eternal.
Tonight I want to hold true to the overarching principle and unifying theme of Gough Whitlam’s public life, his great watchwords:
“contemporary relevance”.
Because while Labor has always been a party enriched by our history and inspired by our legends, our mission is the future.
We measure ourselves in Government by the difference we make, to the country and the people we serve.
That’s why, fifty years ago this week, when reflecting on his first year in office, Gough spoke of:
“promises fulfilled and reforms begun”. 
A typically elegant formulation - and also a useful way of thinking about how every Labor Government sets about building a better Australia.
The delivery of our commitments, here and now.
Reinforced by the pursuit of long-term reform, for lasting change.
The continual and evolving challenge for us is to bind them and balance them.
To deal with the pressures in front of us, in a way that builds for the opportunities ahead of us.
To engage with the urgent responsibilities of getting costs down for families, getting wages up for workers and getting the budget onto a stronger foundation while planning and building for an economy, an energy grid, a workforce, a health system and a region that will look fundamentally different in the decades ahead.
A responsible and reforming Government can’t treat these as alternating tasks – or sequential ones.
You have to embrace both and manage both.
You can’t say: Oh, we’ll get around to the future when we’ve dealt with the present.
Because the way we deal with present challenges must anticipate – and create – the future.
That’s the purpose and urgency that drives me and my colleagues, across our four key priorities. 
One, relieving the pressure on families.
Two, strengthening Medicare.
Three, a future made in Australia.
And four, securing our home – and our place in the world.
In all this, to draw upon a favourite Whitlam theme, we do not view our democratic mandate as ‘permission to preside’ we see it as a ‘command to perform’. 
As I told our Caucus on our first day in the Government Party Room after nine long years at the other end of the hallway we’re not here to occupy the space, we are here to change the country.
Of course, that task is rarely easy, swift or uncontested.
“The way of the reformer is hard in Australia”.  
But that’s also how you know it’s a job worth doing.
Because hard work is what endures. Substance is what lasts.
The patient, sometimes painstaking, challenge of making meaningful change.
Change that empowers people, lifts their living standards and nourishes their aspirations.
Change that brings people together, through shared opportunity and shared reward.
Change that prepares our nation to compete and win in the world - as a resilient, skilled, productive, renewable energy superpower. 
Change where our prosperity and security is built by Australians shaping the future, not waiting for the future to shape us.
This means clearing away a legacy of waste and neglect.
It means moving away from thinking only about what can be avoided by isolation, defeated by division or delayed by inaction and embracing a bigger view of what can be achieved through co-operation, purpose and resolve.
This begins with our number one priority - helping Australians with the cost of living.
Our Government will continue to do everything we responsibly can to support people who are under pressure.
Through 2023 we have delivered:
Cheaper medicines. 
Cheaper child care.
Over 214,000 fee-free TAFE places.
Energy bill relief for millions of households and small businesses.
And new investments in the social safety net, with more direct support for the most vulnerable Australians, including single mothers.
We are going to keep working to bring costs down for families – and also to get wages up for workers.
After a decade of economic architecture where low wages were celebrated as a deliberate design feature I’m proud to say that last quarter produced the highest quarterly wages growth on record.
It also marked two consecutive quarters of real wages growth.
And at this event in honour of the Prime Minister who re-opened the Equal Pay case I’m proud to say the number of Australian women participating in full-time work is at a record high – and the gender pay gap is at a record low.
Proof that our support for a strong minimum wage, our actions to promote secure work and gender pay equity and an historic pay rise for aged care workers is making a difference to wages and lives.
Just as importantly, far from wages growth acting as a handbrake on job creation, we’ve demonstrated the two can go together.
Over 620,000 new jobs have been created in 18 months.
The most by any first-term government in Australian history – and we’re only halfway through.
The balance we are striking in all this is important.
Our efforts to take pressure off people have been carefully designed to not to put pressure on inflation.
Cheaper child care is a good example.
It’s valuable help with the family budget.
It’s also an economic reform that will boost productivity and participation and give working parents more choice and flexibility – women in particular.
And it is education reform.
To quote from Australia’s most famous policy speech.
Early education is a means of “equalising and enriching every child’s life”. 
That’s why our long term goal is making early education and care universal and affordable for every Australian family.
Taking pressure off inflation also depends on putting the Budget on a stronger foundation, building a buffer against current and future uncertainty.
The responsible approach that Jim Chalmers and Katy Gallagher have led, has enabled us to turn a $78 billion deficit into a $22 billion surplus - the first in 15 years.
Our second central priority is Strengthening Medicare.
Of course, this helps with the cost of living – but for a Labor Government Medicare will always stand as a pillar of its own.
Through 2023, we have been opening our 58 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics, in growing suburbs and regional communities around Australia.
New facilities, providing peace of mind to families by improving access to medical services outside of ordinary work hours, free of charge so you don’t have to go to an emergency department, to get treatment you need.
The clinics we have already opened have seen 75,000 presentations.
Nearly 1 in 3 patients have been under 15.
Nearly 1 in 3 visits have been on weekends.
On weekdays, more than 1 in 5 visits have been after 6pm. 
This is a practical service that recognises the time and cost pressures on modern families.
And it’s always important to make the point that diverting these cases is better for hospitals and better for health care workers too.
At the beginning of this month, we delivered the biggest investment in Medicare since it was created.
A tripling of the bulk-billing incentive that will make it easier for 11.6 million people to see a GP.
Promises fulfilled, reforms begun. But more to do.
A key priority for 2024 and beyond will be recruiting and retaining more GPs, nurses and health care workers across Australia.
As well as working with National Cabinet to take pressure off public hospitals and secure the future of the National Disability Insurance Scheme so that it can continue to deliver life-changing outcomes for future generations.
The third key theme that defines our Government’s approach is a future made in Australia.
I mentioned before that the Budget surplus acts as a safeguard against international instability.
It’s one vital element.
But an inescapable lesson of the supply shock driven by the pandemic, reinforced by the global energy market consequences of Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine is that Australia’s long-term economic security depends on much more than budget responsibility.
It means strengthening our position in global supply chains.
Revitalising our local manufacturing capacity and the skills of our workforce, so we can move up the international value chain.
The National Reconstruction Fund we took to last year’s election – and legislated this year – is central to this.
And tonight, I am pleased to announce that the Minister for Industry, Ed Husic and the Minister for Finance, Katy Gallagher, have officially signed-off on the fund’s Investment Mandate.
This means – from tomorrow – the National Reconstruction Fund is open for business.
Money in the bank, ready to invest in new jobs, new skills, new technologies and new industries.
Ready for us to make our future here.
And so many of these new opportunities will be powered by renewable energy.
The first time the Parliament sat, we wrote our new 43% emissions reduction target into law.
The entry ticket to meaningful engagement with other nations - in our region in particular.
And a signal to the world that Australia is the right destination for clean energy investment, committed to cutting emissions and creating jobs.
Achieving this goal depends on a whole host of interconnected initiatives, across the economy.
Our Safeguard Mechanism, supporting industry to adopt new technology is part of it.  
And so is Rewiring the Nation, upgrading and modernising the national energy grid, so clean power can get from new projects to Australian homes and businesses.
For a decade, whether it was rooftop solar or large-scale projects, Australia’s move to renewables was happening in spite of the Commonwealth Government.
At every turn, technology was being held back by ideology.
Economic opportunities were being undermined by political opportunism.
We are turning that around.
Last week, we announced that our Government is prepared to underwrite 32 gigawatts of new electricity – 9 gigawatts of storage and 23 gigawatts of generation.
That’s the equivalent of half the entire east coast’s electricity use.
We are working with investors to reduce the risk, because we want more Australians to share in the rewards.
Above all, we understand that this moment of environmental necessity presents us with an unprecedented economic opportunity.
The chance for our critical minerals and clean energy to take us to net zero – and to power a new generation of local manufacturing.
Not just exporting the raw materials for things like batteries and solar technology – but making that technology here, ourselves.
Unlocking the export opportunities of green hydrogen, to help economies in our region industrialise and decarbonise, at the same time.
And using green hydrogen to make green metals and green fertilisers.
The biggest economic transformation since the industrial revolution is underway.
The global race for new jobs and opportunities and prosperity has already begun.
This contest will not be defined and decided purely by the size of a nation’s economy, or the scale of its investment.
We must play to Australia’s strengths and build on our comparative advantages – from resources to research.
That means making sure that Australians have the skills and knowledge they need to seize the new opportunities on offer.
That’s why we’re rolling-out 300,000 more fee-free TAFE places from next year.
And an additional 20,000 University places.
As well as opening new Regional Study Hubs and TAFE centres of excellence bringing the opportunity of education to Australians in regional communities and growing suburbs.
Breaking down the barriers of disadvantage and distance.
Preparing more Australians for opportunities in clean energy, digital skills and the care economy.
Making our future here at home also depends on ensuring more Australians have a secure home.
Gough Whitlam’s great passion for urban renewal was driven by his resonant belief that every Australian had the right to a roof over their head – in a community served by decent infrastructure.
It recognised individual aspiration – but it also identified government’s responsibility.
It’s in that spirit that we brought together National Cabinet in August, to agree on the most comprehensive set of housing reforms in a generation.
A new national focus on a better deal for renters.
Agreement on our Help-to-Buy Scheme, which we will introduce into the Parliament tomorrow.
Lifting the ambition of our National Housing Accord to 1.2 million new, well-located homes before the end of the decade.
And securing a national consensus on new initiatives that will help us meet that goal.
Speeding-up approvals and unlocking more land for construction near public transport and good services.
Because essential workers shouldn’t have to commute an hour both ways to provide essential services.
And as we grow our national housing supply, we are making long overdue investments in renovating and building public and social housing around Australia.
All this is driven by an enduring Labor understanding of the security and dignity and opportunity that a home provides.
It’s more than just a place to live – it’s a sense of stability, connection to community and a base from which you can aspire to a better life.
Because if you want that famous definition of equality, where every child has a quiet room to study in and a ‘desk with a lamp to read by’ – that starts with a roof over your head.
And in 2023, the child sitting at that desk needs the NBN.
Which is why we’ve created a program to provide free broadband to up to 30,000 families with school-age children, who can’t afford an internet connection.
Now, Rome didn’t go from brick to marble in a day – and it took time for Gough to see the suburbs fully flushed.
But we are acting with purpose – because the need is urgent.
And through next year, you will see a power of work underway on more homes for Australians, in the cities, suburbs and regions alike.
The fourth fundamental priority for our government is securing Australia’s place in the world. 
We do this by investing in our capabilities and investing in our relationships.
Thanks to the outstanding work of Penny Wong and Richard Marles in particular, Australia is back at the table, as a constructive middle power.  
We have turned our alliance with the United States to face the future.
Deepening our co-operation through AUKUS but also on critical minerals, cyber, science and innovation.
We have launched a comprehensive set of initiatives to invest in and engage with the rapidly-growing economies of ASEAN.
We are re-engaged in the Pacific, as a partner, an equal, a neighbour and a leader.
Including, I am proud to say the ground-breaking climate and security agreement we have struck with Tuvalu.
The most significant act of Australian diplomacy since our support for the independence of Papua New Guinea.
And – earlier this month – I travelled to Beijing and Shanghai to mark the 50th anniversary of Gough becoming the first Australian Prime Minister to visit the nation whose economic rise he foresaw.
The latest step in the patient, calibrated and deliberate way we are working to stabilise our relationship with China.  
An approach that has helped secure the release of Cheng Lei.
And removed trade impediments for our farmers, producers and exporters – already in barley, hay, coal and with wine back on track.
Between January and August last year, Australia exported $85 million worth of those products to China.
In the same period this year, it was $6 billion.
By the end of this year, estimates are it will exceed $10 billion.
Our approach to China is to co-operate where we can, disagree where we must and engage in our national interest.
It’s true that what happens on the world stage matters to Australia.
But our region is no mere theatre and we are not spectators.
What Australia says and does on the world stage matters too.  
It matters for our neighbours, for our region, for our security and for our prosperity.
It matters that Australia is there: engaged, represented and invested.
Gough Whitlam understood that – and so do we.
I conclude tonight by saying that if I was not born an optimist – I was certainly raised as one.
I was brought up to believe that in Australia, you could aspire to anything.
I don’t think my Mum would necessarily have taken her instruction on that from the John Curtin Memorial Lecture that Gough delivered in 1975.
But he made a version of the same point.
He said the essential choice in politics, going all the way back to the revolutionaries in America and France was a choice between basic optimism - or basic pessimism.
The conservative worldview, the pessimistic mindset, treats change as a force to be feared.
We see that very much with the current Opposition.
An Opposition that have learned nothing from the past and offer nothing for the future.
An Opposition determined to define themselves only by what they are against.The fundamental flaw in such an approach is that, in the end, it is always self-defeating.
Because it offers no path forward.
It presents no ideas for the future and it places no hope in the people who will shape it.
It promises only a desperate last attempt to cling on to the habits and fears of the past.
For the optimists, for the reforming side of politics, for a government committed to economic and social progress, change is always an opportunity to be seized.
Our optimism isn’t naivety.
We don’t underestimate the challenges confronting our economy or our environment.
We don’t downplay the complexity of the global strategic environment.
We don’t doubt the significance or the stakes of the transformation underway in clean energy and technology.
But we believe – absolutely – in the ability of Australians to meet the demands of the future.
That’s what has driven us in 2023 – it’s what will guide us in 2024. 
Relieving the pressure on families.
Strengthening Medicare.
A future made in Australia.
Securing our place in the world.
These are our priorities, they are our command to perform.
So we look forward to 2024 with a sense of determination and optimism.
Promises fulfilled, reforms begun.
With more to do - and ready to do more.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: I want to thank you all for gathering for our final National Cabinet meeting for 2023. I do want to acknowledge that for members of my team in particular, today's a difficult day. We've just had the condolence motion moved for Peta Murphy, who is very much a beloved colleague lost to cancer at the very young age of 50. So it's been quite a difficult day.
I do want to thank everyone for coming together and for coming to the Lodge last night, for the pre-meeting discussion. And to get together in the really positive spirit that has characterised the way that this group has worked throughout the year.
We've got a lot done in 2023. We had the housing policy reforms about supply, as well as rental reforms and we've seen state and territories act as a result of that. And we're starting to see the work that we've done on issues like the Social Housing Accelerator, meaning that construction's beginning right around the country.
We've got the new five-year Skills Agreement, the first Skills Agreement in 10 years. And already we've had 300,000 Fee-Free TAFE places this year making an enormous difference when it comes to supply chains and that, of course, is delivered through TAFE, which is your responsibility. And it's made an enormous difference. I've been in TAFEs in every one of your jurisdictions, I think over over recent times, and we're seeing more plumbers and carpenters, but also more people in the care sector, in particular in aged care and early learning, and other tasks as well.
We've got the health reform that we've been implementing, Strengthening Medicare, Urgent Care Clinics open in every jurisdiction by the end of the year, there'll be 58 up and running. And what that's doing is taking pressure off emergency departments and taking pressure off the state-run hospital system. And we have NDIS reform, as well, that will have the report released in coming days.
Today, we've got a lot of more important things to discuss as well about what we're continuing to do in health, in the NDIS, in other areas of cooperation. And firstly, we'll hear from the heads of the Australian Border Force and the AFP about Operation AEGIS and what is happening there that's being done in cooperation with states and territories.
So I look forward to another constructive discussion today and welcome you all here.


Peta Murphy was a cherished member of our Labor family.
A proud trade unionist, a wonderful staffer, a magnificent candidate, an outstanding local member, a brilliant Parliamentarian and the very best kind of colleague and friend.
Above and beyond all this, she was the darling daughter of Bob and Jan, the beloved sister of Penni and Jodi and the perfect partner to Rod.
All of you have been in our thoughts in the terribly sad days that have followed Peta’s passing.
On Wednesday last week, we recalled the Parliament to pay tribute to Peta’s memory.
83 Members of the House of Representatives took the opportunity to speak.
To share their memories of the brilliant, funny, courageous and caring person we mourn today.
There are some members of parliament whose contribution earns the grudging respect of the chamber.
There are others – rarer still – who win genuine admiration and real affection across the political spectrum.
Peta Murphy was one of those.
And it is so hard, so cruel, so unfair, to think we’ll never see her bright and shining smile again.
Never hear that raucous laugh.
Never again feel your spirits lift when Peta enters a room.
Never again listen as Peta the happy warrior wades into a debate or steers a committee hearing with that extraordinary combination of intellect, integrity and empathy.
And we’ll never again get told off for making fun of squash.
Every tribute paid to Peta has – rightly – spoken of how hard she worked, how much she achieved, how much better her community and our nation were, for her contribution.  
And yet a profound part of the grief we feel today is not just that we have been deprived of someone we deeply loved, it is that Australia has been denied more of what Peta had to give.
It is so true to Peta’s character that she channelled her personal battle with breast cancer into public policy.
Never thinking of herself – always tenaciously advocating for others.
Championing better services and more work on early detection and a national register for metastatic cancer.
Seeing herself as privileged, because she could set an example, she could be visible, she could give heart to those in the same fight.
In all this, I want to make the point that while everyone admired the grace and courage Peta showed in her struggle, every one of us knew she was so much more than what she endured.
Her brilliant legal career, so often in the service of those with nowhere else to turn, had grounded in her an extraordinary capacity to absorb an issue and to advocate with great force and deep understanding.
We saw that when she argued against the idea of women fleeing family violence being made to draw on their super to support themselves.
We saw it this year, when she led the charge on reducing the harm caused by online gambling.
It says so much that everyone involved in that long multi-party committee process has always referred to the final product as “The Murphy Report”.
And alongside all those gifts in policy and advocacy, Peta excelled in the first responsibility of every MP, she was a wonderful local member.
She had an eagle eye on every local project, an encouraging word for every community organisation and sporting club.
She was so proud to be the first woman to represent an electorate named after a trailblazing woman.
And she took the strong view that schoolchildren in her community were never too young to learn about Louisa Dunkley’s campaign for equal pay for equal work.
What all of us loved about Peta, is what her constituents loved too.
They admired her determination, they could sense her pride in the community, her passion to deliver and they responded - above all – to her absolute authenticity.
Her husband Rod talks about the way people would humbly, shyly come up to Peta in shopping centres and at footy grounds and simply say ‘thank you’.
I saw it for myself, at aged care homes and child care centres, art galleries and community festivals.
The genuine connection she created with people – because they could tell she cared about them.
In her first speech in the Parliament, the best first speech I have ever heard, Peta quoted Pippi Longstocking:
“The strongest girl in the world.” 
And the attitude she brought to public life, indeed to her whole working life, was very true to another piece of Pippi Longstocking wisdom:
“I have never tried that before, so I think I should definitely be able to do that.”
That was Peta – fearless in the face of new challenges, bold in the service of important causes.
Knowing that the very nature of progress means trying things that have not been done before.
Peta believed in the battle of ideas and ideals.
She valued the contest at the heart of democracy.
But she didn’t treat it as winner-take-all.
Part of the reason Peta was so widely admired across the political spectrum was because she engaged with people who disagreed with her.
She found a way to work with them, to take an issue forward, to get things done in the national interest.
Perhaps some of that purpose and urgency came from the fact that Peta knew her time was shorter than it should be.
But I think most of it was driven by her essential character and her fundamental values.
She treated every minute in public life as a gift, an opportunity to advance social justice, a chance to represent and serve the people.
And because of this - because of what Peta did and what she meant.
Because of who she was and how she lived, she will never be truly lost to us.
We will keep the glow of Peta Murphy in our hearts.
We will hold her inspiration and example in our minds.
She will be a cherished member of our family, forever.
May Peta rest in eternal peace.


It’s a great honour to have been invited to deliver the annual Lowy Lecture.
The Lowy Institute has been an important part of our national discourse for 20 years.
It is a great gift to Australia from Sir Frank Lowy, a man who has found so many ways to add to the fabric of our nation.
Sir Frank’s story is an extraordinary one. A story that began on the other side of the world, and became a quintessentially Australian one.
A 13-year-old boy in war-ravaged Budapest, torn between the realities of survival in a city under the fist of the Nazis and the Hungarian Arrow Cross and the fading hope that his father would one day come home.
Life hurled everything at him. Yet we see the man Frank Lowy became, what he made possible here in Australia.
And ultimately, what he has made possible for Australia.
I also want to recognise that tonight is the first Lowy Lecture since the passing of your founding Executive Director and one of Australian foreign policy’s finest writers and thinkers, Allan Gyngell.
Allan famously said that: “the world is a messy place”
And because of that, foreign policy involves:
“an unceasing cycle of action and reaction, in response to an inconceivably complex set of variables”.  
That relentless complexity speaks for the world of today.
More economically connected than ever before - but also more politically fragmented.
A world confronting new flashpoints, old fault lines, ongoing tests of the rules-based order and resurgent challenges to free societies and open economies.
An ongoing land war in Europe.
A conflict in the Middle East, following the 7 October terrorist attack by Hamas, that has claimed thousands of innocent lives in mere months.
Climate change and the risk it presents to the stability of national economies, populations and borders.
And – closest to home - fundamental geopolitical change and intensifying strategic competition.
Upholding Australia’s security in this time of volatility means managing urgent and competing pressures and engaging with complex and fast-moving situations.
And yet the decisions a Government makes in these moments must be informed by much more than a cycle of action and reaction.
What we do and decide cannot be an unconnected set of responses that look no further than the end of the day.
Our actions have to be anchored in a strategic framework - and shaped by an overarching vision for Australia’s future and our place in the world.
Through our first 18 months in office, our Government’s approach to Australia’s foreign policy and our national security has been defined by a complementary focus on investing in our capabilities and investing in our relationships.
Investing in our deterrence and our diplomacy.
This reflects our recognition of Australia’s interests – but it also speaks for our belief in Australia’s agency.
The role we can play in our region, where prosperity is driven by shared opportunity and stability must always be secured by collective responsibility.
This is the contribution Australia can make, as a middle power in the Indo-Pacific.
Safeguarding a region of rules and rights.
Where every nation – large and small– is free to pursue its own destiny and secure its own future. 
A region where the sovereignty of every nation is respected and the dignity of every individual is upheld.
Where we all contribute to regional peace and stability, because we recognise that a more secure world benefits us all.
It’s often said that what happens on the world stage matters to Australia.  
But we are not just observers of the interplay of others’ ambitions.
And our foreign policy is not just a catalogue of things that happen to us.
What Australia says and does on the world stage matters – to our security, our prosperity, to the strength and stability of the region we call home.  
That’s why it matters that we take our seat at the table and have our voice heard in the debate.
Making ourselves part of the solution to climate change.
Re-energising our role in regional and multilateral forums.
Restoring our relationship with the Pacific family, so we are the reliable partner they look to first.
Supporting the fundamental guardrail of dialogue between the United States and the People’s Republic of China.
And putting dialogue at the core of our own international and regional engagement because even when issues are contested, we will always achieve better outcomes when we can deal directly and honestly, at a decision-making level.
Putting a priority on communication over confrontation does not mean choosing the easy course.
It’s not a matter of Australia opting-out of the hard work of defence and security.
Peace is always hard work - and defence and security are central to the task.
Peace must be built, preserved, defended and upheld.
We don’t need to look too far back in history or too far from home to remind ourselves of the devastating toll of the alternative.
This is why when I talk about investing in our capability and investing in our relationships, the concept of investment is deliberate and important.
First, because engagement depends on our active agency.
However deep the sentiment or rich the history, our bilateral and multilateral ties are not self-fulfilling, or self-sustaining.
They are a full-time test of our commitment.
Advancing Australia’s interests and delivering outcomes demands resources and resolve, it takes time and attention and it requires more than a measure of patience and perseverance as well. 
And second, because when Australia invests in our region and the world, we get a return.
The dividend of peace is measured in decades of extraordinary growth and prosperity for the people of our region. 
And like every other nation that has benefited from this framework of freedoms and fairness, Australia has a responsibility to uphold it and defend it. 
That’s why, even though we are half a world away from Ukraine, we are proudly one of the largest non-NATO contributors to its military and humanitarian needs.
We stand with Ukraine in support of its courageous people – and also in defence of a fundamental principle.
The right of every sovereign nation to be secure in its own borders and to determine its own future.
We have taken this same principled approach to the crisis in the Middle East.
From the moment we learned of those horrific attacks on October 7th, our Government has condemned Hamas and called for the release of all hostages.
We mourn the loss of every innocent life in this conflict: Israeli and Palestinian.
Because every innocent life matters.
We will continue to make it clear there is no place for prejudice or hatred, anti-Semitism or Islamophobia, here in our society.
Australia recognises that Israel has the right to defend itself - and the way it does so matters.
Which is why we have called on Israel to respect international humanitarian law.
This means civilians and civilian infrastructure must be protected, and humanitarian aid must be allowed to reach those in desperate need.
The recent pause in hostilities in Gaza allowed for the release of more than 100 hostages and supported an increase in humanitarian access to affected civilians.
Australia wants to see this pause resumed and we support urgent international efforts towards a sustainable ceasefire.
We have said all along, this cannot be one-sided.
Hamas must release all hostages – immediately and unconditionally.
It must stop using Palestinian civilians as human shields, and lay down its arms.  
And I reiterate what I said in Parliament in October: Hamas is the enemy, not the Palestinian people.
There can be no role for Hamas in the future governance of Gaza - and Gaza must not be used as a future platform for terrorism.
None of us should abandon hope in the ultimate goal: a two-state solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living securely and prosperously within internationally-recognised borders.
Without any doubt, Australia’s future security and prosperity will be defined by the strength and success of our engagement in the region we call home.
John Curtin’s decision to recall Australian forces from the Middle East for combat against Japan in New Guinea is widely held to represent the beginning of Australia setting our own foreign policy.
It also represents the first anchoring of Australian strategic policy in Asia and the Pacific.
When Curtin spoke of ‘the Battle for Australia’, he made it clear that we had to fight to secure our continent and our home.
That anchoring of Australian strategic policy in our region has been a core tenet of Labor defence and foreign policy ever since. 
We saw it when Gough Whitlam founded our diplomatic relationship with China and established our partnership with ASEAN.
Bob Hawke and Paul Keating then amplified Australia’s interests on a pan-regional basis.
First by establishing the APEC forum and then, through Keating, elevating it to include the whole Pacific Rim at a leader-level.
Kevin Rudd built on this work with his role in the expansion of the East Asia Summit and the elevation of the G20 forum.
Through the 80s and 90s, a period of profound change around the world, Australia established the enduring geopolitical architecture of the region.
A mighty achievement for a middle power.
The challenge and the opportunity for our generation is to reinforce and expand upon those achievements.
To act in the best of tradition of Labor Governments - and in doing so advance the best interests of the Australian people.
This means modernising those existing frameworks and forums so they can empower us in new economic, security and energy progress.
Maintaining and strengthening a strategic balance that can adapt to a changing region.
And seeking out new opportunities for deepening our bilateral ties.
For our Government, this work begins with Indonesia.
I’m pleased to say that Australia and Indonesia are making remarkable progress towards a Defence Co-Operation Agreement.
This is something President Widodo and I have discussed on a number of occasions – and the progress we have made is a credit to the work of Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles in particular.
This new agreement will be binding under international law, elevating our defence partnership and enabling new ways for us to work together.
It will be underpinned by the Lombok Treaty and it speaks – above all – for the deep and important trust between our nations.
Together with our new Strategic Partnership with the Philippines – our Government’s actions are making it plain that Australia is seeking our security in Asia, not from it.  
And the same is true for our prosperity.
More than any other part of the world, Asia is where Australia’s economic destiny lies.
Our Government has made clear our strong and continuing commitment to ASEAN centrality.
We also recognise that for too long the economies of ASEAN have not been central to Australia’s economic thinking.
Business investment in the region has been stagnant, people to people connections under-resourced and trade well short of its potential.
This weakens our presence and our relevance. 
The new strategy we launched in Jakarta in September is all about changing that.
It’s called Invested, a set of strategic recommendations from Nicholas Moore around everything from energy transformation and supply chain resilience to better business connections taken together, they represent the most significant upgrade of Australia’s economic engagement with ASEAN nations for a generation.
And we will be able to advance our strategic and economic partnership further when we host the ASEAN-Australia Special Summit in Melbourne next March.
As with the nations of ASEAN, Australia and India is another relationship that has been underdone for too long.
Not enough work was done to turn the genuine ties of affection, into tangible benefits for our peoples and economies.
I’m proud our Government is taking our partnership with India to a new level, both bilaterally and through the revitalised Quad.
Channelling our common histories and cultures into a greater sense of common cause, including deeper strategic co-operation to maintain peace and security in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
And working to realise the enormous potential of our partnership in everything from clean energy to higher education.
Every step of the way, our Indian diaspora are demonstrating how important and valuable they are in achieving this goal.
Another reminder that our diversity and social cohesion is both a national treasure – and an international asset.
Seizing these new opportunities does not mean letting go of existing strengths.
Australia does not have to choose between deeper partnerships or a broader range of partners.
We can and must look to build both.
That’s why, at the same time as we are boosting our security and economic co-operation with Southeast Asia, we are building on our longstanding ties with Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Even within those two partnerships, we see the potential for greater depth and diversity.
Australia will continue to be a reliable energy provider to the powerhouse economies of North Asia as we help drive their transformation to clean energy and deepen our security collaboration.
Because energy security is economic security and it is national security.
For more than half a century Australia has been the single largest economic, security and development partner in the Pacific.
We engage as partners, as neighbours and as equals.
By respecting institutions like the Pacific Islands Forum and promoting unity in the Pacific family.
This is where I particularly want to acknowledge the outstanding work – and quite extraordinary stamina – of Foreign Minister Penny Wong, and the Minister for International Development and the Pacific, Pat Conroy.
Our neighbours understand the realities of strategic competition, in addition to the issues they face in building more resilient communities and stronger economies.
We must engage on these interconnected challenges.
Because climate change is a security issue, in the Pacific more than anywhere else.
Just as economic development and infrastructure, including digital connectivity through subsea cables is essential to the stability of the region.
The historic agreement we’ve struck with Tuvalu is a powerful example of engaging with this combination of priorities.
It safeguards sovereignty, provides security against rising sea levels and respects the inherent dignity of that nation and its people.
This is the most significant piece of Pacific diplomacy Australia has been part of since our support for Papua New Guinea’s independence.
And it’s a reminder of how Australia can play to our unique strengths, the opportunities that only we can offer our neighbours.
That’s the spirit of our new Pacific Engagement Visa, which comes into effect next year.
And the improvements we’ve made to the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility Scheme.  
In a region where more than one third of people live on less than $1000 a year, PALM workers send home an average of $1500 a month boosting Pacific economies and lifting families out of poverty and filling urgent gaps in our workforce, including in aged care and regional communities.
Our region is drawn closer by these economic and social connections - the personal ties that bind.
That’s also the beauty of a team from Papua New Guinea taking part in the National Rugby League.
It taps into a passion and a culture that people in our two nations share.
When I had the privilege being the first foreign leader to address the PNG Parliament in January this year I made it clear Australia was looking to finalise a Bilateral Security Agreement with our nearest neighbour, our close friend and our fellow democracy.
I’m pleased that we were able to sign that agreement when Prime Minister Marape visited Canberra this month.
And I look forward to welcoming him for his address to our Parliament in February next year, the first Pacific Island leader to be extended this invitation.  
Our Government’s careful, methodical and respectful approach, has delivered significant progress in the Pacific.
We have brought the same sense of calm and consistency to the work of stabilising our relationship with China. 
We are clear-eyed about the situation.
Mindful that for all the change the Australia and China relationship has undergone through 50 years now, we remain two nations with very different values and political systems.
I’ve said before that China does not see itself as a status quo power.
It seeks a region and a world that is much more accommodating of its ambitions and its interests.
And yet it is always important to make the point that China’s extraordinary and unparalleled economic achievements have been made possible by our region’s commitment to peace, freedom of navigation and respect for sovereignty.
This is where our Government’s patient, calibrated and deliberate approach to managing this relationship is so important.  
We’ve put a focus on rebuilding dialogue – and my visit to Beijing and Shanghai last month was another step in this process.  
This doesn’t mean compromising any of Australia’s core interests or values.
In fact, we use dialogue to advance those interests and articulate those values.
To advocate for the rules-based order, to assert our commitment to human rights and to affirm the peace and stability that has benefited both our nations.
Our approach has seen ministerial meetings resume, student exchange and tourism revived and the resumption of co-operation in central areas including climate change and consular issues.
I’m pleased most of the impediments to trade have now been removed.
Opportunities for our farmers, producers and exporters in barley, hay, coal and timber, and wine are back on track.
Between January and October last year, Australia exported $194 million worth of those products to China.
In the same period this year, it was $8.5 billion.
By the end of this year it will exceed $10 billion – and much more next year.
More than one in four Australian jobs relies on trade - and our single biggest trading partner is China.
The position we outlined on first coming to government has guided us: co-operate where we can, disagree where we must, and engage in the national interest.
This is a principled and practical way of managing complexity that is delivering benefits for Australia, China and the region.
As we take stock at the end of 2023, we can see that in every part of the world Australia is working to turn agreement into action.
To convert dialogue into delivery.
We are revitalising our bonds with the Pacific family.
Stabilising our relationship with China and contributing to strategic balance in the region.
Modernising our engagement with Asia more broadly.
And turning our alliance with the United States to face the future.
The people of Australia and the United States share a history of sacrifice in the cause of peace we hold a common commitment to democracy, freedom and equality.
Those enduring values guide us and bind us.
But ours is not just an alliance of rich history and deep affection - it is a pact between two Pacific nations.
The submarine technology we are securing through AUKUS will deliver Australia the single-biggest boost to our defence and deterrence capability, in our history.
It will transform our ability to contribute to the stability and security of the region.
The passing of the AUKUS legislation through the US Congress last week is an historic achievement.
This will enable the transfer of Virginia-class submarines to Australia and revolutionise the way our technology, research and defence industries co-operate.
This is the ‘innovation alliance’ President Biden talks about.
One we are strengthening through new engagement in technology, quantum computing and cybersecurity.
In May this year President Biden and I signed the Australia-United States Climate, Critical Minerals, and Clean Energy Transformation Compact.
A third pillar to the Australia and America’s alliance, to stand alongside our security and economic co-operation.
The biggest economic and technological change of any of our lifetimes is underway.
We can help shape it – and share its opportunities.
Not by seeking to compete with or outbid the Inflation Reduction Act but by deriving the maximum benefit from it moving Australia up the international value chain in critical minerals, energy and manufacturing.
I conclude tonight with this.
I said earlier that foreign policy cannot merely be a catalogue of things that are happening to us.Nor should we treat it only as a survey of the challenges and obstacles we face.
When our Government invests in Australia’s capability, when we invest in our relationships we are not seeking to hold back a changing world, or isolate ourselves from it.
We are investing in Australia’s ability to shape the future - and to share in the benefits of change.
To seize the opportunities of global energy and technology transformation.
To re-anchor ourselves as an economic, security and development partner of choice in the region.
To power the next wave of economic and infrastructure growth in North Asia.
To partner with our allies in new fields of innovation with new skills and opportunities.
To use our status as an influential middle power to help secure the peace and security that underpins our prosperity.
We will always face difficult challenges and complex choices.
But we should not lose sight of the fact that this remains a time of profound opportunity.
That’s why we will continue to engage, we will continue to use Australia’s agency to advance Australia’s interests.
Securing our home.
Strengthening our region.
And shaping our future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Friends, it is such a joy to gather together on the eve of Australia Day.
Our national day is our chance to do so much more than simply count our blessings. We pause to reflect on everything that we have achieved as a nation, as a people.
All that we have created and built and learned through all the ups and downs of our history.
The challenges we have faced – together.
The opportunities we have seized – together.
The tests we have passed – together.
And it is together that we look to the future.
We do so with courage. We do it with optimism. And when times do turn tough, we let it bring out the best in our character.
We’ve been seeing that time and time again among our fellow Australians dealing with floods and bushfires. Neighbours helping neighbours, strangers helping strangers.
And every firefighter, every rescue worker and every member of the Australian Defence Force who puts themselves on the line.
We live in the greatest country on Earth, but we don’t let it rest there. We know that our nation can be even greater.
That’s the spirit we see embodied by every Australian of the Year, and by every Australian who has ever been nominated.
It is such a great honour. No one is ever considered for it lightly, and every nominee who is here tonight is already an extraordinary part of the Australian story.
I do want to thank the class of 2023. Local Hero, Amar Singh. Young Australian of the Year, Awer Mabil. Senior Australian of the Year, Professor Tom Calma AO. And, of course, our 2023 Australian of the Year, Taryn Brumfitt.
The greatest ambition anyone can have is to make a positive difference.
All of you have done that. I know all of you will continue to do so, adding to the qualities that make Australia the bright beacon that it is to so many.
Tomorrow, at 320 ceremonies across this continent, more than 15,000 people are becoming Australian citizens.
Drawn from every part of the world, from every faith and background, they will be pledging their loyalty to their new home.
They will joining our Australian family, making our big picture that crucial bit bigger, adding to the diversity that is Australia’s great strength.
It is a diversity that begins with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. People who have been here for such a profoundly long time it stretches the imagination, leaving the imagination permanently enlarged.
We celebrate our differences. We rejoice in what we have in common. And, like the different facets that give a diamond its sparkle, we bring it all together in our shared Australian identity.
Ultimately we look for the best in ourselves. We look for what is best about the Australian character. And we seek out the people who show us what those qualities and values are in the most powerful way of all - by living them.
That’s what we see in all of tonight’s nominees. Having had the pleasure of meeting you all this morning, my high hopes for the future are now even higher.
You have done so much to make Australia a brighter a place.
This is Australia’s chance to return the favour and shine a light on you. 


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I want to acknowledge all the members of my team who are here today.
Our Labor Government is driven by the determination to make a positive difference.
To change this great country, for the better.
And to build an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
So that when you work hard and make sacrifices, you get fair reward for your effort.
You earn the economic security to plan for your future, to pursue your aspirations, to make a good life for yourself and your family.
That’s at the heart of everything our Government seeks to deliver for the people of Australia.
This is why helping with the cost of living remains our number one priority.
Because if the cost of essentials is rising too fast, people hardly have time to think about the future, let alone plan or save for it.
I understand people are under financial pressure.
After inflation jumped to 2.1 per cent in the March quarter of 2022, interest rates started to rise.
Australians have been living through the economic aftershock of the pandemic, the first recession in three decades, and the ongoing, far-reaching consequences of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
An unprecedented combination of global inflation and damaged supply chains has pushed up interest rates, putting pressure on family budgets.
Everything we have done as a Government has been about managing those competing forces.
Making the responsible decisions to fix the Budget – delivering the first surplus in 15 years and a second one a possibility - so we have a buffer against future uncertainty.
So fiscal policy is working with monetary policy, not against it.
And so we have room in the budget to provide more support to Australians.
Rebuilding our supply chains, fixing workforce shortages and investing in manufacturing, skills and energy for the future.
And delivering a range of targeted measures – from energy bill relief to increased rent assistance - that provide meaningful help with the cost of living, without adding to inflation.
That’s the core of our approach.
Tackling the immediate challenges people are facing – while always looking to both anticipate and shape the future.
Helping Australians here and now – in a way that also builds for the long term.
And one of the great privileges of serving as Prime Minister is meeting people for whom our policies are making a real and practical difference.
Australians with chronic heart conditions, or osteoporosis, saving hundreds of dollars through cheaper medicines.
Families in Frankston and Hobart and Rockingham who’ve been able to get fast and free treatment at one of the 58 Urgent Care Clinics we’ve opened all over Australia.
Young people in regional Queensland and the northern suburbs of Perth, undertaking apprenticeships because of fee-free TAFE.
Factories in Ingleburn, Bundaberg and Marrickville that are hiring new workers and investing in new technology, because they are backed by a government that believes in a future made in Australia.
Australian universities and researchers partnering with local firms to lead the world in everything from cloud computing to critical minerals.
Farmers and producers, who’ve been able to diversify and find new markets in India and South East Asia and are now exporting to China again as well.
Pensioners and small business owners being assisted by our energy bill relief – and our new support for rooftop solar in social housing.
More than 1 million families have saved money through cheaper child care.
Help for their family budget here and now – and an economic reform that delivers for two generations.
Boosting productivity and participation by making it easier for parents to return to work - and giving more children access to the benefits of early education.;
And of course, it’s not just the people you meet, the national economic data tells the same story.
Around 650,000 jobs created, since we came to government.
Last year is the first year since monthly records began where unemployment stayed below 4 per cent for every single month.
The first time ever.
Since 1978 there have been 22 months when unemployment has had a 3 in front of it – 19 of these 22 have been under our Government.
Importantly, the latest monthly inflation rate for the 12 months to November fell to 4.3 per cent.
The smallest annual increase since January 2022.
And – just as we promised Australians - wages are moving again.
We’ve supported back to back increases in the minimum wage and we’ve delivered an historic 15 per cent pay rise for aged care workers.
We’ve taken the gender pay gap to a record low.
And wages are growing at their fastest rate in almost 15 years – including two consecutive quarters of real wages growth.
All of these signs are encouraging, all of them reinforce my optimism about Australia’s future, all of them underline my admiration for our people, their perseverance and positivity in tough times.
But I understand that the progress we’ve made together is not enough.
I recognise – as Treasury analysis confirms:
“Working households have experienced the fastest rise in their cost of living.”
That’s why, over summer, I asked Treasury and Finance to present us with options to help people with their cost of living, while continuing the fight against inflation.
Australians are looking for more help.
Australians deserve more help.
And today I can confirm that more help is on the way.
Today, I announce that from the 1st of July this year, our Government will deliver a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer.
All 13.6 million taxpayers, not just some.
Everyone who works and pays tax will benefit.
This is a plan for middle Australia that delivers for every Australian taxpayer, right up and down the income ladder.
Helping with the cost of living, nourishing aspiration – and boosting participation.
Strengthening the connection between hard work – and fair reward.
Because we want people to earn more – and we want them to keep more of what they earn.
The first element of our plan reduces the lowest rate of income tax from 19 cents in the dollar, down to 16 cents.
This change means that taxpayers earning less than $45,000 will now receive a tax cut.
And every working Australian will pay less tax on the first $45,000 that they earn.
This is a significant boost for the take home pay of Australians on modest incomes and people working part-time.
An early educator, or an aged care worker or a cleaner earning $50,000, will receive a tax cut worth over $900 a year.
These tax cuts will provide meaningful help for parents returning to work, particularly women with young children.
Because we know that when women with children are making decisions about how many hours they will work, an increase in their take home pay is a powerful incentive.
This is where our broad and fair tax cuts that benefit workers also deliver for business, by increasing workforce participation.
Today, I also announce we will be increasing the low income threshold at which the Medicare levy applies.
This means 1.2 million low-income earners will either remain exempt from paying the levy, or pay less in tax.
But it doesn’t stop there.
Our Government understands that middle income Australians need help with cost of living now, more than ever.
This is why Labor’s tax cuts are fairly and squarely focused on middle Australia.
The second tax rate will be cut from 32.5 percent down to 30 per cent - and that will apply all the way to $135,000.
We will be retaining the 37 per cent rate, which will now apply from $135,000 - up from $120,000.
The threshold for the top tax rate of 45 per cent will also be increased. It will now kick-in at $190,000, up from $180,000.
This is the first increase in the threshold for the top marginal rate since 2008.
I want to take you through what these changes will deliver for people.
The average wage in Australia is $73,000.
A person earning that will now get a tax cut of more than $1,500 a year.
More than double what they would have got, under the plan put forward by Scott Morrison.
Consider a full-time worker earning $100,000 a year.
They will get a tax cut of over $2,100.
Over $800 more for these middle income earners, because of our changes.
For a family on the average household income – around $130,000.
With one partner earning $80,000 and the other $50,000, their combined tax cut will be over $2600.
$1600 more than they would get under the old plan.
And someone earning over $190,000 will get a substantial tax cut, over $4,500.
Our plan will more than double the benefit for Australians on the average income.
And it will look after low income earners and part-time workers as well.
So, someone working at Australia’s largest employer Woolworths earning $40,000, will now get a tax cut of over $650.
Under Scott Morrison’s plan, they would have got nothing.
Not a dollar.
And – crucially - just like our other measures assisting people with the cost of living, our tax cuts do not add to inflation.
We have publicly released the advice from Treasury.
It makes it clear, and I quote:
“This option is broadly revenue neutral, will not add to inflationary pressures and will support labour supply.”
The Treasury Secretary – and the Treasurer – have both consulted the Governor of the Reserve Bank on our changes, who expects that there are no implications for their inflation forecasts.
Since I had the honour of becoming Labor Leader, this is the 9th time I’ve addressed the National Press Club.
As Leader and as Prime Minister - I’ve always said I’d be upfront with people and take responsibility for the decisions my government makes.
I’m doing that today.
When economic circumstances change, the right thing to do is change your economic policy.
That’s what we are doing.
This is a change in our policy.
Some would say that we should stay the course, even if it means going to the wrong destination.
To them I say, we are choosing a better way forward, given the changed circumstances.
We are doing the right thing, for the right reasons.
With a plan that delivers a tax cut for every taxpayer.
More help for middle Australia.
More help for families under pressure with their cost of living.
And a better deal for 5.8 million working women.
Every woman taxpayer will get a tax cut.
And 90 per cent will receive a bigger tax cut, under our plan.
When Scott Morrison brought his tax plan to the Parliament back in 2019 I said, on many occasions, that pretending you knew exactly what the economy would look like in 5 years’ time was:
“a triumph of hope over experience - and economic reality”.
As the Treasury advice makes clear:
“The Australian economy was expected to be supported by a positive global outlook, with strong, broad-based global growth.
Inflation, and therefore interest rates, were expected to remain low.
However, unanticipated global events meant that these projections have not come to pass.”
Instead, we know, we’ve had to deal with a global pandemic, a recession, damaged supply chains, conflict in Europe and the Middle East, rapid increases in the price of food and energy and ongoing worldwide economic uncertainty.
And if we were to simply proceed with the old plan – promoted before any of these challenges even existed it would mean middle Australia missing out on the help they need and they deserve.
And it would mean leaving out millions of women, part-time workers, young people and renters, who more than ever, deserve a government that’s on their side.
For me, our responsibility is clear.
This is the right decision, not the easy decision.
Just as the health crisis of the pandemic meant that governments had a responsibility to change economic policy, through measures such as JobKeeper, the cost of living pressures facing Australians on low and middle incomes, demand a better tax policy.
A plan that responds to the real challenges people are facing today.
Because when I see the pressure Australians are under right now, it’s crystal clear to me that every taxpayer needs and deserves a meaningful tax cut.
And that is precisely what Australians will get from our Government.
We’ve seen, already, that our opponents will revert to their predictable shouting and confected outrage.
That’s all they do, that’s all they’ve got – negativity, conflict and division.
Nothing positive to offer the Australian people.
One quote from yesterday sums up why I say the Coalition has become the Noalition.
The Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party actually said:
“We will fight this legislation in the Parliament.
We don’t even know what it will look like.”
They don’t know what it looks like.
They don’t care who it will help.
The only thing they are in interested in, is having a fight.
They are so addicted to saying no, that they have already promised to reverse these tax cuts - and increase taxes on 11.5 million hard working Australians if they win the next election.
That’s how far down the rabbit hole they’ve gone.
They would rather stage a political brawl, than help low and middle income earners.
That’s why they voted against cheaper medicine and energy bill relief.
Voted against secure jobs and better pay.
Voted against Australian manufacturing and voted against more affordable housing.
Attacked cheaper child care and talked-down fee-free TAFE.
But good Government isn’t about looking for fights – it’s about finding solutions.
And that is the focus of my government.
Putting people ahead of politics.
That’s what our Government is doing by broadening these tax cuts so they include everyone.
A decision inspired by unity and serving the national interest, delivering for everyone.
I want Australians to know that we did not choose this course lightly.
This is the right decision, for the right reasons – and we’ve made it the right way, through our proper processes.
It is the best way forward.
Because it’s the best way to help Australians struggling with their cost of living without putting pressure on inflation.
This plan will boost the family budgets of middle Australia and boost workforce participation in our economy.
These broader and better tax cuts are not the beginning of our actions on cost of living – and they will not be the end.
They fit together with everything we are doing to build a stronger economy across the board.
Balancing the Budget.
Boosting wages.
Creating jobs.
Bringing inflation under control.
And driving fairer prices for Australian consumers.
We want people earning more, keeping more of what they earn – and getting better value for what they spend.
I’m pleased Dr Craig Emerson is leading our review of the Food and Grocery Code of Conduct.
And today I announce that the Treasurer will be directing the ACCC to conduct a 12 month price inquiry into the supermarket industry.
The ACCC has significant powers – and it is the best and most effective body to investigate supermarket prices.
To look at how things like online shopping, loyalty programs and changes in technology are impacting competition in the industry.
And to examine the difference between the price paid at the farm gate – and the prices people pay at the check-out.
For me, it’s this simple.
When farmers are selling their product for less, supermarkets should charge Australians less.
Today, I also announced that the Government will fund consumer organisation CHOICE to provide shoppers with a clear understanding of how supermarkets are performing on this score.
Because across thousands of products it can be hard for people to find the best deal.
We are backing CHOICE – renowned for their commitment to consumer fairness - to provide clear and regular information on prices across a basket of goods.
This will promote transparency, enhance competition and drive value.
These actions send a very clear message – our Government is prepared to take action to make sure that Australians are not paying one dollar more than they should for the things they need.
When I stood at this podium on the Wednesday before the 2022 election.
I said I wanted to lead:
“A government that honours the values of the Australian people: that repays hard work, nourishes aspiration, and creates opportunity.
A government driven by strong and simple principles – no-one held back, no-one left behind.”
No-one held back, no-one left behind.
No-one left behind speaks to our responsibility to look after the most vulnerable in our society.
That has always been fundamental to the Labor mission – and indeed central to the Australian character.
That’s why our tax cuts deliver for every taxpayer.
No-one held back is about aspiration - because that is a fundamental Labor value too.
Making sure every Australian is encouraged to aim high, to pursue their dreams and reach their potential – and to get fair reward for the hard work they put in along the way.
That’s why the tax cuts we are delivering on 1 July, go all the way up the income scale.
That’s why we are addressing the issue of bracket creep with our changes.
Middle Australia is the big focus of this plan - and people on low incomes and the highest income earners are included too.
Because we want all Australians to be able to strive for a promotion or take up an extra shift or a new opportunity, without feeling like the system is working against them.
And because whether you’re earning $50,000, or $90,000 or $190,000 or more – I know you work hard for it.
I recognise that what you do is essential to the strength of our economy and the health of our society.
And I want to make sure your efforts are rewarded.
Put simply, our Government’s definition of aspiration is bigger and broader than just the highest income level.
Our aspiration is inclusive, not exclusive.
Because when no-one is held back and no-one is left behind – everyone is lifted up.
That’s so much a part of what we celebrate tomorrow, around our country, as we welcome our newest Australian citizens.
People who have come here seeking to make a better life for themselves and their children and in doing so have made this a better nation for us all.
Our Government’s aspiration is for all Australians to have the security and opportunity and the confidence to plan for their future.
The security of a good job, with fair pay in a safe workplace.
The opportunity for parents to balance caring and career, without being penalised or put-off by the cost of child care.
The security of Medicare, knowing that if you get sick, you can see a doctor and afford the medicine you need.
The life-changing power of education – from the early years to school to TAFE to university.
Something I spoke about on election night, opening the doors of opportunity.
That’s what education does – giving people the skills and knowledge and self-belief to adapt and succeed in a world being shaped by new technology.
The security we gain from investing in our capabilities and investing in our relationships.
Because when Australia is engaged in our region and stronger in the world, we are safer at home.
The opportunity that acting on climate change represents for our economy in new jobs and clean energy and the security that we must deliver for the next generation, by protecting our environment.
The security of a roof over your head - the opportunity to buy your first home.
The opportunities we can create, working with people with disability, to reform the NDIS and secure its future.
The security – and dignity – that superannuation and the pension offers working people in retirement.
The security and dignity and peace of mind that decent aged care provides older Australians and their families.
And the transformative opportunity of equality for women – in our economy and our society.
Closing the gender pay gap, addressing family violence and promoting gender equality in every aspect of Australian life, from the sporting field, to the boardroom, to our parliaments.
It all matters. It all fits together.
It all drives our Government’s determination to make a positive difference.
On the eve of Australia Day, I am more optimistic about Australia than ever before.
If we respond to the challenges before us with hope, with vision, with ambition and determination - we can make this, the greatest country on earth, even greater in the future.
Located, as we are, in the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
Home to extraordinary resources and natural assets.
And strengthened by the remarkable diversity and talent, creativity and courage of our greatest asset, the people of Australia.
Together, we can build, shape and secure a better future, where no-one is held back and no-one is left behind.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Your Excellency, distinguished guests one and all.
My fellow Australians and my very-soon-to-be fellow Australians.
Every citizenship ceremony is an extraordinary event, a solemn occasion and a joyous one.
A formal commitment – and a warm embrace.
My great predecessor Ben Chifley officiated at the very first of these ceremonies 75 years ago, across the lake at Albert Hall.
We have built on that tradition ever since because, as Australians, we choose to celebrate those who have chosen our nation as their home and chosen us as their fellow citizens.
Generations of people like you - who have looked to Australia, dreaming of a better life for themselves and their families - and in doing so, have made this an even better nation for us all.
That’s why I can think of no better day for a citizenship ceremony than Australia Day.
Australia Day is our chance to pause and reflect on everything that we have achieved as a nation.
Everything that we have created and built and learned through all the ups and downs of our history.  
The mighty challenges we have faced, the profound opportunities we have seized, the stern tests we have passed – together.
Everything that has made us who we are as a people.
Everything that has made us who we are, as a nation.
And just as Australia Day is about the way all the different elements of our past add up to what we have in the present, it’s also very much about our future, and what we can gain.
As I look at your faces, I can see we are about to gain so much.
What you are adding to today is the wonderful and enduring truth that the Australian sense of identity finds so much of its heart and strength in our diversity.
The bedrock of that diversity, of course, is the world’s oldest continuous culture.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have been here for so long that the very shape of the continent has changed.
A period of time that defies imagining.
What an extraordinary privilege it is, for their culture to be the beginning of our national story and for their wisdom to be a continuing part of our national life.
The enduring foundation of our modern, prosperous, peaceful and multicultural democracy.
As Australians, we cherish all we have, we celebrate it. And each one of us has the opportunity and the responsibility to add to it.
That’s something I said to the Australian of the Year nominees yesterday, and I say it today to you, who may well be future Australians of the Year.
We are always at our best when we work together and, crucially, when we look to the future together.
And that’s how we can make this an even better, stronger, fairer and more prosperous country.
Today, our sense of togetherness is growing at 320 citizenship ceremonies right across this continent, with more than 15,000 people becoming Australian citizens.
More than 15,000 people from every part of the world, drawn from every faith and background, will be pledging their loyalty to their new home, to Australia, our democratic beliefs, our laws, our values and our people.
Joining our Australian family.
Joining us as proud citizens of the greatest country on earth.
And writing the newest chapter in a 75-year story that has seen more than six million people take up Australian citizenship.
It is such a great honour for me as Prime Minister to be able to personally welcome you to the family.
Sixteen new citizens, will be joining us from 10 different countries: the Philippines, India, Japan, Estonia, North Macedonia, Liberia, the United States of America, Uzbekistan, Tonga and Mongolia.
Nurses and social workers, students, software engineers, accountants, small business owners and more.
A diverse sweep of skills, experience, aspiration and initiative.
And a common determination, a shared commitment, an equal love and loyalty for this, your new home.
On behalf of all your fellow Australians, thank you for joining our family.
For adding yourselves to the picture.
And for showing the depth of your commitment to our country, to your country.
Congratulations, and welcome home.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.                                       
It is such a pleasure to be with you all in Orange – a wonderful part of New South Wales that’s about to be made even better with the construction of the new Orange Regional Conservatorium and Planetarium.
As some of you might know, music has always played a big part in my life. While I don’t play an instrument, I understand the power of music to bring us together and to lift us up. It helps us feel the highs, and it helps us make sense of the lows.
Music is one of the most central parts of the human experience. In the words of one of my great predecessors, Paul Keating: “Our DNA is wired for music.”
And I know just how much an education in music can expand and enhance the mind, and make you a more creative and flexible thinker, whether you’re a child or your childhood’s a little bit behind you.
The conservatorium is currently teaching 1400 students, ranging in age from young children to local residents in their 80s.
But you’re definitely ready for a new home with a bit more space. The location where we are today is right at the main entrance to the new conservatorium.
There are plans for a 275-seat auditorium, which aims to create a state-of-the-art music performance space, rivalling any similar venue in regional NSW.
There will be 40 new purpose-built practice, teaching and rehearsal studios, aimed at meeting the huge demand for teaching music to local children and adults.
And in a great example of aiming high, there will also be a 65-seat planetarium. It’s a perfect fit for Orange, which is on the astronomical highway to both Parkes – home of the famous radio telescope – and Siding Springs near Coonabarabran.
A conservatorium and a planetarium – this place truly will be full of stars.
This will be a major boost to the cultural life of Orange. I’m delighted that the Government I have the privilege of leading has joined forces with the New South Wales Government to invest in it.
I look forward to the opening.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It’s an honour to join you all here at Frankston Bowling Club for Pink Pennant Day. I’m grateful that you’ve dedicated it to our dearly missed friend, Peta Murphy. All of us who knew her are deeply touched.
As Peta could have told you, there’s a solid rule that applies across so much of life: The more we know, the better we can help.
It certainly applies when it comes to cancer. The more we know, the better our understanding. That’s the key to better treatment and, ultimately, better outcomes for Australians with cancer.
We’re here today to announce an important new step towards knowing more.
In Australia today, there are more than 1 million people living or who have lived with cancer. Last year alone it was estimated that there would be around 165,000 cases of cancer diagnosed and, tragically, 51,000 people would die from it.
And as everyone here knows, every case of cancer is a story that ends up affecting family and loved ones. 
We live in one of the best health systems in the world, including some of the best cancer treatment. What we don’t have is a consistent, co-ordinated record of people whose cancer has progressed to metastatic stage.
We also don’t know how many people have been diagnosed with the same form of cancer they’ve had to deal with earlier in their life.
While Australia’s cancer data is high quality, there is always room for improvement – such as more information about stage at cancer diagnosis, cancer recurrence, and progression to metastatic cancer.
Without this information, it is impossible to know how many Australians are diagnosed with cancer at different stages, and whether someone has been diagnosed with the same cancer before.
It is also difficult to determine the effectiveness of Australia’s national screening programs and treatments, and to keep track of outcomes.
The answer – which so many have rightly been pushing for – is a national registry for metastatic cancers.
I’m really proud to announce that we are committing $1.5 million to start building that registry to accelerate the collection of national cancer stage and recurrence data.
It’s in line with the recently launched Australian Cancer Plan, and in response to the Breast Cancer Network Australia’s report, Time to Count People with Metastatic Breast Cancer: A Way Forward.
This investment includes funding for the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare to establish the Australian Cancer Data Alliance.
I’d like to express my gratitude to the work done by so many to get us to this point.
Among them the Breast Cancer Network Australia and all stakeholders who contributed to the report, for their tireless advocacy campaigning for the collection of more comprehensive breast cancer data.
I’d also like to recognise the people affected by cancer, consumer organisations, health services, researchers and clinicians, which have continued to advocate to improve the completeness of Australia’s cancer data.
Right now, I’d like to make particular mention of one – our friend who is very much on our minds today. Peta Murphy was so many things to so many: a friend, an inspiration, a wonderful Parliamentarian, a great voice for her community here in Dunkley.
And no matter how overwhelming her experience with cancer became, she remained a person of such great personal strength and compassion.
I will always be awed by the fact that even right up to the end, Peta was thinking of others.
In what proved to be the final week of her life – when she didn’t have much physical strength left – she still travelled to Parliament because she wanted to help launch that report from Breast Cancer Network Australia I mentioned, which called for a national registry for metastatic cancers.
I wish Peta were here right now. I know we all do. But she would have been pleased to see this happening.
We know so much more when it comes to cancer than we used to – but there is so much that remains unknown.
But this will help us take more steps towards chipping away at its mysteries, and to keep improving the lives of Australians with cancer.
Sometimes you need a better map to find your way forward, sometimes a brighter light to read it by. I have confidence that this registry will be a bit of both.
ENDS


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet. I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I am honoured to be here in this place where love will keep triumphing over loss.
It is always a very particular honour to be in the presence of Leila and Danny Abdallah. Two truly remarkable Australians who have not only risen from the deepest grief, they have lifted us all higher in the process.
I have always said that the very worst of circumstances brings out the best in Australians. Repeatedly, we see it in the remarkable example of the Abdallahs and Sakrs.
The worst nightmare for any parent is to lose their child. It’s hard to imagine how you would come through a loss like that – let alone with grace and compassion.
And yet that is what the Danny and Leila Abdallah and Bridget Sakr have done.
They have lived the truth that is at the heart of their Maronite Catholic faith – to forgive your enemies, to forgive as you yourself have been forgiven.
Their profound act of forgiveness is profound is an extraordinary example of going beyond what anyone could have expected.
And by setting up the i4Give Foundation to help others who are suffering, it’s safe to say they have saved lives.
In Danny, Leila, Bridget and Craig we see a courage and a strength almost beyond measure.
Their three children and their niece lost their futures on this spot four years ago.
But what Danny, Leila, Bridget and Craig have done is held out the promise of a better future for all of us.
What an extraordinary thing to. What a powerful way to honour Antony, Angelina, Sienna and Veronique.
With this memorial garden, which you fought for so hard, their memories are further honoured. Each February, every flower that blooms here will invite us to think about who they were – and who they were yet to become.
I keep turning back to Danny’s words:
‘[My family] would either be stuck in the valley of pain and grief or I could lead them to the high ground.’

You have shown us all the high ground. It is the place of our better selves.
To the Abdallahs and Sakrs I say: Your spirit represents the very best of us. It represents the very best of humanity.
The light of your grace brightens the way for all of us, especially for the most important journey of all – the journey that each of us must take into our own hearts.
You have a nation’s admiration. You have a nation’s thanks.
ENDS


We gather in this solemn place, and we gather in peace.
Peace is not a given. For many across the world right now, it is tragically elusive.
We do not take peace for granted.
The peace that we gather in here today is the gift to us from generations of Australians who have taken up arms in our name.
It is a peace shared now with the places where so many of them fell.
Beaches where the waves roll in the sea’s eternal rhythm.
Meadows of flower and birdsong.
Places where there is little to hint at the killing fields they once were.
Yet they are mapped out in our hearts in an atlas of loss and sacrifice.
Places where mud and dust, jungle and ocean received the bodies of young Australians sent in our name.
We remember them — not just for their courage, even though there were times their courage was almost beyond our comprehension.
But we also remember their fear. The fear of young Australians far from home, confronting the unimaginable as it became reality.
We acknowledge the extraordinariness of what they did, but they were human beings of flesh and blood.
We remember them, every name, every face, every future changed forever, every future lost.
We remember all who served in our name — and all who serve now.
The great multitudes who were cast into the ranks of the unknown soldier as they were torn from life.
And those whose families were afforded that one slender consolation of knowing their earthly remains had been identified, and conveyed to their final rest.
Just one was Private Robert Edward McIntyre, a butcher from Horsham in Victoria. As the marker on his grave at Gallipoli tells us, he served in the 8th Battalion Australian Infantry.
Even the bare bones of what is carved into his tombstone is enough to make you pause.
His life ended on 7 August 1915, barely four months into the Gallipoli campaign. He was just 22.
But then you come to a solitary line, a message from his parents: 
“How much of love and light and joy is buried with our darling boy.”
An entire eulogy in just 14 words.
The story of war is often painted on a large canvas, in broad brushstrokes of generals and battles, leaders and campaigns, the dead drawn together in a haze of numbers.
And so often it is framed in the rhetoric of nobility and sacrifice, lit up with the abiding resilience of the national spirit.
But how much of our national spirit is to be found on those modest tombstones like Private McIntyre’s, the scale of what Australia lost spelt out in expressions of grief and tenderness.
Personal universes of life and love and loss captured in the spare eloquence of a broken heart.
It’s captured in diary entries and in letters of reassurance and love to those at home – scraps of paper alive with voices laconic, lyrical, and plain-spoken alike.
Each year, as we gather in this place of memory, we strive to hear their voices still.
We gather amid all these names arrayed in constellations of grief that never fade and never set.
All who went in our name, and never came home.
Those who came home, but were unable to escape the shadow of what they’d seen.
And those who went to war and, having seen the worst that humanity is capable of, were forever guided by a sense that despite everything, the best of humanity is inextinguishable.
We have seen what horrors Australians have defeated. We have seen the difference Australians have made in the world. And the difference they continue to make.
We thank all serving members of the Australian Defence Force.
And we thank all veterans.
Just as they stepped up for us, we must step for them.
As we await the going down of the sun, we thank and pay tribute to them all.
We have faced moments when the light has seemed so very far away, but because of them, it is only nightfall that can ever gather us in darkness.
Lest we forget.
We gather in this solemn place, and we gather in peace.
Peace is not a given. For many across the world right now, it is tragically elusive.
We do not take peace for granted.
The peace that we gather in here today is the gift to us from generations of Australians who have taken up arms in our name.
It is a peace shared now with the places where so many of them fell.
Beaches where the waves roll in the sea’s eternal rhythm.
Meadows of flower and birdsong.
Places where there is little to hint at the killing fields they once were.
Yet they are mapped out in our hearts in an atlas of loss and sacrifice.
Places where mud and dust, jungle and ocean received the bodies of young Australians sent in our name.
We remember them — not just for their courage, even though there were times their courage was almost beyond our comprehension.
But we also remember their fear. The fear of young Australians far from home, confronting the unimaginable as it became reality.
We acknowledge the extraordinariness of what they did, but they were human beings of flesh and blood.
We remember them, every name, every face, every future changed forever, every future lost.
We remember all who served in our name — and all who serve now.
The great multitudes who were cast into the ranks of the unknown soldier as they were torn from life.
And those whose families were afforded that one slender consolation of knowing their earthly remains had been identified, and conveyed to their final rest.
Just one was Private Robert Edward McIntyre, a butcher from Horsham in Victoria. As the marker on his grave at Gallipoli tells us, he served in the 8th Battalion Australian Infantry.
Even the bare bones of what is carved into his tombstone is enough to make you pause.
His life ended on 7 August 1915, barely four months into the Gallipoli campaign. He was just 22.
But then you come to a solitary line, a message from his parents: 
“How much of love and light and joy is buried with our darling boy.”
An entire eulogy in just 14 words.
The story of war is often painted on a large canvas, in broad brushstrokes of generals and battles, leaders and campaigns, the dead drawn together in a haze of numbers.
And so often it is framed in the rhetoric of nobility and sacrifice, lit up with the abiding resilience of the national spirit.
But how much of our national spirit is to be found on those modest tombstones like Private McIntyre’s, the scale of what Australia lost spelt out in expressions of grief and tenderness.
Personal universes of life and love and loss captured in the spare eloquence of a broken heart.
It’s captured in diary entries and in letters of reassurance and love to those at home – scraps of paper alive with voices laconic, lyrical, and plain-spoken alike.
Each year, as we gather in this place of memory, we strive to hear their voices still.
We gather amid all these names arrayed in constellations of grief that never fade and never set.
All who went in our name, and never came home.
Those who came home, but were unable to escape the shadow of what they’d seen.
And those who went to war and, having seen the worst that humanity is capable of, were forever guided by a sense that despite everything, the best of humanity is inextinguishable.
We have seen what horrors Australians have defeated. We have seen the difference Australians have made in the world. And the difference they continue to make.
We thank all serving members of the Australian Defence Force.
And we thank all veterans.
Just as they stepped up for us, we must step for them.
As we await the going down of the sun, we thank and pay tribute to them all.
We have faced moments when the light has seemed so very far away, but because of them, it is only nightfall that can ever gather us in darkness.
Lest we forget.


We're here today to mark 40 years of Medicare.
Last Thursday, I was in Robertson with Emma and Dr. Gordon Reid, appropriate that I was with a pharmacist and a doctor there in Umina at an Urgent Care Clinic last Thursday to mark Medicare's birthday.
One of the things that we're reminded of is that Medicare wasn't the first iteration. The first iteration was, of course, Medibank.
And today, we remember our friend the late Bill Hayden as well. As we commemorated his life, but one of his greatest achievements was of course Medibank.
It's also a reminder that support for universal healthcare, as the foundation stone of our public health system is not something we can take for granted.
Because when the Fraser Government came to office, they got rid of Medibank. And it took the election of the Hawke Government in 1983, to bring back Medicare, as one of the key elements of that campaign.
It took the leadership of Bob Hawke, and the determination of Neal Blewett, another great Health Minister in the fine Labor tradition.
It is a testament to the good judgement of the Australian people who time and time again, voted to protect Medicare and keep it strong.
John Howard went to elections saying that he would get rid of Medicare and to trash it.
And of course, we know that it is now just one of the core foundations of what the Australian Labor Party believes in and what the Australian people know is so important as well.
In recent times, there's been more bipartisanship, when it comes to the foundations of Medicare, it doesn't mean though that it hasn't been contested.
Because we do know, as we were reminded by Nemesis over the last couple of Monday nights, we've been reminded of exactly what the Government that we replaced stood for, when it comes to healthcare.
Where when they got elected to office, without saying anything before the election, they tried to introduce a GP tax under Peter Dutton, and get rid of therefore bulk billing, and seeing the doctor for free.
They tried something similar on not just visiting the GP, they tried it on hospital visits, and also, cuts to pharmaceuticals as well, increased costs are coming through.
So we need to remain vigilant. We need to celebrate the achievement of the creation and the maintenance of Medicare and we need to strengthen it.
And that's why since we came to office, we've been determined to have strengthening Medicare as one of the key components and it will be in the next election going forward as well.
At the December meeting of the National Capital, we provided an additional $1.2 billion of support for primary healthcare.
We said that we'd add to the 58 Urgent Care Clinics that are providing again, another step between visiting the GP and visiting the emergency department of the hospital.
That is making an enormous difference. Just there in Umina alone, I think there has been 1,200 visits. And that is what we are seeing right around the country at the 58 Urgent Care Clinics that we've opened.
Whether they be in Bunbury in WA, Frankston in Victoria, Umina. Whether they be, where I was in the electorate of Dickson last week as well.
Everywhere, it is making a difference and that's why we're going to add to it.
The tripling of the Bulk Billing Incentive that was at the centre of our Budget last year has made an enormous difference as well.
We need to rescue bulk billing, where numbers have been dropping over a long period. We needed to arrest the decline and you starts to increase.
And we saw for the first time in a long while, we saw a bump in bulk billing rates, people being able to visit the doctor in excess of an additional 300,000 free visits to the doctor, as a direct result of just two months of adding to bulk billing support.
We want to today as well acknowledge those people who make Medicare possible.
The GP, the doctors, the nurses, the people who work on the front desks, at our doctor's surgeries, at our hospitals. The orderlies, the people who take the X-rays, radiographers, all those people who make a difference.
But also those good public servants, working in offices making sure that payments are made, making sure that people receive that support going through.
We think that government has no greater responsibility than to look after people with the healthcare that they need, when they need it.
And if you look at our system compared with other parts of the world, that rely upon a private system, what you see is the difference Medicare can make.
When Kerry Packer had a heart attack, he ended up at my local hospital in Camperdown, the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.
He got the same care that my mum got throughout her life as a single mum and invalid pensioner.
The same care, the same support. That is a fundamental tenet of who Australians are, that we look after each other.
We don't look at people's credit cards and what's in their wallet, all they need in their wallet is Medicare card.
And that's important that that continue to be the foundation of our health system here in this country. And that's what makes an enormous difference.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
The lead-up to International Women’s Day is an opportunity for all of us to recognise the progress that women are driving across our economy and our society.
It’s a chance to re-affirm our commitment to true gender equality – in the community, the boardroom, on the sporting field, in our parliaments.
Above all, this is a time when we must face-up to where we are falling short and look for new ways to do better.
Nowhere is this need for new thinking and renewed determination more urgent or more clear than when it comes to addressing violence against women and children.
One death from family violence is one too many. One death a week is an epidemic.
It is an offence against every value we hold as Australians, it flies in the face of everything we say and imagine about ourselves as nation.
In acknowledging this hard truth, it is worth noting that there has been a profound change in the way we talk about family and domestic violence and the national priority we give to it.
The terrible toll of violence against women is front page news – as it should be.
And that in itself should give us cause for hope.
Because so much of this overdue change in mindset is down to the courage of victim-survivors and advocates, extraordinary Australians like Rosie Batty.
Women who have channelled their grief and pain into a call for national action.
Over recent years, the voices and experiences of women have helped change public perception.
And under our Government, the voices and experiences of women are changing public policy.
I am proud to lead the first government in Australian history with a majority of women in our membership.
You can see, across every portfolio, this has made a difference.
Because of women, campaigning with the union movement, making it clear that no-one should have choose to between their safety and their job – we now have 10 Days Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave.
Because of women’s advocacy and the work of experts like Anne Summers, emphasising the way poverty and financial dependency trap people in violent relationships – we’ve delivered more support for single mums.
Because of women, making it clear that one of the most basic reasons they do not leave a dangerous situation sooner is because they simply have nowhere safe to go – we are building and funding more crisis accommodation and safe housing around the country.
The experience and perspective of women and children is driving our actions on family and sexual violence law reform.
It’s driving the work our outstanding Minister for Women, Katy Gallagher, is leading on our new Gender Equality Strategy.
It’s informing what we’re doing in education, everything from respectful relationships to dealing with sexual assault on campuses and preventing online abuse.
And it’s shaping so much of the economic progress that we have made.
The gender pay gap is at a record low, the participation rate has reached historic highs.
All 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report are being implemented.
We’ve taken new action on pay equity and pay transparency.
These are just some of the changes that have seen Australia climb from 43rd in the Global Gender Gap rankings to 26th.
And yet even as we welcome this progress, we must recognise that gender equality, while essential, does not safeguard against family violence on its own.
Indeed, even nations that lead the world on measures of gender equality are dealing with their own shocking rates of violence.
Some of it, in the cruellest of ironies, occurring as a reaction to the progress being made.
Male partners using violence to try and re-assert some sort of imagined authority.
This is why addressing family violence cannot begin and end with efforts to achieve gender equity or economic equality.
We have to go deeper than that.
To start with, we have to listen and learn from those who have experienced violence.
That’s what the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commissioner Cronin is doing.
And it’s what Minister Amanda Rishworth has done through our National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children.
Out of those conversations and consultations on the National Plan have come two important and recurring messages I wanted to highlight this morning.
First, there must be more humanity and empathy and dignity accorded to victims of family, domestic and sexual violence, from law enforcement to government services to the courts.
When women are seeking help they should be heard and seen, believed, supported and empowered.
A willingness to understand what a person has been through must be built-in into the system and shape the actions of everyone who works in it.
As one woman put it:
“Your whole world is turned upside down. Most days you don’t even know what your own name is. Let alone the right services to call.”
And the second vital point was that we need a much sharper focus on stopping violence, not just responding to it.
One person put it like this:
“If we look at this as a waterfall, we’re catching women and children at the bottom of the waterfall. They’re already in crisis, and they’re drowning. We want to be catching women before they fall in. If they’re partway down, we want early intervention to get in there. Because when they get to the bottom, crisis and tertiary response is overwhelmed, which they are.”
We need to put the focus on prevention and we need to do that in new ways.
Concentrating our efforts on perpetrators.
Intervening early where there is a higher risk – whether it’s because people are facing financial or health stress, or alcohol and drug issues.
As well as proactively engaging with children who have been exposed to violence.
Because all the data tells us that men who perpetrate violence as adults are more likely to have experienced violence as a child.
We know that’s not the reality for everyone. Ending violence in a generation means making sure it’s not the reality for anyone.
Because violence against women and children is never acceptable.
We need to break the cycle, to make sure that the trauma inflicted by this generation of abusers, doesn’t create another generation of perpetrators.
That’s why we are investing in initiatives like Helping Children Heal and other early intervention programs that will help young men deal with the trauma they’ve suffered, so they can form healthy relationships when they grow up.
The final thing I’d say is that while women are shaping these policies and driving these responses, ending this epidemic of violence has to involve men stepping up.
Because violence against women is not a problem that women should have to solve.
Men have to be prepared to take responsibility for our actions and our attitudes.
To educate our sons, to talk to our mates.
To drive real change in the culture of our sporting clubs, our faith and community groups and our workplaces – including this workplace.
It’s great there are so many Members and Senators here this morning.
I know that everyone elected to Parliament, from all points of the political compass, believes that the decisions we make here can help change the country for the better.
And practically every week, whenever we read about another life violently stolen, all of us are reminded of why change is needed and why it’s needed as a matter of urgency.
I know all of us are determined for Australia to do better on this.
Working together, I know we can and I’m confident we will.


My friend, Prime Minister Marape, on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, it is a great pleasure to so warmly welcome you to the heart of our democracy.
You are the first leader of another nation to address us in this chamber since 2020.
And the first leader of a Pacific island nation to address the Australian Parliament, ever.
It is fitting that such an honour belongs to Papua New Guinea.
Australia and Papua New Guinea are close in every sense of the word.
We are the nearest of neighbours.
The most steadfast and trusted of partners.
And the very oldest of friends.
Our connection stretches back thousands of years, to Torres Strait Islanders and Indigenous traders, weaving together their cultures and communities.
And while the modern relationship that we celebrate with your visit today has evolved and expanded to include every field of human endeavour, from agriculture and medicine to education, sport and the frontline of clean energy.
Our bond still holds true to the spirit of those very first exchanges.
We embrace each other as equals.
We learn from each other as neighbours.
We are there for each other as mates, especially when times are hard.
And in everything our people do together, we nourish our common interests, our shared values and our unique connections.
Including, of course, a great and growing passion for that mighty cultural institution, rugby league.
Sport brings our people together.
It’s part of our shared bond.
And Prime Minister, like you, I hope the day will come when the people of Papua New Guinea can cheer for a team of their own in the National Rugby League.
Next year, we will commemorate, and celebrate, the 50th anniversary of Papua New Guinea’s independence.
A momentous day in the life of both our nations.
Australia will always be proud of the part we played in that time of historic change.
Yet we know that independence was never our gift to give.
Independence was the people of Papua New Guinea's right to assert, it was your country’s opportunity to seize.
It was an act of great courage, profound national unity.
And a statement of self-belief as well as self-determination.
It sent a message to our region then, it stands as an example to our region now.
It speaks for a universal truth: every Pacific nation, big and small, has the right to shape its own future and secure its own destiny.
Mr Prime Minister, half a century ago, the Whitlam Labor Government worked with purpose and pride alongside your leaders and your citizens to lay the foundations of a new democracy.
Today, our Government is partnering with yours, to build the architecture of peace and opportunity.
To fulfil your vision of a modern and prosperous future for your people.
A vision that both our peoples are helping to make real, teaching together in PNG schools, studying together at Australian universities and TAFEs.
Working together, including through the expanded and reformed Pacific Australia Labour Mobility scheme.
Not only bringing essential skills to Australian farms and aged care homes, but also sending good wages back to families in your country.
And working together to build the infrastructure that can transform the words and ambitions of our agreements into concrete realities.
New projects backed by Australia, including through the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific and built by the people of PNG.
Over 1,800 kilometres of roads connecting services and support and supplies to remote villages and giving your farmers and producers access to city markets.
Upgrading six priority ports and building better biosecurity, so PNG can sell more of your world-class cocoa and coffee and seafood to the region and the world.
Investing in new clean energy projects, to bring light and power and economic opportunity to homes and schools, hospitals and health centres.
Building new undersea cables, breaking-down the barriers of isolation to bring jobs and education in reach of boys and girls alike.
Mr Prime Minister, Australia wants to build this future with you and secure it with you, as your primary partner.
Central to this is the new Bilateral Security Agreement that we signed here in Parliament House in December last year.
The beginning of a new era of cooperation between our nations spanning defence, policing and border and maritime security.
And meeting the urgent challenges of cyber security and climate change.
An agreement for the future, anchored in our shared history.
Mr Prime Minister, on the other side of the world, in a quiet French village called Villers-Bretonneux, when the children of the local school play in the yard each day, they look up at a banner that reads:
“Do not forget Australia”.
A sacred command from one generation, to the next.
Given in honour of the memory of more than 3,000 Australians who died defending the town from German attacks during the First World War.
Villers-Bretonneux is a name that lives in Anzac legend, so is Kokoda.
And when Australians reflect on the heroism the people of Papua New Guinea showed in the defence of their homeland.
When we remember those soldiers and coast watchers, serving and sacrificing together.
The families and communities who risked their own lives, to feed and guide and help Australians in desperate need during our darkest hour.
And when we remember the care and kindness your people extended to wounded diggers in their hardest moments of pain and fear.
I say to you:  Australia will never forget Papua New Guinea.
And those words do not need to be displayed on a sign, or engraved on a memorial.
Becaus, they were written by the courage of your people.
And they are recorded in every Australian heart.
When I had the great honour of addressing the PNG Parliament at the beginning of last year.
I said this would be a ‘decisive decade’ for both our nations and for the Indo-Pacific.
It will be a decisive decade for us and it can be a decisive decade because of us.
Because of what we decide, together, Papua New Guinea and Australia.
The co-operation and stability we can build together.
The peace and security we can uphold together.
The growth and prosperity we can achieve together.
The broader opportunity and deeper equality we can create together.
The democratic values we can champion together.
Two free, proud and independent democracies.
Two countries home to unique environmental treasures.
Two lands rich in natural resources and richer still in human potential.
Two bold, diverse and resilient populations, ready to make this decade our own.
Neighbours and mates. Partners and Equals.
Prime Minister Marape, Australians will never forget what the people of Papua New Guinea did for us in the past.
Let us never doubt what we can achieve together in the future.
You are most welcome in our Parliament today, you are welcome in Australia, always.
We all look forward to your speech.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I’m delighted to be here in Ballarat.
The course of our national history has been shaped and changed here.
It’s a place where leaders were born.
A place where the past is present.
And we find an important part of our past here at the Australian Ex-Prisoners of War Memorial, which speaks of a different chapter in our nation’s story.
It’s a story that needs to be told. No one instilled that idea in me more than my dear friend, mentor and father figure, Tom Uren.
Tom spent much of the Second World War as a prisoner of the Japanese – captured in Timor, incarcerated at Changi, forced to work on the Thai-Burma railway, then sent to Japan as a slave labourer – only to witness the atomic bombing of Nagasaki.
I will always think with wonder of how Tom endured years of such depravity and cruelty – and emerged as a tower of humanity.
Tom saw humankind in its darkest depths, yet he was forever after driven to seek out our brightest heights. And when he held up the past to us, he was holding out the hope of a better future.
Tom always said Australians survived in the prison camps because of a simple code: The healthy looked after the sick, the strong looked after the weak, the young looked after the old.
Tom’s strength was inseparable from his gentleness, and I believe that it was that aspect of life in captivity that lay at the heart of who he was.
He knew that the very worst could bring out the very best in us. And I believe those values are at the heart of what it is to be an Australian.
That is why I am proud to be here to see the story of Australian PoWs being told.
It tells of the sacrifice, courage and mateship of the men and women who served our country in war.
And asks us to honour the POWs among them.
For whom captivity meant waiting in silence.
Long years of isolation and deprivation, without news of loved ones or mates, home or country.
When the sounds of war were muffled by chains and fences.
And the impulse to action was too often crushed by brutality and inhumanity.
For those men and women, their strength lay in the power to endure.
This memorial is an eloquent expression of their spirit.
It is a record of patience, perseverance and humour.
And, above all, hope.
The roll of names is a litany of endurance.
Its standing stones and sombre granite are a tribute to fortitude.
And the flowing water sings a hymn to constancy.
Through the centuries, war has led to a flood of diaries and documents, recounting life on and off the battlefield.
With them came objects and artworks, many crafted by POWs in the long, oppressive hours of imprisonment.
Often made in haste from materials scrounged from dumps, they are a storehouse of memory and a record of fidelity.
The work of men and women, imprisoned in the bitter cold of a European winter, or the heat of the tropics.
Sick, wounded, starving, exhausted.
But, while the breath of life remained, the spark of creativity enlivened their hands.
Shaping relics of a time and place no words could comprehend.
A pottery mug, inscribed with the plea of a loving father:
'God bless and protect Bill, Jim, Ronnie, Eddie, Kenny and Dear Maud'.
A woollen blanket, crocheted in the muted colours of Red Cross-issued socks and jumpers.
Rosary beads, painstakingly fashioned from seeds and wire.
A Melbourne Cup trophy, improvised out of a can of bully beef.
Heartbreakingly, these artefacts often came home without their creators.
And for family and friends, they became a window onto the unimaginable — and a final, precious gift from their dear ones.
A symbol of the light of hope that burnt within them as the wretched weeks, months and years of captivity passed.
This is the spirit so poignantly captured in the arrangement of this memorial to Australia’s POWs.
On its 20th anniversary, I offer my thanks to those who saw and acted on the need for a memorial to honour Australia’s prisoners of war.
To tell us their story. A story that needed to be told. A story that needs to keep being told.
Lest We Forget.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I also acknowledge those members of the Stolen Generations who have joined us in here. I had the great honour of spending time with them this morning at the National Apology Breakfast.
Your presence humbles us, and elevates us.
The Apology was the very first order of business of the Rudd Labor Government. There are many moments I am proud of as a parliamentarian, but that extraordinary day 16 years ago remains my proudest.
And amid the catharsis it made possible, it set in place the annual report card that is Closing the Gap.
It is important to reflect on the Apology, and the courage and grace of the survivors who made it possible. As Prime Minister Rudd implored us that day:
Let us turn this page together … and write this new chapter in our nation's story together.

Anniversaries matter deeply. But what will shape the future is the actions we take now.
Sixteen years after the Apology, only 11 out of 19 socio-economic outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are improving. Just four are on track to meet their targets.
What should give us pause is that outcomes have worsened for four critical targets – children's early development, rates of children in out-of-home care, rates of adult imprisonment, and tragically suicide.
We can take some heart from the fact that in some areas that are off target, they are not uniformly so.Early childhood development, adult incarceration rates and out-of-home care aren't on track at a national level, but have shown improvement in some regions and jurisdictions. That's a positive, albeit a slender one.
The Productivity Commission has made it clear that the old ways are not working.Decades of insisting that Government knows best, has made things worse.
We must find a better way – and we must do it together.
That focus was a fundamental reason our Government sought to fulfil the gracious and generous request from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people for a Voice enshrined in the Nation's Constitution.
Of course, we respect the referendum result.
The preceding debate brought into sharp focus the disadvantage and inequality endured by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Support for reconciliation is a core value of this Labor Government. And it is a value shared by Australians.
Australians want to close the gap. Australians believe in the fair go.
This Government remains determined to move reconciliation forward and seek better results for Indigenous Australians.
As we take the time needed to get Makaratta and truth-telling right, the work of treaty goes on at a state and territory level. There will be a diversity of processes, reflecting the diversity of First Nations across the continent.
And we will respond to their progress while focusing on our immediate responsibilities – Closing the Gap, self-determination and tangible outcomes, particularly in jobs, housing, education, health and justice.
There have, of course, been improvements during the course of the modern Australian story. When we paid our respects to the late Dr Lowitja O'Donoghue last week, it was clear how much had changed during her lifetime – thanks in no small part to her.
Her love for this country found its greatest expression in her faith in our ability, and our will, to become an even better nation.
With us in the gallery today is Deb Edwards – Dr O'Donoghue's niece and one of the keepers of her flame.
Australia has overcome much, but the gaps persist, including the life expectancy gap that gapes between us like a chasm. That is inexcusable.
Uluru was an invitation born of grace. But grace is not a bottomless well. And we cannot ask for infinite patience. We all agree that the status quo is unacceptable.
As just one example, this is what Dr Jason King told the ABC last year about the community he works in near Cairns.
We have a rheumatic heart disease rate – a medical condition which has been eliminated from the broader Australian population to a larger extent – that is 100 times the average in this country.

The ABC even had to include an explanation of rheumatic heart disease. That is how completely it has faded – not just from the general community, but from our collective memory. But not from Indigenous Australia.
But we cannot keep doing the same thing and expect a different outcome. Our approach has to change. Making progress depends on listening to people and communities. In the words of Tom Calma:
Bureaucrats and governments can have the best intentions in the world, but if their ideas have not been subject to the 'reality test' of the life experience of the local Indigenous peoples who are intended to benefit from this, then government efforts will fail.

That is why we are listening to and working with communities.
The Government is committed to the ongoing National Agreement on Closing the Gap. We are determined to work with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to create new opportunities and achieve better outcomes at a local level.
We must deliver real jobs with real skills, which means real opportunity for First Nations people.
That is why we are moving on from the failed Community Development Program. It created no real opportunities. It built no futures.
Today I announce the creation of our Remote Jobs and Economic Development Program. This is a better approach.
It will fund community organisations to create 3000 jobs in remote areas.
Real jobs with proper wages and decent conditions.
Jobs developed in partnership with Indigenous communities.
Jobs that will build skills that communities want.
Jobs that deliver services that communities want.
Jobs that deliver infrastructure that communities want.
Jobs that create a sense of possibility – for individuals, for families, and for communities.
This new program will focus squarely on economic development that strengthens community and, crucially, lays the foundations for long-term, positive change.
The key ingredient is engagement with community organisations and communities to identify and develop local opportunities and jobs. Those organisations will also identify the right people to do those jobs and will be the employer.
We are also increasing the number of Indigenous Rangers – which has been such a compelling success story – and developing the junior program.
We want every Australian to have access to the dignity of work.
And we want every job to confer dignity.
As part of our focus on housing, my Government has worked with the Northern Territory Government to escalate construction of remote housing in order to address the worst overcrowding rates in the country.
Together we have achieved a 200 per cent increase in the rate of delivery of Commonwealth-funded housing, building 100 homes in 100 days in 2023.
Last year, as part of Closing the Gap we committed to building 157 houses in remote Northern Territory communities during the financial year 2023-24.
Today, I can confirm that these are on schedule to be, not just completed, but be completed months early.
We have also restored funding for Northern Territory Homelands, with housing repairs across the Territory, from Paru on the Tiwi Islands, to Utopia in the Barkly and vital upgrades in sanitation and electrical safety, and water testing and supply.
This is essential, because so much of life's possibility begins with the stability and the security of somewhere to call home.
We must keep going, and delivery has to be the priority. Delivery that means better health outcomes. Delivery that means stronger communities.
Communities that get a say. And just as importantly, are heard.
What so much of it amounts to is a simple truth, and that is what Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander parents want for their children is the same as all Australians want for theirs – the same opportunity to make a good life for themselves.
The next generation is critical to change.
So I am pleased to announce that we are establishing a National Commissioner for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children and Young People.
The National Commissioner will be dedicated to protecting and promoting the rights, interests and wellbeing of First Nations children and young people, as well as calling on their strengths, sense of hope, and ideas for change.
The Commissioner will address the unacceptable rates of out-of-home care. What it all comes down to is strengthening families and keeping children safe.
It is what the Coalition of the Peaks and experts have been calling for, guided every step of the way by the evidence. We have listened.
An interim National Commissioner will be appointed this year. They will undertake consultation with First Nations and other stakeholders on the role and functions of a legislated independent and empowered National Commissioner.
Since we were elected, this Government has prioritised resourcing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations, particularly the community-controlled sector.
To help end family and domestic violence we are providing immediate assistance of $96 million in grants to frontline Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations in supporting First Nations women and children affected by violence.
We will invest in justice reinvestment right across the continent as part of our landmark justice reinvestment programs, the largest commitment to justice reinvestment ever delivered by the Commonwealth.
Justice reinvestment is a long-term, community-led approach to preventing crime, improving community safety and reducing the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults and children in custody.
We have delivered on our election commitment to establish national real-time reporting of all deaths in custody. Every preventable death in custody is a tragedy, with a shockwave of trauma and grief that rocks families and entire communities.
Real-time reporting will ensure we have better data from every state and territory to identify systemic failures in custodial practices and try to prevent future deaths occurring in similar circumstances.
Under our Healthworker Traineeship Program, 183 students have enrolled and when they are ready, will go work for Aboriginal community-controlled health organisations.
Through elder care support, we have funded 182 full time equivalent positions to work as elder care support workers.
Through our support for suicide prevention efforts, we now have 108 workers to drive culturally appropriate suicide prevention across country.
In the area of early education, we have ensured a base entitlement of 36 hours a fortnight for First Nations children.
Last year, in January to September alone, 14,000 Indigenous students enrolled in fee-free TAFE.
We are improving access to safe drinking water for 1100 people in the communities in Yuendumu and Milinginbi.
We are improving renal services with an anticipated 30 dialysis units in remote areas over four years.
After a decade of neglect we're making a record investment of $250 million in Central Australia, for a better, safer future. We are continuing to talk to the community about how effectively this roll-out can be completed.
I can announce that includes seven new Remote Training Hubs in Central Australia. One of the first ones will be in Yuendumu. And as with every other initiative, we will keep working with the community.
There are no easy solutions and no quick fixes to the challenges facing Indigenous Australians in Alice Springs, but we are working with the community to deliver effective, lasting solutions.
Just some of what we have done includes:

An increase in funding for police and youth services.
Expanded family and domestic violence services in remote communities outside Alice Springs.
Setting up a night patrol.
Improved health services for children and families.
New dialysis centres at Ti-Tree and Harts Range.
Increased funding and improved programs to get kids to school and keep them there.
Expanded safe short-term accommodation in Alice Springs.

As part of our Government's justice reinvestment program, Lhere Artepe, Desert Knowledge Australia and Anglicare NT are developing a local response to reduce crime and increase community safety.
And we upgraded Wi-Fi in four communities, which among other things gives teenagers opportunities to access study and training opportunities.
Following the success of the Community Wi-Fi trial, we are upgrading Wi-Fi in another 20 communities this year, boosting access to services and chipping away at the tyranny of distance.
This will be done in partnership with NBN Co, with access delivered via the NBN Sky Muster service and in-community Digital Ambassadors to support digital literacy.
Kids should have the same access to the same digital opportunities whether they're in Alice, Brisbane or the Kimberley.
Again, this is what we can do when we listen to people in communities.
While it's crucial to have built this momentum, it's essential to keep building on it.
We are also looking to some of the possibilities in the transition to renewable energy. Taking a leaf out of Canada's book, Energy Minister Chris Bowen is co-developing a First Nations Clean Energy Strategy.
There is already significant First Nations involvement in some major renewable energy investments.
And as Australia moves ever closer to taking its rightful place as a clean energy superpower, the potential is exciting – in job creation and in the right of Indigenous Australians to leverage benefit from their own land.
Mr Speaker
If we want to close the gap, we have to listen to people who live on the other side of it.
Canberra must be willing to share power with communities.
To offer responsibility and ownership and self-determination.
To let local knowledge design programs, to trust locals to deliver them and to listen to locals when they tell us what's working and what isn't.
That's a culture change we have to drive – in this building, in the public service and across governments at all levels.
The price of failure – over successive governments – isn't just counted in dollars, it's measured in lives.
Not every community-driven initiative will be an overnight success, but we know that we cannot just keep doing things the same way. The Productivity Commission has outlined the case for a new approach.
I am grateful for the ongoing work of the Coalition of Peaks, led so ably by Pat Turner, a great Australian, and deputy lead conveners Catherine Liddle and Scott Wilson, for their determination to ensure the success of this endeavour.
The Coalition of Peaks and the state and territory governments are vital partners in our national effort. Greater co-operation is key to meaningful, sustained progress.
My Government is enhanced by the wealth of wisdom and expertise of the Minister for Indigenous Australians, the member for Barton as well as the Assistant Minister for Indigenous Australians and Assistant Minister for Indigenous Health, Senator Malarndirri McCarthy.
I want to also put on record that I am very grateful to the Father of Reconciliation, Pat Dodson. His absence from this place is keenly felt, but I'm glad he's in the Kimberley, where his big heart belongs.
And I know that I can speak on behalf of all Parliamentarians in saying that we all wish him very well with his ongoing health issues that he is dealing with, with the same courage in which he has dealt with his extraordinary journey in life.
His legacy is in the best possible hands with our First Nations Caucus, who will keep building on it and carrying it forward.
What they and others have done is ensure that this Government listens to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
That we remain committed to Australians having a shared understanding of our history and a united vision for our future, a future shaped by self-determination.
We are clear-eyed in our dedication to building an Australia where more families know the stability of a roof over their head.
Where communities are safer, happier and healthier – shaped and secured by the people who call them home.
Where more Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children have the same chance to have a good crack at a fulfilling life.
The simple truth that can brighten the path ahead for all of us is that when Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people advance, the entire nation moves forward.
There is so much that we can do. So much that we must do. We can and we must do better than Governments of all persuasions have done over the last 123 years.
We keep writing the great Australian story. It's a story that goes back 65,000 years.
And those of us who've either come to this nation ourselves, or have come from descendants of people who have come over the last 200 plus years, have the great privilege of sharing this greatest country on earth, with the oldest continuous culture on earth. That must be a source of enormous pride for all Australians.
It is a great Australian story, that all of us, particularly us here, have a chance to write the next chapter – and to do it in the spirit of reconciliation.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we are meeting.
I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I also pass on my respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people that are with us here this morning.
And I particularly want to acknowledge every member of the Stolen Generations who are here with us today.
It is such an honour for me to be here with you.
Just as it was an extraordinary honour for me to be able to play a part in that extraordinary day sixteen years ago.
The apology was the very first order of business of the newly elected Rudd Labor Government.
It was the fulfilment of a priority.
It was the overdue acknowledgement of a great hurt.
It was the act of a nation that will no longer turn its back.
And it was our ears and hearts finally open for all who had for so long been telling us a difficult truth.
Survivors speaking for themselves, speaking for those who couldn't.
Our nation was lifted by the courage of everyone who spoke up.
Everyone who told their stories and took on the burden, and so often the trauma, of revisiting their childhood.
And courage is what we saw in every member of the Stolen Generations who came here that day and faced the very institution that had failed you and failed you profoundly.
Alongside your courage, you showed us grace, almost beyond imagining.
Perhaps most importantly, you showed us that when we have an honest reckoning of the past, we give ourselves a better future.
And a big part of that is the healing that began sixteen years ago with just one word - Sorry.
Easy now to remember that the uttering of that word by an Australian Prime Minister was not inevitable, and was controversial at the time.
It was the right thing to do.
We always talk about healing in the present tense because it is ongoing.
It is in every sense a work in progress.
A task that takes in not just our history, but also our future.
We try to reconcile the past, not as an exercise in blame, but as a necessary step to move forward.
You can't know where you're going if you don't know where you’ve been, to put it really simply.
I can tell you, there are many moments that I'm proud of as a Parliamentarian.
That extraordinary day sixteen years ago, remains my proudest.
That was the end of one chapter and the beginning of another.
Of course, the new chapter has not been straightforward, a fact that has been emphasised by the latest Closing the Gap Report.
Closing the Gap and the Government's implementation plan have rightly been returned to February.
Closing the Gap is part of a new chapter that the Apology made possible. They belong together.
And when we confront the many challenges in closing the gap we should always look to the courage of the survivors who have made it all possible.
You have our respect and you have our gratitude.
We will keep tackling these challenges.
The courage shown by my Minister for Indigenous Australians in leading the campaign along with Patrick Dodson, who we do miss, indeed very sincerely, his wisdom in this building. 
The courage in taking forward a referendum to recognise First Nations people in our constitution in the form in which they themselves requested, through the gracious Uluru Statement from the Heart, is one that was a necessary step going forward as well.
We were disappointed by the result.
We respect the outcome.
But it does not diminish one bit our determination to listen to First Nations people about how to close the gap.
It was never the end.
It was the means to the end.
The end is reconciliation.
The end is closing the gap in life expectancy, in education outcomes, health outcomes, housing outcomes.
This gap in all of these areas diminishes us as a nation.
And the Productivity Commission, no less, has confirmed that the key to advancing is indeed listening to people who are directly affected as we move forward.
So we will keep tackling these challenges.
We will continue to work each and every day with our commitment to First Nations people and to reconciliation, undiminished.
Empowered by the courage of those First Nations people who I was proud to stand with and humbled by their grace and dignity during and after that referendum campaign.
I do thank every single survivor who showed us a new path ahead.
We will keep walking along this path and we'll do so together.
Because I firmly believe that the Australian people want reconciliation.
But they want us to move forward as a nation.
And they recognise that the gaps which are there in so many aspects.
And we know, we’ll hear later today, only four of the nineteen. That's not a pass mark for us as a nation.
And all of us, regardless of where we stand on the political spectrum, need to recognise that we need to do better.
We must do better because First Nations people deserve this.
But the Australian nation, founded as we are on the concept of a fair go, and respecting each other regardless of our origins, deserve this as well.
Thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I'm delighted be back in Newcastle.
This is a beautiful part of our country, it's also a community that can teach us so much about responding to challenges and seizing opportunities.
Newcastle and the Hunter tell a great Australian story of resilience and reconstruction.
A reminder that even as we grapple with the urgent challenges of the present, we must always be looking to anticipate and shape the future.
And proof that while the forces of economic change are inevitable and unavoidable, what happens next is up to us.
More than a century ago, the opening of the steelworks brought new prosperity to this region and built new prosperity for our nation.
There are over 10,000 tonnes of Newcastle steel in the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
Newcastle steel helped arm and defend Australia in the Second World War.
And every day in Canberra, the Australian flag above Parliament House flies on a mast made of Newcastle steel.
When production peaked here in the early 1980s, the site employed over 11,000 people.
Then, in 1997, BHP announced it would be closing the steelworks.
And back then, there were plenty of people ready to write Newcastle off.
Yet anyone who witnessed what the Knights produced that September, saw a sign of things to come.
Proof that you should never write off Novocastrians.
Because even when the furnaces at the steelworks went cold, the spark of creativity and innovation in Newcastle and the Hunter was still there, firing this community's reinvention and renewal.
The workers and businesses in this great surf-loving town didn't just let the wave of change wash over them.
You didn't wait out the back, hoping something would turn up.
You picked your moment, you took your chance.
You and your community understood that the skills and determination and co-operation which had made the Hunter an economic powerhouse in the 20th Century could drive its growth and transformation into the 21st Century.
We can see the dividend of that approach, all around us.
A hard-working, dynamic, diversifying and innovative local economy.
The home of good jobs, in growing industries.
A hub of new skills, new technologies, new energy and new ideas.
The University of Newcastle has made such an important contribution to all of that success.
In my speech on election night, I spoke about the historic mission that drives Labor Governments. Opening the doors of opportunity and widening them.
Education, from the early years, to school, TAFE and university is and always will be absolutely fundamental to that.
And for 50 years, the University of Newcastle has led the nation in opening its doors.
The fee-free enabling courses offered here represent an alternative pathway to higher education.
A foot in the door for students who did not obtain the qualification for direct entry.
They help people who otherwise wouldn't have the chance to go to uni, train for something they're passionate about while also getting a grounding in writing and research and the general career skills that higher education offers.
An extraordinary 70,000 people have taken up the offer.
That's not a national figure, 70,000 people here in the Hunter.
In the last 10 years alone, nearly one in five students who graduated from the University of Newcastle entered via these enabling courses.
Because when Australians are given a chance to better themselves - they take it and they make the most of it.
Our fee-free TAFE places speak to that.
We made 180,000 available at the beginning of 2023 and by the end of the year over 300,000 people had enrolled.
More than a third of those Australians seeking a new qualification were living in the regions.
Wherever institutions and employers and governments invest in our people and their potential that investment delivers a profound return: for the individual, for our workforce, for our national productivity and prosperity.
We are entering a time when 9 out of every 10 new jobs will require either a university degree or a TAFE qualification and I see the University of Newcastle's commitment to equity and excellence as a model that other universities around Australia should be looking to embrace and emulate.
Education is central to creating opportunity, it's also fundamental to our Government's vision for a future made in Australia.
Education and skills are about preparing our workforce to compete and lead and succeed in a global economy being redefined by decarbonisation and digital technology.
New skills build new strengths for our economy and they create new opportunities for our people.
They give Australians the confidence and capacity to aspire to a better life for themselves and their families.
Because when we talk about a future made in Australia, we want it made the Australian way.
Not entering a race to the bottom on pay and conditions but driving a new generation of good jobs and fair wages in safe workplaces.
Highly-skilled workers, making high-value products.
That's the economic high road and it runs right through the Hunter.
Fifty years ago, the Liddell Power Station was brand new - and it was the most powerful generating station in Australia.
Today, the future of that site lies in renewable energy.
It's a snapshot of the economic and energy transformation underway in Australia, particularly in regional Australia.
A journey that every advanced economy has embarked on.
And a race that Australia can win.
Every nation needs to decarbonise and electrify.
And no nation is better placed than Australia to achieve this transition here at home and power it in the world.
We are home to every metal and critical mineral essential to net zero.
We are already the world's largest supplier of lithium, the fourth largest of cobalt, and the third largest of rare earths.
We have a workforce skilled in safe extraction.
And we own a proven track record as a reliable producer and exporter of energy and resources.
So much of the history of the Hunter speaks proudly to that.
But I don't want extraction to be the limit of our ambitions.
I don't want us to spend another generation as the last link in the global supply chain.
I want to see more Australian workers and Australians firms adding value here.
I want to see more Australian research incorporating Australian resources into technology made here in Australia.
Like at MCi, where they are using technology developed at the University of Newcastle to transform captured carbon dioxide emissions into carbonate rock that can be used in building materials.
Or 3ME Technology, which is working to electrify heavy vehicles used in mining, replacing diesel engines with batteries.
As well as developing an electric version of the iconic Bushmaster vehicle, in partnership with the Australian Defence Force.
Reliable and affordable clean energy, from solar to green hydrogen to offshore wind can power a new generation of advanced manufacturing and heavy industry, in our suburbs and our regional centres.
In defence manufacturing, in the transport sector.
In cement, ammonia, green steel and green aluminium.
And of course if we can get this right, it's not a closed loop.
We can be an exporter of clean energy technology and clean energy itself.
Helping our neighbours reduce their emissions and bolster their energy security.
There is a huge prize on offer here, across every sector of our economy and in every market in our region.
That's why I talk about Australia as a renewable energy superpower, because that's the truly global scale of the opportunity.
Those are the stakes. That's the path so many countries are trying to find for themselves.
And Government has to be a partner in this, not just an observer.
You can see that in the unprecedented investments the United States and the EU and Japan and Korea are making in their industrial bases.
We don't have to go dollar-for-dollar in our spending.
But we can go toe-to-toe on the quality and impact of our policies.
Our new Net Zero Economy Authority will be part of that.
Working with business and industry in the Hunter, so they can invest in reducing their emissions.
And co-ordinating with local government, Business Hunter and local workers, planning for new jobs in a stronger and more diverse local economy.
In all of this, we must be prepared to think big.
Australia may be home to only 0.3 per cent of the world's population but we produce over 1 per cent of global GDP.
We don't just punch above our weight, we pack a punch.
We are the 13th biggest economy in the world.
And in so many areas that matter, we can keep growing.
By pursuing greater diversity in who we trade with and what we trade.
By driving better co-operation in our Federation and healthier competition in our economy.
And by unlocking the productivity dividend of everything from new technologies, to a reformed NDIS to continuing progress on equality for women.
This is a task that traverses far more than energy policy, or industry policy.
This is a whole-of-nation opportunity and it demands a whole-of-economy approach.
It all has to fit together, it all has to pull in the same direction.
Skills and training and higher education, of course.
But also that network of support for research and development, getting access to capital for start-ups and innovators.
Making it easier for Australian breakthroughs to be commercialised.
And boosting productivity across the board by helping Australian companies, big and small, new and old, adapt to digital technology and build it into their business model.
That's what our National Reconstruction Fund is about, making those strategic investments, in everything from food and beverage manufacturing to agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
But our task as a Government and our test as a nation, goes beyond investing in firms and institutions.
We need to increase housing supply, particularly in growth corridors and close to public transport so that the essential workforce of our future, particularly in health and the caring economy, can afford to live in the communities they serve.
Continuing action on closing the gender pay gap, increasing economic participation and promoting equality for women in every facet of Australian life.
Because the fastest and most enduring way to boost productivity and grow our economy, is to invest in gender equality.
It means building the infrastructure to connect communities and promote economic development.
Which is why we are funding the business case for high speed rail from Sydney to Newcastle, a truly transformative project.
By the end of this year we will have the proposed alignment, station locations, train types, costs and construction timeframes, as well as a better understanding of the immense economic potential.
We're also funding the M1 extension to Raymond Terrace and Heatherbrae, the missing piece of the Pacific Highway.
This project will reduce traffic, it will improve road safety, it will create local jobs.
And it will lift national productivity, making it easier to move freight to and from this vital port.
The work of nation-building includes digital infrastructure too.
The internet has made it possible for a start-up or a family business in a country town to advertise their product to our region, to trade in the world's biggest marketplace.
It's made telehealth a reality and made it easier for to get medical advice or mental health support, without driving for hours both ways.
It has given young people in some of the most remote parts of our country unprecedented access to new knowledge and opportunities.
Fast, reliable internet is not a luxury, it's essential for our future growth.
So is injecting more competition into our economy.
Competition is good for markets and customers, it delivers better value products and a broader choice of them.
Competition is good for farmers and producers, it makes sure they get a fair deal.
It's good for small and medium businesses by enabling them to compete on quality not just volume.
It's good for workers and managers because it rewards talent and effort and makes it easier for people to pursue new opportunities.
And it's good for our economy, because competition fosters new ideas, new sources of growth and new drivers of productivity.
We've taken action on all these fronts.
But clearly there is an opportunity for us to do more and to do it in a more comprehensive and consolidated way.
And that's going to be a key priority for our Government in the year ahead.
Across all this work to strengthen the future prosperity of our nation, we remain focused on providing greater economic security for our people.
Because that's the starting point for everything else Australians want to achieve.
That's the foundation that all aspiration is built on.
Unless you have a sense of financial security here and now, you can hardly allow yourself to think about the future, let alone plan or save for it.
This is why our Government's number one priority is helping Australians with their cost of living, in every way we can.
It's why we made the responsible decisions to deliver a Budget surplus, the first in 15 years.
Building a buffer against future uncertainty.
Putting downward pressure on inflation.
And making it possible for us to provide support for Australians under financial stress.
Cheaper child care. Cheaper medicines.
Energy bill relief for 5 million households and 1 million small businesses.
The biggest increase in rent assistance in 30 years.
The biggest investment in bulk-billing in 40 years.
Opening 58 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics, including one in Cessnock and another down the road at Lake Haven.
And saving the much-loved GP Access After Hours service across five clinics in the Hunter.
All of this support carefully designed to ease the pressures on people, without adding to pressure on inflation.
And it was very encouraging to see the inflation rate fall to 4.1 per cent.
The job isn't done, but we are winning the battle.
And while we will keep working to get costs down for families, we're working to get wages up.
Now growing at their fastest rate in almost 15 years and with two consecutive quarters of real wages growth.
We want people to earn more and we want people to keep more of what they earn.
That's why we're delivering a tax cut for all 13.6 million Australian taxpayers, not just some.
From the 1st of July, across the Hunter and Central Coast, 428,000 locals will be getting a tax cut.
And 85 per cent of those workers will be getting a bigger tax cut than they would have under the Morrison Government's plan.
For people in Newcastle, it's an average of more than $1600 a year, back in their pocket.
Our Government's tax cuts are aimed fairly and squarely at middle Australia and they deliver a benefit for Australians right and up down the income scale.
Better for the regions.
Better for working women.
Better for carers and nurses and truckies and tradies and teachers.
And just like cheaper child care, this is cost-of-living relief and economic reform.
Because our tax cuts represent a real improvement in the take home pay of people on modest incomes and Australians working part time.
A genuine incentive for parents with young children to work an extra day, or retail workers to put their hand up for another shift.
Boosting workforce participation, across our country and rebuilding the link between hard work and fair reward.
I don't know how many of you put yourselves through all three episodes of Nemesis on the ABC over the last few Mondays.
But one of the things that really stuck with me watching the senior Coalition ministers and Prime Ministers look back on those years was there virtually no discussion of policy and no mention of people.
Just a decade of rolling animosity, an entire government consumed by dysfunction and division.
A Coalition stuck in the past and set on dragging the rest of Australia back there to keep them company.
And if that's all you've got, if all you ever do is get angry about change, or try and make people afraid of it, you render yourself incapable of shaping it.
There are obviously a lot of reasons I'm glad we won the last election.
But one that drives me and my colleagues, every day, is the belief that this is the decisive decade for Australia.
This is the time when we have to get right, the moment that matters.
Yes there are big challenges.
This is the biggest and best chance our country will get.
To harness the power of global economic change and put it to work for our people.Creating jobs and lifting living standards.
Converting our natural resources into national strengths.
And ensuring that here on the doorstep of the fastest growing region in the world in human history, we are not just on the outside looking in we are engaged and involved, as a partner of choice, and a leader in education and skills and technology.
Everything about Newcastle and the Hunter speaks for what we can achieve when we act with urgency and purpose, optimism and determination.
When we work to shape the future, rather than waiting for the future to shape us.You've done it here before.
We can do it together again.
We can build and secure the better future that all Australians deserve.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It’s always good to be in Nowra. And it’s a pleasure to speak at the Shoalhaven Entertainment Centre.
If you’re at a loose end next Saturday night, come back here and see Boy &amp; Bear. They’re a great band who come out of Marrickville.
It’s so important that the lifeblood of the arts flows through here in all its forms, whether it’s a band on tour, or a permanent fixture like Bundanon just up the river from here.
It’s all part of what makes life tick in the great diversity of communities in regional NSW. And no one knows that better than you.
It gives me the greatest pleasure to be here with the members of what is easily the best country party Australia has ever known – Country Labor.
It’s great to be in a state that once again has a Labor Government, under the leadership of Premier Chris Minns.
And I’m especially pleased to be in a beautiful part of NSW that enjoys such strong representation – both at the federal level with my friend Fiona Phillips, and your great new voice in Macquarie Street, Liza Butler.
Whether it’s Liza or Fiona – or Fiona’s equally superb electorate neighbour, Kristy McBain – what they represent, indeed what all of you here represent is this fundamental truth: The people of country Australia find their best political representation in the Australian Labor Party.
Anyone who wants to know why regional NSW does best with a Labor government only needs to look at what we’ve already done – even just in the last two weeks.
In Parliament’s first sitting fortnight of the year, we introduced legislation to give all Australian taxpayers a tax cut.
We’re delivering tax cuts for all 13.6 million Australians.
Right across country NSW, 960,000 people will be getting a tax cut.
And over 86 per cent of regional workers across the nation will be getting a bigger tax cut than they would have under the Morrison Government’s plan.
Our tax cuts are aimed squarely at regional Australia. Our tax cuts are aimed squarely at middle Australia.
If you want positive change, vote Labor.
We wanted even more to show for our fortnight in the national Parliament, so we closed another round of workplace loopholes.

We ended the concept of a forced permanent casual.
We introduced world-leading minimum standards for gig economy workers, including rideshare drivers and delivery riders.
We ensured a safe, sustainable and viable trucking industry.
And we stopped unpaid, unreasonable overtime for workers through a right to disconnect.

We want Australians to earn more and keep more of what they earn. The Coalition wants Australians working longer, for less.
This is the stuff that only gets fixed when with a Labor government. And after nearly a decade of the other mob, we have work to do.
We are getting on with the job.
The Coalition’s just getting on its soapbox, shouting about how the world will end if Labor follows the Australian spirit of the fair go.
Their gut reaction was to oppose our tax cuts. Their first instinct was to promise to roll them back.
Then – because they actually heard the Australian people’s strong support for Labor’s tax cuts – they changed their mind, gritted their teeth and said they’d support them after all.
Even then, they’re still dreaming of rollbacks.
They have voted against every other cost of living measure we have introduced. They are so against it that in Parliament on Thursday, they even moved an amendment to take mentions of “cost of living” out of the Bill title.
They only ever take a stand when it’s to stand against something.
They offer no alternative plan. They have no idea on how to help middle Australia. They have no idea on to help regional Australia.
And the ideas never occur to them because you never occur to them.
They can change how they vote – they'll never change who they are.
Friends, this is the great divide in Australian politics.
We want you to earn more and keep more of what you earn.
The Liberals and Nationals want you to work longer for less.
And the first chance they get, they’ll walk away from middle Australia.
They talk about aspiration as if it’s something that only kicks in once your bank balance is big enough.
That’s the only measurement they apply because it’s the only one they know.
In the Labor Party, we know aspiration doesn’t start at the top tax bracket.
Aspiration is about the life you want to make for yourself and your family.
The security and opportunity you want to build.
The society and community you want to live in.
The environment you want your grandchildren to inherit.
Our definition of aspiration is inclusive, not exclusive.
We don’t doubt that people on high incomes work hard for their money.
That’s why our tax cuts travel all the way up the income scale.
But in the Labor Party, we know that our economy, our prosperity, our country is driven by the hard work of millions of low and middle-income Australians in the outer suburbs, in the country towns, right across the regions.
The Liberal tax plan had no room for those Australians.
And only the Nationals would so cravenly nod along and abandon the people they claim to represent.
That’s not the Labor way.
We believe in an economy that works for people not the other way around.
We champion a simple principle: no-one held back, no-one left behind.
We respect the work of every Australian, not just some.
And we champion the aspirations of all Australians, not just some.
I feel it’s safe to assume a few of you watched Nemesis on the ABC. What it made forensically clear was just how focused the Libs and Nats are on themselves – and only themselves.
Now I have a small confession to make: there was a moment during Nemesis when I felt a bit of sympathy for Peter Dutton. There was Scott Morrison getting five secret portfolios, but all Pete got was a single syllable.
And when Malcolm Turnbull uses a word of just one syllable, you know things are serious.
But what was even more damning that the word “thug” was that in the 4 ½ hours they spent talking about each other like they were flicking through a thesaurus of hatred, the Australian people barely rated a mention.
We are here to serve the Australian people.
We’re in Government to make a positive difference.
And that is the Labor way.
Across all this work to strengthen the future prosperity of our nation, we remain focused on providing greater economic security for our people.
Our No.1 priority is helping Australians with their cost of living every way we can.
It’s why we made the responsible decisions that delivered a Budget surplus, the first in 15 years.
Building a buffer against future uncertainty.
Putting downward pressure on inflation.
And giving us room to deliver a range of support for Australians under financial stress.
Cheaper child care.
Cheaper medicine.
The biggest boost to rent assistance in 30 years.
The biggest investment in bulk-billing in 40 years.
We’ve got wages moving again.
We’re delivering energy price relief.
We’ve expanded Paid Parental Leave.
All of this is carefully designed to ease the pressures on people, without adding to pressure on inflation.
Let’s look at the huge contrast between Labor and the Liberal-National Noalition.
They cut Medicare. We’ve opened 58 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics.
They let bulk billing decline. We’ve made it easier for people to see a doctor for free.
They let aged care drift into a state of neglect. We’ve given aged care workers a 15 per cent pay rise and put nurses back into nursing homes.
They cut TAFE, we’re creating new TAFE places and they’re fee-free.
They sat on their hands as manufacturing was hollowed out. We’re ensuring manufacturing has a strong, proud future.
They stood back and did nothing as our power grid decayed. We’re Rewiring the Nation.
They rail against renewable energy. We are making Australia a renewable energy superpower.
They pretend climate change isn’t real. We’re getting on with dealing with its challenges and seizing its opportunities.
They presided over stagnant wages. We’ve got wages moving again.
They hamstrung Australia with copper broadband that was a museum piece from the start. We’re getting the NBN right.
And on their watch, our biggest trading partner shut its doors to Australian producers. Under us, ships loaded with Australian barley and other products are once again heading to China.
Let’s take a moment to consider what used to be proudly called the Country Party.
The Nationals claim to stand for regional Australia. They claim to stand for regional NSW. But this holds as much water as Peter Dutton’s claim that the Liberals are the true party of the working class.
The Nationals don’t represent their seats – they just occupy them.
Perhaps the greatest paradox about the Nationals is how much they tell us they identify with the man and the woman on the land – and yet how little they are like them.
Who provides a better example of adaptation than farmers? Farmers understand the necessity of change. Farmers endlessly look for better ways of doing things.
Farmers are in tune with their environment, realistic about tackling climate change, and open to the possibilities of new technology.
That’s why we’ve seen such an extraordinary evolution in farming practices.
All that’s changed about the Nationals is that they used to have leaders who were willing to stand up to the Liberals. Now all they do is enable them.
If you want to get something done in regional Australia, the Nationals are never the answer.
What we understand is that the regions are not all the same.
Depending on where you are, farmers, growers, producers and miners may well be a very important part of the picture. In many places, they are the backbone of the economy and the community.
Yet there is so much more. Regions are home to manufacturing.
They’re home to unis and TAFEs and students and teachers.
They’re home to carers and builders.
They’re home to hospitality workers and posties, tradies and nurses, steelworkers and artists.
And they’re home to mums and dads who have big aspirations – for themselves and their kids.
While people in the country often hope for fair weather and a good crop, they also want reliable internet and decent health care.
They want to know their children are learning from great teachers and their parents are getting proper aged care.
That there are jobs and opportunities and rewards for hard work.
We’re working to make sure they get all these things.
As a Labor government, we are committed to spreading efforts right across Australia, crucially in our many regional communities – and everyone who makes them what they are.
Working against the tyranny of distance and – in the case of the Nationals – the tyranny of indifference.
Working to help those communities become even better places to live.
Easier places to live.
Places that attract newcomers – individuals, families and businesses alike.
This is just one of the ways we can make the greatest country on Earth even greater.
An Australia that isn’t so top heavy with capital cities will be a nation more in balance with itself.
Both as Prime Minister and as a former Regional Development Minister, my dedication to regional Australia is absolute.
This is all a part of the story of Labor governments. We are not here for the prestige. We are not here for the job title. We are not here to occupy the space.
We are here to make a difference. We are here to help Australians better fulfil their potential and become the even greater nation that we know we can be.
This is what we do.
Point to change that lifts Australians up and you know it was done by a Labor government.
Point to a real social reform and you know it was done by Labor government.
Point to a big initiative like Medicare or universal superannuation, initiatives that have improved the lives of countless Australians and will be improving the lives of Australians long after we’re gone. And you know it was done by a Labor government.
Whenever the Australian people entrust the Labor Party with the great privilege and responsibility of forming government, we repay that trust – and we repay it with interest.
This is both our proud record as a party – and it is our exciting future.
And everyone here today is part of it.
Thank you. Not just for what you do for Labor – thank you for what you do for our nation.
Together we will build a better future.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Hello everyone and welcome, particularly to the Premier of Western Australia, Roger Cook, for what is our third Cabinet meeting here in WA since our election in less than two years ago. I promised to bring Cabinet here twice, so we've exceeded that with two meetings here in Perth and one of course up in Port Hedland. And this is my 18th visit to Western Australia, I've been to Perth and Port Hedland, Karratha, Kalgoorlie, Albany, Bunbury, Fitzroy Crossing, and other places as well in this great state of WA. So I should be entitled to vote in your election next year. But, we very much appreciate the role that Western Australia plays in our national economy. You are a driving force for our economy, not just in ways that are often spoken about, in terms of minerals and resources, but in value adding in manufacturing, in defence, in service delivery and in the leadership that you provide as well in areas like tourism and employment and Indigenous affairs. And we have a very close relationship with the WA Government. At the National Cabinet last year, we cemented in December, not just fixing up the other States, because we have the long term commitment to WA getting your fair share of the GST in recognition of the role that you play in our national economy. But for other States, as well, we resolved those issues going forward. But in addition to that, we had important reforms, particularly in health, where we came to an agreement not for one five year agreement, but four two five year agreements, lifting the Commonwealth's share, up to 45 per cent over that period. In addition to that the reform of the National Disability Insurance Scheme to make sure that it's sustainable into the future in terms that of service delivery. And we look forward very much to continuing to work with you. Ministers have been out and about, I think Minister Bowen was up in Karratha with the hydrogen project, a great example of how WA is positioned to benefit from the global economic changes that we are seeing. You have a range of resources that will be in demand. And we need to make sure in areas like nickel, where I visited the nickel refinery with the then Premier Mark McGowan and the Prime Minister of Japan, Kishida, during his bilateral visit here, not that long ago. We need to make sure that industries like that, which have an important role to play in our future, continue, but also that we have newer industries like hydrogen continue as well. I'm really excited about the prospects for Australia during this decade, that can set us up for the decades ahead and no state is better positioned to continue to grow than the great state of Western Australia. So, welcome Premier.

ROGER COOK, PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Thank you very much.
PRIME MINISTER: We've had a long, close relationship going back many decades. And it's a privilege to be able to work together in the positions that we now hold.
PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Thank you very much, Prime Minister, and I'd say welcome back, but it's almost as if you haven't been away. It's wonderful to have you and the Cabinet back in Western Australia. And as we're often prone to say, welcome to the engine room of the nation's economy. And we are very excited to have you all to be able to continue to see the great potential for Western Australia. This is an exciting place to be at the moment, as we continue to capitalise on our traditional resource base, but also looked to the future and how we can continue to diversify our economy, but particularly for the energy transition. And as you observed, the energy transition represents the opportunity to really transform our economy. And from that perspective, your leadership and your support in relation to that journey is greatly appreciated. I think we also need to acknowledge that not only in addition to great work that you've done in health, unfortunately the Education Minister isn't here but I was going to make the observation
PRIME MINISTER: Storms in Sydney.
PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA: I'm a little jealous of their rain. We've also just recently announced the full funding for what we call full Gonski in relation to our public education. And that is an extraordinary achievement and one in which we're very proud to be working with your Government to make sure that we got across the line. So, right across all our policy areas, I just want to thank you for the great working relationship we have with your Government, and look forward to continuing to work with you for some more success into the future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet.
And I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I want to also acknowledged the Premier of Western Australia, Roger Cook, the former Premier as well, my mate, Mark McGowan.
And I could run through the members of the Caucus of my Government who are here, but basically it might be easier to just name those who aren't here.
So all of my Ministerial colleagues from Canberra, who travelled right around Australia to be with you here this evening, I welcome and acknowledge all of you as well.
It is indeed an enormous pleasure to be here in Perth at this magnificent event, and to wish you all a Happy New Year.
Xīn Nián Kuài Lè.
Gong Hei Fat Choi.
I join you in welcoming the Year of the Dragon.
The beginning of Lunar New Year is a time full of happiness.
A chance to give thanks for family and community.
And to look forward with optimism for the year ahead.
Lunar New Year celebrations have become a fixture of our national calendar.
Embraced not just by people with connections to China, Singapore or Malaysia, but by Australians from all walks of life and every background.
The Chinese community and Chinese culture are such an important part of our national story and our national identity.
From those who journeyed here at the beginning of the 19th century, to the 1.4 million people of Chinese ancestry who proudly call Australia home.
People who came here seeking a better life for themselves and their families and in doing so has made Australia a better nation for us all.
People like my friend, the great Member for Tangney, Sam Lim, who is here with us tonight.
There are many exceptional people in our Parliament, but it’s fair to say that there is nobody quite like Sam.
A Malaysian-Chinese who came to Australia for what Australia has to offer.
A former police officer, but also I think the only person I've ever met who is not just a former police officer, but a former dolphin trainer as well.
He speaks ten languages.
Sam came here in 2005 in search of new opportunities and he has become a leader in his community, being awarded WA Police Officer of the Year in 2020 for his service to multicultural communities during COVID.
And he has become a powerful advocate in Canberra.
His story of hard work and aspiration reflects the journey of many of you here tonight and the incredible contributions that you make to Australian life.
And having so many people from charities involved with the Chinese Australian community.
And I would like to acknowledge as well, the Ambassador from the People's Republic of China and the Consul Generals who join us here tonight as well.
It is indeed a great celebration, not just of Chinese New Year and the Year of the Dragon, but a great celebration of Australian multiculturalism here in Perth.
Last year, I had the great honour of being the first Australian Prime Minister to visit China since 2016.
I look forward to welcoming Premier Li here, this year, on the return visit.
That visit marked 50 years of diplomatic relations between our two countries and it signified another important step in the patient, calibrated and deliberate approach that my Government has taken to stabilising the relationship between Australia and China.
In Shanghai and Beijing, you can see the contribution Western Australian resources have made to China’s extraordinary economic transformation.
A transformation, that in recent decades, has seen more people lifted out of poverty than has occurred in any country in human history over that period of time, and enormous achievement.
And here in WA, you can see how much the Chinese Australian community has done to drive the growth and success of this remarkable state.
So many of you in this room have been central to that.
With your creativity and your determination, your hard work and your commitment.
And your contribution to our society and community.
On the eve of Australia Day last year, I had the privilege of welcoming Theresa Kwok to Canberra.
Theresa is of course the CEO of Chung Wah Community and Aged Care, and was the Senior Australian of the Year for Western Australia in 2023.
That award recognised her nearly 35 years of work with Chung Wah, welcoming and settling older migrants.
Making people feel at home and helping them build a sense of connection with their new country.
Respect. Kindness. Looking after each other.
Those are the enduring values of this community.
And they are great Australian qualities.
They underpin the harmony and unity that, at our best, makes Australia an example for the world.
So, thank you for everything you do to contribute to this.
To make this city, this proud state of Western Australia and our great country the thriving and vibrant place that it is.
I wish you and your families a very happy, peaceful and prosperous new year.
Thank you everyone.
Xiè xie da jia.


I am so delighted to be here with you
Fifty years of anything is a significant event. To be able to sustain a hospitality business half a century – to come through all those changes and not simply survive but to be actually thriving – that is something absolutely worth marking in style.
We’ve joined together tonight to celebrate half a century of Navarra – a great Australian business that proudly wears the name of an extraordinary family.
For decade after decade, you’ve been the magic ingredient in some of the most special moments in so many lives.
And what you’ve achieved adds up to a great Australian story.
Like many great Australian stories, it’s a story that began on the other side of the world – but it was only in Australia where the pages were big enough to write the full story.
And it all starts with Filippo Navarra.
Filippo’s migrant story is shared by generations of Australians.
It is a story powered by the one simple idea that is the true, beating heart of aspiration – the desire to build a better life.
Migration stories are rarely easy. To leave home for a distant land can be a leap into the unknown.
But as he swapped Sicily for the hustle of 1960s Sydney, Filippo had what it took to make a go of it.
Like so many Italians, he arrived on the migrant ship Oceania in 1962. I can only imagine he came down the gangway at full speed. He still hasn’t slowed down.
Filippo says that from the day he arrived he liked “the quality of the country”.
A place where there was plenty of work, and plenty of opportunity for everybody.
It’s an enduring and vital part of what we celebrate about Australia.
And I like to think Filippo saw something else that was special about his new home.
Its people, and the diversity that makes our nation what it is today.
From the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, who have been here for a period of time that defies imagining to the migrants from every nation, every faith and every background, who have joined our Australian family since.
Migrants who have brought skills. Experience. Energy. Initiative. Courage.
Making the big picture of our nation even bigger.
And that’s what Filippo did, starting a business that, with the help of his wife, Sarina – another Sicilian-born powerhouse – has grown with this city.
Sarina was an entrepreneur ahead of her time, and I know she is greatly missed.
For 50 years, the Navarra family has been working with generosity and fortitude.
As a thriving local business, Navarra Venues sees what a future made in Australia looks like.
A future of overcoming challenges and seizing opportunities.
A future built on the skills and energy of our people.
As an employer, you’ve provided jobs and training to hundreds of Australians.
Enabling them to seize their own opportunities.
And we see your generosity put to work in your charitable arm, Navarra Care Foundation, which raises money and, with partners like St Vincent de Paul, feeds the hungry.
In your words, you’re harnessing goodness. So just as Navarra is a name we have come to associate with the special moments in life – all those celebrations, all those bright milestones it’s also a name that means helping people out, and softening the harder moments in life.
I’m proud to stand before you as the first Australian Prime Minister with Italian heritage.
And I am every bit as proud of the fact that, growing up in the inner west, I have always felt a special connection with Australia’s Italian community.
Generations of Italians have made such a powerful contribution to this country.In business and politics, education and healthcare, culture and community.
The Navarra family has always embodied that spirit.
From the day you landed in Australia, Filippo, you’ve been a dreamer of dreams.
And, with your children and grandchildren, you’ve helped so many thousands of people realise theirs.
You’ve made it your business to make dreams come true.
Congratulations to Navarra Venues on a magnificent 50 years.
Auguri a tutti!


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m so pleased to be back here at my old school to congratulate all the new members of the College Parliament.
Being chosen to represent your peers is a recognition of your qualities.
It speaks for everything you’ve achieved through your time at school so far.
It’s also a challenge for the year ahead: to use your talents to serve others.
Because whether it’s Federal Parliament, or College Parliament, the honour and the privilege is never about the position you hold or the title you’re given.
The great privilege of being chosen to serve, is the opportunity to make a positive difference for others and to make this great school an even better place.
You do that by being true to yourself, by holding strong to your values.
And you do it by being willing to listen and learn, because no one comes to these jobs with all the answers to every question.
My greatest mentor in public life, Tom Uren, served in Federal Parliament for 32 years.
He used to say you should try and learn something new every day, because that’s how you grow as a person.
That advice still lives with me every day I have the extraordinary honour of serving as the 31st Prime Minister of Australia.
To the senior students here, I understand that as you get closer to the end of your time at school, there are more challenges and more pressure.
I still remember the expectation you put on yourself ahead of those final exams.
Education is a precious thing and it’s right to take it seriously and to work hard in pursuit of your goals.
But what I also remember from my time at school is the fun you have along the way and all the friends you make.
That matters too and it stays with you.
As do the values that were nurtured at this school.
For all of you, this is a special time in your life and I want to encourage you to enjoy it and to look forward with optimism, because there is a bright future ahead for you and for our country.
The years ahead will define Australia’s future and each of you will be part of it.
Part of a global economy being redefined by technology and clean energy and digital transformation.
Every country is facing these challenges and no country is better placed than Australia to make these changes work for us and to seize the opportunities ahead of us.
When I was at school, people still talked about the ‘tyranny of distance’.
The idea that down in this part of the world we were cut-off from the markets and economies that shaped global prosperity.
Today, we stand on the doorstep of the fastest growing region in the world, in human history.
The tyranny of distance has been replaced by the opportunity of proximity.
And with our resources and our people and our talent and smarts, Australia can make this moment our own.
We can be part of the solution to global climate change.
We can provide the energy to power a new generation of good jobs.
And we can drive breakthroughs in technology that will create new opportunities.
We can achieve all this while nourishing our Australian sense of fairness and social justice.
Showing kindness to those doing it tough, looking after the most vulnerable in our society.
Making sure that as our nation moves ahead, no-one is held back and no-one is left behind.
I’ve always been an optimist about Australia’s future.
And when I see the drive and passion of your generation, I’m optimistic that we can make this greatest country on earth, even greater.
I wish you all the very best for the future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging. 
There are some truly iconic brands represented here tonight.
Favourites of Australian families, for generations.
A key ingredient in so many of our celebrations and shared memories.
Australians feel a real sense of connection to the things you make.
And it’s just not Australians who love your work, the brands here represent some of our most famous exports to the world.
Your companies, your workforce and your collective commitment to excellence have ensured that whenever and wherever people see the label ‘Australian Made’ they know it stands for world-class quality, great value and high-skill and sustainable production.
And just as importantly our Government knows that Australian made food and beverage stands for more than one quarter of all manufacturing jobs in Australia.
Good jobs that strengthen local communities.
I’ve seen this for myself, all over our nation.
In Bundaberg, where last year they opened their new Master Brewery.
A great Australian name, investing in new jobs and new technology and investing in their hometown.
Tassal, in the Huon Valley, taking world-famous Tasmanian salmon to market.
And the revamped Darrell Lea factory in Ingleburn, where last year I met George and Beatrice, who’ve worked at Darrell Lea for 47 and 29 years respectively.
That’s the kind of loyalty and commitment so many workers in your industry demonstrate.
People who are proud of where they work and what they do. Proud to be part of the great national success story of food and beverage manufacturing.
And together I want us to write the next chapter in that story and create the next generation of Australian prosperity. 
To bring more good jobs to our suburbs and regional centres.
To invest in the clean energy that will power manufacturing in a net zero economy.
To build the infrastructure and embrace the technology that will drive our future productivity.
To make our future here in Australia and make it the Australian way.
High-value products, high-skill work and high standards of safety and sustainability. 
That’s the central purpose of our National Reconstruction Fund.
Investing in Australia’s self-reliance, moving our economy up the international value chain.
Including $500 million set aside for value-adding in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and fibre.
And a further $1 billion for advanced manufacturing.
I’m proud that the National Reconstruction Fund is open for business.
An important vehicle, ready to invest in our economic sovereignty.
Ready to drive new investment in sustainable projects that contribute to decarbonisation, and embrace the principles of a circular economy.
Ready to back projects that support a skilled, adaptable workforce including investing in workers who might otherwise miss out on these opportunities.
I am proud to lead a Government delivering one of the biggest-ever investments in manufacturing capability in Australian history.
Because I know when Government makes the investment, Australians make the most of the opportunity.
We see that in vocational education: we announced 180,000 fee-free TAFE places for 2023 and over 350,000 Australians enrolled, seeking out new skills for themselves.
We see it in trade because when Government is willing to invest in our relationships, to pursue greater diversity in who we trade with then companies like yours can achieve greater diversity in what we trade, building and securing new export markets.
When you have a Government that doesn’t let ideology and politics get in the way of renewable energy then business can embrace its potential.
And when Australia invests in research and science and development, then we make it easier for our innovators to commercialise their ideas.
We make it easier for Australian breakthroughs to create new Australian jobs.
Skills. Trade. Clean Energy. Innovation. Jobs.
These are at the heart of our Government’s economic agenda, they are fundamental to our vision for a future made in Australia.
And I know they can be the core of our co-operation and our shared success in the years ahead.
Have a wonderful evening.    


It’s an honour to be here with you tonight and to join in celebrating Navy Week for 2024.
And I want to congratulate you on the insight of the theme you have chosen for this year.
“Our power at sea is derived from the wellbeing of our Navy people and their families”. 
That is a timeless truth.
Because the great strength of the Royal Australian Navy and indeed our entire Australian Defence Force has always been the people who serve our country.
The men and women who wear the uniform and their families, because they also serve.
That is why just as our Veterans have always stepped up for us, we must step up for them.
And it is why one of the great privileges of my job is the opportunity to meet with the men and women currently serving in the Australian Defence Force and to say thank you for the skilled, dedicated and professional way you carry out your vital work.
All of you here tonight understand the place of honour that the Royal Australian Navy occupies in our nation’s history.
Yours is a noble tradition of service to Australia and courage in the cause of peace.
Memorials around our country bear the names of Australian naval personnel who have lost their lives in conflict, reaching back to the First World War.
And for more than a century, the Navy has given strength to Australian self-reliance.
You and the generations who have served before you, have upheld our national sovereignty, as well as our national security.
Our naval capability has always been a central part of Australia’s contribution to the peace, stability, security and prosperity of our region, the Indo-Pacific.
National sovereignty. Regional stability. Peace and security.
This is the Navy’s legacy, it is your history and it is your future mission too.
That’s what our Government is investing in.
Last week, the Deputy Prime Minister released our blueprint for the future of the Royal Australian Navy.
We committed ourselves to the next generation of continuous naval shipbuilding and the thousands of skilled jobs this industry represents.
Locking-in decades of work in the Osborne shipyards at South Australia and the Henderson precinct in Western Australia.
Our plan will see the number of warships more than double, from 11 to 26.
Bringing our fleet size to its largest level since the Second World War.
We are investing in a bigger, more lethal fleet and it will come into service sooner.
Of course, this larger fleet will need more personnel, which is why we’re focused on boosting recruitment.
And why we want to work with the best recruiters and best ambassadors for the Navy, the people in this room and all those you serve with.
We are making these decisions in accordance with independent and expert recommendations.
And we are making these investments because we recognise that in a time of strategic competition and international uncertainty, it has never been more important to ensure that the members of the Royal Australian Navy are supported by the very best in technology.
When the Commonwealth Naval Forces came into existence this week in 1901, the fleet’s only turret ship was built in 1870.
It took a long and determined campaign from a great Prime Minister, Andrew Fisher, to secure a fleet worthy of those Australians who had volunteered to serve their new nation.
The world that first generation of Australian naval personnel knew has changed in almost every way. 
The challenges we face, the technology we look to, the way in which we co-operate and interact with our allies and partners are constantly evolving.
But what has not changed, what will never change, is the ultimate power and the greatest strength of the Royal Australian Navy will always reside in the people who serve.
Your courage, your skill, your dedication to duty will shape the future of our fleet, the future security of our nation and the future stability of our region.
And in all this, I want you and your families to know that Australia is proud of you and Australia is with you, every step of the way.
Thank you, enjoy Navy Week.


Labor’s tax cuts passed through Parliament this week. Tax cuts built on the unwavering spirit of fairness that is shared by the Australian Labor Party and the Maritime Union of Australia. The fairness on which we can build a better future.
We’re giving all of Australia’s 13.6 million taxpayers a tax cut because we support the aspirations of every Australian.
We’re helping you earn more and keep more of what you earn – and that will make a real difference to households right across Australia.
Peter Dutton and the Liberals have made it clear they will roll back these tax cuts the first chance they get. They don’t believe anyone has aspiration until their bank balance is big enough.
They may have changed their vote this time, but they can never change who they are.
Nowhere is this truer than when it comes to workers’ rights. They have shown their true nature by bitterly opposing each of the reforms we have introduced to make our workplace fairer and more productive. They have carried on as if the sky would fall in.
The truth is wages are growing at their highest level since 2008.
The gender pay gap is the lowest it has ever been.
Unemployment remains at historically low levels and jobs are more secure because we have closed off loopholes that are used to exploit workers.
These reforms say something about who we are and the values we stand for – and I need to acknowledge the leading role of Minister Tony Burke, who is here tonight, in delivering these reforms.
I come to you tonight after a week in which the Government has also been pushing back against the Opposition’s latest scare campaign: over fuel efficiency standards, of all things.
It’s a measure that will save hardworking Australians money. The fuel efficiency debate that has seen Peter Dutton and his mob join the lonely side that contains just Russia.
So that’s one more difference between us. The Liberals lean towards the Kremlin. I lean towards Crumlin.
Paddy has that true Irish gift of the gab. You could spend hours listening to his soaring oratory – and I mean that literally because I have. The hours just fly past.
Paddy has been known to charm even the most steel-hearted robber baron. He knows that personal relationships are important and that, sometimes, you need to put aside your feelings in order to get the best result for maritime workers. That takes wisdom, and it takes a particular strength of character.
Paddy is a good and loyal friend. I worked closely with him when I was previously Transport Minister. We have continued to work closely to deliver important reforms such as the strategic fleet.
Paddy has long stood tall for the rights of people with a disability and people injured in the workplace.
He has stood for the responsible investment of workers’ superannuation and pension funds.
As befits a man who has spent so much of his life crossing the horizon, Paddy has been an outstanding international union leader.
He’s been the Australian Workers’ Delegate to the International Labour Organisation’s Maritime Conferences since 1993.
He was also one of the lead negotiators of the ground-breaking Maritime Labour Convention 2006 that embedded Port State Control into the protection of international seafarers safety, rights and working conditions.
This is the first and only instance of this being achieved in an international industry. And that is something that is to Paddy’s eternal credit.
It is such an honour to be with you here tonight, Paddy. You have made a difference and you have kept making a difference. You have changed the lives of so many of working Australians for the better.
I also want to acknowledge Mich-Elle Myers – for all you do, both as an Assistant National Secretary and as a national Vice President of the ALP – and as one of my local Grayndler constituents.
That’s why we’re all here – this is why we sign up. To make that difference.
I was pleased to host Philippines President Ferdinand Marcos in Parliament House today, and I’m looking forward to continuing our conversation at the ASEAN Summit next week. I’ve enjoyed my engagement with President Marcos here and in Manila.
Ours can be very productive relationship, not least in the shipping lanes and on the wharves.
What I find encouraging is that – fittingly for such a maritime power – President Marcos counts as a friend and ally the head of the Philippines maritime union, Conrad Oca.
This is generally a good move and I would advise any national leader to befriend their national maritime union head immediately.
Conrad Oca is also a friend of Australian seafarers. He has been instrumental in working with the ITF and the MUA in securing funding from the ITF Seafarers Promotion Fund, funding that finds its ultimate home with Maritime Employees Training Ltd – the largest employer of Trainee seafarers in Australia. 
With Conrad Oca’s support, $17 million has been delivered under that co-operative arrangement over the past 13 years.
We will always seek out further ways to co-operate. That’s where the best outcomes always lie.
Just over two years ago, Minister Catherine King and I stood with you in Newcastle and announced our intention to create a Strategic Fleet. Australian flagged, Australian crewed.
I’m pleased to say that this is another election commitment being fulfilled.
No one understands the importance of this more than the people in this room.
An Australian-flagged and crewed strategic fleet will improve Australia’s future maritime capability by helping get vital goods to affected regions and make us less reliant on international shipping in times of national crisis and emergency.
And if there’s something Covid taught us, it’s that we can’t afford to leave ourselves vulnerable at the end of the global supply chain.
I am pleased to say that work towards establishing Australia’s Maritime Strategic Fleet is well and truly underway.
Legislative reviews of the Shipping Registration Act 1981 and the Coastal Trading (Revitalising Australian Shipping) Act 2012 will be announced shortly.
While the strategic fleet will provide invaluable training opportunities and employment pathways, it alone will not overcome all the barriers to growing the Australian seafaring workforce.
The Jobs and Skills Council for the Transport and Logistics sector is considering the advice of the Taskforce as part of its annual Workforce Plan.
Australia relies on shipping to support our economic and social wellbeing, with an incredible 99 per cent of the volume of our goods trade moved by sea.
It is essential that we make sure Australia continues to have a robust supply chain so we get food, fuel, medical supplies and other critical cargo to support Australian industries, the community and protect our national interest.
To ensure this, it is essential that the maritime workers of Australia have a strong union – that means strong membership, and it means strong leadership. Both great MUA traditions.
And the best results will always be the mighty MUA working with a Labor government.


President Marcos, on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people, it is my very great pleasure to welcome you and the First Lady to our Parliament.
This is an historic occasion for both our democracies.
It is also the natural next step in our nations’ growing partnership. 
The bilateral relationship between Australia and the Philippines is now 78 years old. 
Our ties of trade and culture, friendship and family are centuries older.
In East Arnhem Land, the art and stories of the Yolngu people tell of their ancestors boarding visiting trading ships and sailing to far-off lands.
In every sense, Mr President, our peoples have been on a voyage together, for a very long time.
Australia and the Philippines are in the same boat and we share a vision for our destination: a peaceful, secure, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific.
We know the course to follow: strengthening our economic partnership through trade and investment.
Building on our connections in education and skills and creating more opportunities for our young people through the new work and holiday visa that we have agreed together.
Continuing our shared efforts in agriculture research.
And deepening our cooperation in defence, to support regional security. 
This is the new level of engagement our Government is seeking between our two nations and indeed across ASEAN as a whole.
I know the Philippines is rightly proud of its place as one of the five founding members of ASEAN.
And all of us in Australia are looking forward to next week’s Special Summit in Melbourne, which will mark 50 years since Australia became ASEAN’s first Dialogue Partner.
For Australia, ASEAN is central and it is essential.
And we want to continue to work closely with the Philippines and all our friends and partners in ASEAN, to promote the shared opportunity that drives our regional prosperity, and to fulfil our collective responsibility to uphold regional security.
Mr President, our nations share a determination to navigate the challenges of our time: climate change, food security, cybersecurity, counterterrorism and regional security.
The new Strategic Partnership you and I signed together in Manila last year speaks to our mutual trust and our common resolve.
I am pleased we are building on this momentum today.
Signing a Memorandum of Understanding for Enhanced Maritime Cooperation.
And agreeing to new initiatives in the key areas of digital technology and cybersecurity.
As our nations work together in this decisive decade for the Indo-Pacific, we can draw inspiration from our shared history.
In June 1943, when eight Australian servicemen escaped from their prisoner of war camp in Sandakan, they joined the Filipino resistance in their struggle against Japanese occupation. 
In Palo, on Leyte, a memorial stands in honour of the 92 Australians who lost their lives in the liberation of the Philippines in 1944.
Our nations served and sacrificed together in Korea.
In 1999, the Philippines joined Australia in supporting independence for East Timor.
And in 2013, Australian defence personnel and medical mission teams returned to the Philippines to provide humanitarian assistance after Typhoon Yolanda.
That’s the spirit of Filipino bayanihan and Australian mateship: we work together and we care for each other.  
Mr President, this connection and affection lives and thrives in the electorates of so many of the Members of Parliament you see here today.
Where members from all sides of politics have the privilege of representing the large and growing Filipino-Australian community, many of whom have joined us in the Parliament today.  
People famous for their generosity, hospitality and love of family.
Renowned for their hard work and aspiration.
And always looking to give back to the community.  
That’s just as true in my electorate in Sydney’s inner west as it is in the regions, like in Port Wakefield in South Australia.
Eighteen months ago, their local Country Fire Service was staring down the barrel of closure.
When the small band of volunteers put out a call for new recruits, they received only one response.
Samson Bucol, who migrated to Australia from the Philippines in 2014.
His dedication to duty won the respect and affection of his fellow volunteers and he soon passed the word to others.
Today, a quarter of the members of that Country Fire Service are of Filipino descent and half of the cadets.
Characteristic of the spirit of the Filipino diaspora that calls Australia home.
Mr President, you address us today as a leader in the region where, more than any other, Australia’s destiny lies. 
And as we look to shape the future together, I’m reminded of something you said to me at our last meeting: prosperity and progress depend on peace.
That is what our Strategic Partnership recognises.
And that is what is so significant about the maritime cooperation activities our two navies completed together for the first time in November last year.
We are both island nations.
We are both trading nations.
And for both of us, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is not an abstract notion or a theoretical question.
Freedom of navigation is fundamental to our sovereignty, our prosperity, our security and our territorial integrity.
Our co-operation is an assertion of our national interest and a recognition of our regional responsibility.
It reflects our shared understanding that peace depends on more than the presence of the great powers.
All of us in the international community, middle powers like our countries, as well as small nations, have our part to play in building a more stable, peaceful and prosperous future.
President Marcos, to conclude on a personal note, I want to say how touched Jodie and I were by the kindness extended to us during our time in your wonderful country last year.
We were proud to host you at The Lodge last night, to begin your important visit.
And I know you will be warmly welcomed wherever you go in Australia.
Because all of us in this place, and indeed all Australians, are united in our respect for the contribution your nation and your people make to our region and our communities.  
You honour us today and we look forward to your address.


Ministerial colleagues, Mr Nicholas Moore and distinguished guests, it is an honour to be here with some of Southeast Asia and Australia's most eminent business leaders.
I'm pleased to welcome you to the great city of Melbourne for the ASEAN-Australia Special Summit to commemorate 50 years of Dialogue Relations.
I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the lands on which we meet — the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung people — and I pay my respects to their Elders, past and present.
As we meet to renew our commitment to ASEAN centrality – this forum is a celebration of ASEAN vitality.
The dynamism and drive of businesses and workers and economies that – combined – will represent the 4th largest economy in the world by 2040.
Your businesses are helping generate that growth and success.
The Government I lead has made it clear: more than any other region, Southeast Asia is where Australia's future lies.
In 2022, our two-way trade with ASEAN Member States passed $178 billion — greater than our two-way trade with Japan or the US.
And our two-way investment with the region was worth $307 billion.
But we want to do more - to support regional growth and to realise mutual benefits.
To deepen our ties and to boost the skills of our people.
Australia has a huge amount to offer.
Ours is a substantial and innovative G20 economy, blessed with huge stores of world-class raw materials, and the know-how and skills base, to compete in the future economy.
So there is room for much stronger economic partnerships between us.
That's why I was proud to launch Invested: Australia's Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040 in Jakarta last year.
Developed by Nicholas Moore, our Special Envoy for Southeast Asia, who brought huge experience to the task.
The strategy is the product of extensive consultations throughout the region.
Over 750 meetings with businesses, governments and diaspora leaders.
Almost 200 submissions.
All leading to recommendations representing the most significant upgrade of Australia's economic engagement with ASEAN for a generation.
Responding to the speed of the transformation underway – and the scale of the opportunities ahead.
A key part of this, as I announced in Jakarta last year, is what we're calling Deal Teams to identify opportunities for investors, our Southeast Asia Business Exchange, and the Placements and Internships Pilot Program for Young Professionals.
I know many of you have helped with the development of the Economic Strategy, I am sure you will be able to see where your insights have shaped our work.
Australia and Southeast Asia must together face this moment with a sense of optimism – and urgency.
Because while there is so much untapped potential – there is not unlimited time.
We must act together – and we must act now:
To engage the digital economy to support our region's social and economic development.
To turn our commodities into higher-value exports in competitive global markets.
To back equality for women in business leadership.
And to leverage our expertise and technology to meet the region's shared energy security needs.
This is what we can achieve by expanding our two-way trade and investment links, and advancing our mutual economic prosperity and security.
We want to build on the upgraded ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area and implement the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
We want to ensure businesses in Southeast Asia can access the markets that are available in Australia, including in infrastructure and the clean energy transition.
Acting on climate change is an environmental necessity for our region – it is also a transformative economic opportunity.
I spoke earlier about steps the Government has already taken to implement the blue print of our Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040.
I am pleased today to announce our response to another key recommendation of the Economic Strategy, which is our decision to establish a $2 billion Southeast Asia Investment Financing Facility, managed by Export Finance Australia.
Demonstrating the value Australia can add – as an exporter of knowledge, and a sharer of expertise.
This builds on our infrastructure technical assistance in the region, particularly our Partnerships for Infrastructure Program where we are committing another $140 million.
This will support ASEAN's efforts to improve infrastructure development – including early-stage project preparation - and accelerate regulatory reform in order to attract more diverse, quality infrastructure finance.
The combination of these three key initiatives from the Economic Strategy - the Facility, Partnerships for Infrastructure and Deal Teams - will catalyse greater Australian private sector investment in Southeast Asia and vice versa.
Another recommendation we are actioning is the appointment of ten Business Champions, some of whom are in the room today.
Our Champions are senior Australian business leaders – many of them are here today and I want to thank them. They will be key advocates for Australia's trade and investment ties with the countries of Southeast Asia.
We're also launching new 'Landing Pads' in Jakarta and Ho Chi Minh City to act as regional hubs to drive Australian technology exports into the region and boost Southeast Asia's digital transformation.
We've seen, with our first Landing Pad in Singapore, that this model helps business scale up their technology and break into markets.
We are always listening to the region and responding to their priorities.
We are improving access to long validity visas for Southeast Asian travellers, beyond our current three-year offering to five and ten year visas. This demonstrates unequivocally that Australia is open for business, tourism, and trade.
We want to create a better environment for business by identifying opportunities for co-investment and dismantling barriers that hold back innovation and enterprise.
Making it easier for all of you to do what you do best.
Create jobs.
Drive growth.
And build the next generation of prosperity for Australia, Southeast Asia and our shared future.


Your Excellencies and distinguished guests. It is an honour to welcome you all to Australia and to Melbourne this ASEAN-Australia Special Summit commemorating 50 years of Dialogue Relations.
I’m very pleased to welcome my co-chair, Prime Minister Sonexay.
I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the lands on which we meet — the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung people — and I pay my respects to their Elders, past and present.
Thank you to Uncle Bill Nicholson, for his warm welcome on behalf of the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung Traditional Owners.
We come together today to celebrate everything our citizens have achieved together over the past five decades.
Five decades of deepening our economic co-operation, broadening our two-way investment and strengthening the bonds of trust and friendship between our peoples and nations. 
Five decades where the centrality of ASEAN has helped to underpin the stability, prosperity and security of the region we call home.
Five decades where each of us has helped build a strong and broad foundation.
But only a foundation.
And while we honour the vision and praise the legacy of the leaders who brought this forum together, half a century ago. What happens next is up to us.
That is the challenge confronting each of us – and it is the transformative set of opportunities in reach of all of us.
In 2021, ASEAN and Australia took the historic step of establishing a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership.
And with new co-operation between our governments, our businesses, our institutions and our peoples, we can see this partnership realise a new generation of peace, progress and prosperity.
Navigating the strategic challenges of our time - and finding new ways for our region to make this moment our own.
Australia’s two-way trade with ASEAN is worth around $180 billion a year.
Our investment totals nearly $300 billion.
That’s the level of engagement we bring to this forum – that’s the foundation we want to build on.
ASEAN is set to be the fourth-largest economy in the world by 2040.
And Australia wants to be a partner in this growth and prosperity, not an observer.
Not on the outside looking in, part of it – engaged and invested.
That’s why my Government’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy is called: Invested. 
It’s a plan to build on regional trade agreements - including the recently upgraded ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership.
And to drive diversification in our trade, our economies and our two-way investment.
This is not a task for Governments alone - which is why so many respected business leaders and innovators and job creators from across the region are here with us today.
As well as representatives from civil society and the all-important education sector.  
All here to share ideas on accelerating the transition to clean energy – and meeting the environmental challenge of climate change.
Expanding our maritime co-operation – for our shared security and our mutual prosperity.
And making sure that the big changes re-shaping the global and regional economy are harnessed in the interests of our people.
I look forward to convening with my fellow leaders tomorrow to continue our discussions.
To affirm our shared vision for the region.
And to agree on new ways we can support the ASEAN Outlook of the Indo-Pacific and achieve a more stable, peaceful, prosperous, and secure future.
Ladies and Gentlemen
The city we meet in for this summit has been witness to wave after wave of social and economic transformation.
The new wealth of the Gold Rush of the 1850s.
New rights for workers at the turn of last century.
A new home for people of every faith and tradition, leading Australia’s embrace of multiculturalism.
And yet we all know that the speed and scale of the change ahead of us will be more powerful and more profound than anything that has gone before.
Let us work together to embrace this change – and to shape it.
And as we commence the sixth decade of our co-operation – let us make it a decisive decade for our shared success.


Your Excellencies, my friends, welcome to Melbourne.
I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the lands on which we meet — the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung people  — and I pay my respects to their Elders, past and present.
I would like to acknowledge my co-chair, Prime Minister Sonexay.
Australia and Laos are longstanding friends with a rich  history of partnership — including the memorable visit to Australia by Prime Minister Sonexay’s father, then-Prime Minister Khamtai Siphandone almost 30 years ago.
Prime Minister, I look forward to continuing to support your year as ASEAN Chair, promoting your chosen theme of ‘Enhancing Connectivity and Resilience’.
It’s an honour to host you all here in Melbourne as we mark 50 years of partnership between Australia and ASEAN.
This is an opportunity to celebrate our successes.
And to affirm our shared belief in ASEAN centrality.
The central role ASEAN plays in our region’s prosperity – and its security.
And to articulate our common vision for the next 50 years of our cooperation.
To position ourselves - and our partnership – so we can seize and shape the opportunities transforming the region that all of us call home. 
To ensure that ours is ‘A Partnership for the Future’, anchored in enduring friendship and trust.
And to see the ambition of our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership realised in new, deeper and more diversified engagement with ASEAN.
So ASEAN and Australian consumers and businesses can access new products and new markets.
So we can achieve net zero - in a way that guarantees regional energy security, underwrites national economic sovereignty and brings a new wave of clean energy trade and investment.
We must work to turn our natural connections into even greater practical cooperation: on marine sustainability, the blue economy, and the security of our oceans and seas.
And our commitment to the future – in the best traditions of ASEAN – means encouraging and educating the next generation of emerging leaders.
In all this, Australia commits to working with you to make sure the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity, equality, and independence are upheld.
To ensure our region is secure, resilient, open, inclusive, and prosperous.
The regional architecture, with ASEAN at its centre, is vital in pursuing these goals, and for promoting trust and transparency among our nations.
Australia is fully committed to cooperating with you within the framework of ASEAN and through crucial bodies like the East Asia Summit and APEC.  
I hope you leave Australia with a deeper understanding of Australia’s commitment to our region and our optimism for its future.
Our understanding that more than any other part of the world – South East Asia is where Australia’s destiny lies.
This is why we will continue to support your ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific and ensure the stability and peace of our region.
Today’s Summit has four key themes which will shape the ASEAN-Australia partnership for the future: trade and investment, climate and clean energy transition, maritime cooperation, and emerging leadership.
These four themes are also reflected throughout the Melbourne Declaration which we will be adopting later today.
This is the breadth of our agenda. The shared prosperity we can achieve through closer trade and investment; the shared opportunity we have to act on climate and embrace clean energy, the shared responsibility we have to deepen our maritime cooperation and our shared faith in our emerging leaders.
And the engagement we have had, leading into this Summit, across these four themes - from business, academia, civil society and government - show how much potential there is for even stronger partnership between Australia and ASEAN.   
So let me again offer Australia’s warm welcome to all of you, and our unwavering confidence in the next 50 years of the ASEAN-Australia partnership.
I would now like to invite Prime Minister Sonexay to deliver his opening remarks.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is a great and humbling honour to join with you today to honour the memory of one of the most remarkable leaders this country has ever known.
Lowitja O’Donoghue was, to use the words of Noel Pearson, “a leader's leader”.
As we mourn her, we give thanks for the better Australia she helped make possible. Perhaps even more importantly, we reflect on the possibility of an even better Australia, which she placed so clearly before us.
Last year, when I delivered the Lowitja O’Donoghue Oration, I said I saw her as one of the great rocks around which the river of our history has gently bent, persuaded to flow along a better course.
Her remarkable power was one built on an abiding faith in the possibility of a more united Australia.
This was a faith she embodied with her efforts to bring about meaningful and lasting reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
A faith underpinned by her unceasing work to improve the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Yet consider the stony ground in which this faith somehow took root.
Starting with a childhood that saw her separated from her family, her language and her own name, Dr O'Donoghue endured discrimination that would have given her every reason to lose faith in her country – but she never did.
The little girl who longed to be reunited with her mother somehow transcended the weight of her own experience and grew into a woman of grace, moral clarity and profound inner strength.
A woman who grew up in hard country, yet emerged as a figure of such generosity.
We celebrate Dr O’Donoghue’s life of compassion. Her life of courage. A life in which toughness and tenderness existed in perfect symbiosis.
Hers was also a life that could be measured in firsts.
She was the first Aboriginal trainee nurse at Royal Adelaide Hospital.
The first woman to be a regional director of an Australian federal department.
The founding Chairperson of the National Aboriginal Conference.
The first Aboriginal woman to be made a member of the Order of Australia.
The inaugural Chairperson of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission.
And in 1992, at the launch of the International Year of the Word’s Indigenous People, she became the first Aboriginal person to speak at the United Nations General Assembly.
Standing alongside Torres Strait Islander George Mye, she spoke of survival, and she spoke of challenge.
“We have become,” she said, “marginalised in our own country.”
Yet, showing the mutually reinforcing strength and grace that were such defining features of her character, Dr O’Donoghue spoke of celebrating her people’s survival. A celebration that entailed looking “with hope to our future”.
As she put it:
“We do not wish to conquer or oppress. Nor indeed do we wish to retaliate for two centuries of injustice. Rather we seek to create a new partnership based upon understanding, co-operation and goodwill.
"The past cannot be changed; our future is in our hands.”
And as the world watched on, she stood at the forefront of a new relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia an opportunity extended to all of us to accept and celebrate the world’s oldest continuous living culture as a fundamental part of who we are as a nation.
It is a journey we are still on, building on every moment of hard-won progress. It isn’t a journey we travel in a straight line, but with every step forward we remember it was so often Dr O’Donoghue who led the way.
She was proud of being first.
She was determined to not to be last.
When Dr O’Donoghue opened a door, she held it open for all who followed.
She made history but her focus was on giving people a future. She wanted to be the first of many.
In the words of her biographer Stuart Rintoul:
"I asked her why she had lived the life she lived. She looked at me and said: "Because I loved my people.""
Through her time in this world, Dr O'Donoghue walked tall, and the power of her example made us all walk that little bit taller as well.
Now she walks in another place.
Yet, thanks to all that she did, she will always be here. In all her warmth and all her strength, a great rock standing forever at the river’s bend.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I salute all my Federal and State colleagues here today, each and every one of them a champion for the people of Tasmania.
And I want to give a special shout out to the volunteers and campaign workers here with us, as well as all those working across the state as we speak: people knocking on doors, making phone calls and spreading the word.
Last year, we came together to celebrate 120 years of Tasmanian Labor.
Through every one of those years, Labor has relied on the energy, passion and dedication of true believers like you.
As leaders and members and candidates, we all stand on the shoulders of people who put up their hand and put in the hours.
True believers who carry the Labor message to every part of the community.
And that’s never been more important.
Because in tough contests like this election, at a time when people are busier than ever and the media they consume is more fragmented than ever.
Real conversations – face to face, door-to-door - are more powerful than ever.
That’s where every minute of the next 12 days matters – and every Labor volunteer can be the difference.
That’s what the next 12 days are about: Tasmanians talking to Tasmanians about Labor’s positive plans for jobs and housing, skills, services – and the cost of living.
That’s how Labor can win, and will win this election.
Friends
We know how Labor can win in Tasmania – and we know why Tasmania needs Labor to win.
Because there are a lot of Tasmanians who are under pressure right now.
That’s why – as a Federal Labor Government - we’re strengthening Medicare.
We’ve tripled the bulk-billing incentive and have opened new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics in Devonport, Hobart and Launceston – so more Tasmanians can see a doctor for free.
We’re helping people with chronic conditions save money with cheaper medicines.
We’re taking pressure off family budgets with cheaper child care and the largest increase to rent assistance in 30 years.
We’re holding the big supermarkets to account – to make sure that Tasmanian farmers and Tasmanian shoppers get a fair deal.
We’ve helped thousands of Tasmanians train for new jobs through fee-free TAFE.
We’ve supported back-to-back increases in the minimum wage.
We've delivered an historic pay rise for aged care workers and we’ve got wages moving again.
We want people to earn more – and we want people to keep more of what they earn.
Which is why, from 1 July, we’re delivering a tax cut for every Tasmanian taxpayer.
And 9 out of 10 Tasmanian workers get a bigger tax cut under Labor than they would have under the Liberals.
Helping people with their cost of living is our Federal Government’s number one priority.
And I know helping Tasmanians with their cost of living will be Rebecca White’s number one priority as Premier.
Tasmanians know Rebecca White, they know she’s a person of substance.
A leader with the conviction to fight for what she believes in – and the strength of character to see it through.
Rebecca isn’t running for Premier for the title or the trappings of office, her team aren’t seeking Government to just occupy the space.
Rebecca White wants to be the Premier of Tasmania – so she can deliver for the people she serves and the state she loves.
That’s the sense of purpose and urgency that drives her – a determination to create more opportunities for Tasmanians here in Tasmania.
To go to uni, or TAFE and find a good job, without having to move interstate.
To save for a home of their own, in their hometown.
To know the security of strong Medicare, good hospitals and decent aged care.
That’s the difference between a Labor Party that knows people need help here and now.
And a dysfunctional Liberal Government that is going through this campaign pretending to discover problems that it has spent 10 years creating.
A Liberal Government asking for a second decade in power.
After the endless chaos and conflict and confusion of their third term, they’re asking people to reward them with a fourth term.
As if the first 10 years was just a warm-up, a dress rehearsal.
And they’re up to the same tricks in Canberra.
The same Liberal Party who wasted a decade in Government fighting each other about whether climate change was real, instead of investing in renewable energy now say they want to build nuclear reactors all over Australia.
There’s a reason they didn’t do it during their 9 years in Government.
It’s because nuclear power is the most expensive form of new energy – and it’s the slowest to build.
It doesn’t make sense for our economy – or our environment.
It doesn’t help with cost of living – and it doesn’t help with climate change.
For decades, Tasmania has shown Australia that renewable energy is the answer.
Not some far-off dream – a concrete, reliable and affordable reality.
And our Government is investing in new jobs and new projects – like green hydrogen in Bell Bay and community batteries in Howrah and Shorewell Park.
Because we see Tasmania as vital and central to our vision for Australia as a renewable energy superpower.
By contrast, the Liberals’ Nuclear Fantasy isn’t a plan to do something - it’s an excuse for doing nothing.
An alibi for inaction – a new stage of denial.
In fact, nuclear power is a lot like the Liberal Party.
No help to anyone today, completely wrong for Australia’s future - and notorious for waste that takes forever to clean up.
Labor is the party of the light on the hill – the Liberals want Australia to glow in the dark.
Now, I say this to Tasmanians.
After a decade in office, why would anyone think they are going to be better in their second decade?
The reason why this third election in just six years is being held is because they couldn't govern themselves.
People voted for Premier Hodgman and they got Premier Gutwein.
They voted for Premier Gutwein and they got Premier Rockliff.
If they vote for Premier Rockliff, will they get Michael Ferguson? Or there is worse, will they get Eric Abetz?
The sequel no one wanted heading to a state parliament near you.
The truth is, if Tasmanians want to change the Government, there is only one way to do it.
And that is by voting Labor.
Whether it’s energy or housing, jobs, Medicare or the cost of living. 
Only Labor ever comes to the table with real policies to solve the problem.
That’s what election campaigns are about – because it’s what Government should be about.
The great reward of victory, the privilege of governing is the opportunity to make a positive difference to people’s lives.
Rebecca White understands this, she lives and breathes it.
Her determination to deliver has made her a great Labor leader.
And I know it will drive her every day as a great Labor Premier.
Please welcome, my friend, your leader and the next Premier of Tasmania: Rebecca White!    


It is a sad honour to join with you today to farewell our dear friend, Linda White.
We come together to pay respects and grieve for someone taken from us far too soon.
Yet what will long outlast our sadness is our pride in all that she was, and all that she did.
Her achievements. Her warmth. Her capacity. Her wisdom.
Linda was a beloved friend and a valued colleague.
Linda understood both the fragility of democracy, and the duty of every elected representative to strengthen democracy by working to restore the public’s faith in it.
As a Labor Senator, but even more so through all her efforts over decades across the wider labour movement.
We pay tribute today to a formidable supporter of working Australians, in particular women.
Even in her early professional life, Linda was always ready for a challenge, championing for something better. Linda was never the answer if you were ever looking for someone ready to settle for good enough.
At a time the Melbourne Law School was largely male, she became the second ever female President of the Law Students Society.
As a young lawyer, she played her part in tackling injustices that were only just beginning to be dragged out into the light and fully confronted, including corruption in the police force, and child sex abuse in the clergy.
In her time at the Australian Services Union, she rose from rank-and-file activist to Assistant National Secretary.
When you look back at the ASU’s proud record, Linda’s legacy is everywhere – from protecting workers’ entitlements in the Ansett collapse and the decade-long battle that ensued, to leading the campaign for equal pay for social and community services workers, to fighting for the right to income for members affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Yet, as Linda put it, what mattered just as much were the smaller things that didn’t attract the spotlight, what she termed the “hard day-to-day work of unionism which binds us together in solidarity”.
In retiring from the ASU, Linda reflected on her pride at her role in the ASU putting the issue of women’s unequal superannuation outcomes on the map.
Our Government’s International Women’s Day announcement last week that superannuation will be paid on government Paid Parental Leave – a measure that will enhance economic security and gender equality – is just one important testament to her efforts.
Linda was a servant of the administration of the Labor Party federally and in Victoria, through the good times and the hard.
As the longest serving woman on the National Executive of the ALP, she was central to the affirmative action reforms, which led to my Government being the first in Australian history with a majority of female members.
Throughout this period Linda was forthright, outspoken and true to her values. She was loyal, and called it as she saw it. Trusted and respected by all in what can be a tough arena.
The day Linda entered the Parliament was a good day for the Australian Labor Party, for the Senate and for the nation.
If you can tell a person by the company they keep, a perfect picture of Linda was provided by the sheer breadth of her supporters packing out the public gallery for her first speech to the Senate.
There were rank-and-file ASU members, comrades from across the labour movement who may not see eye to eye on a lot but they did on Linda, her treasured book club, fellow Melbourne Law School graduates, and friends from the arts community, including today’s MC, Rachel Griffiths.
What they all heard that day was a ripper of a speech from someone with a full appreciation of both the privilege and the responsibility of elected office.
In Linda’s words:
“For some people, their pathway in life is determined by the circumstances of their birth. Governments, however, have the power to open up new choices and opportunities that would otherwise remain out of reach. The power we have in this place to change lives is significant.”
Sadly, Linda was not destined to be in the Senate for long, but she made powerful use of the brief time she had, making a profound impact on matters of significance, including the National Anti-Corruption Commission, better access to superannuation for women, and the important check on executive power, the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation Committee.
She may well have been the most senior new backbencher to have ever existed.
As a Senator for Victoria, Linda’s love for this state blossomed. She became an active voice in caucus and the parliament for agriculture and the regions. She loved the relationship she was developing with her constituents.
Linda believed in a better, fairer and more compassionate Australia, a belief that was always backed by her energy and action.
Even her love of the arts, good food and beautiful gardens was energised by her sense of fairness, a belief that good things in life should be available to everyone.
Bread, and roses too.
On behalf of the Australian Government and the Labor family, I offer my deepest condolences to Linda’s family, her loved ones, and to everyone grieving for her.
Our hearts go out to her beloved brother Michael and sister-in-law Julie; and to the countless activists she mentored – especially women – across the labour movement.
To everyone who benefited from Linda’s generosity and her endless, driving instinct for fairness and the possibility of a better life.
I consider myself fortunate that I got to witness so much of Linda’s contribution over our three decades of friendship.
When I visited her in hospital weeks before her passing, Linda was in good spirits. She was focussed on the Dunkley by-election, and even apologised for not being on the ground campaigning. She declared she had so much more to do.
Like everyone here today, I will miss her enormously. As a colleague and a source of advice, but most importantly as a dear friend.
In reflecting on her experience representing victim-survivors of child sex abuse and their families, Linda said:
“Countless people came forward and shared their stories with me… I was honoured to have had this trust.”
This reflection could be made of her entire, generous contribution.
At the end of a life, one of the finest things that can be said of a person is that they made a difference. That they changed the lives of others, and changed them for the better.
Linda White did all of that. Linda White made a positive difference. Each and every day.
As she put it in that wonderful first speech to the Senate:
“Getting justice for people has dominated my working life.”
She lived her life well, and she lived it true to her values.
May Linda rest in peace.    


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I acknowledge Elders past, present and emerging.
It is a great pleasure to be with you. I’d like to thank The Advertiser for its Building a Bigger, Better South Australia campaign – and for facilitating today’s conversation.
Since the last time we were together, South Australia has been an important part of my schedule. In fact, this is my 15th visit to South Australia since my election as Prime Minister less than two years ago.
South Australia’s part in the great Australian project is crucial – but your contribution should never be a one-way street. That’s why one of my Government's priorities is helping South Australians with their cost of living.
From 1 July, every single South Australian taxpayer will be getting a tax cut.
Every taxpayer – not just some.
Our tax cuts are designed to deliver a bigger benefit, for more Australians. 

84 per cent of taxpayers will be better off.
90 per cent of women, 98 per cent of young people.

These tax cuts support the aspirations of all Australians. Because we know that aspiration doesn’t start at the top tax bracket.
We want South Australians to earn more, and to keep more of what they earn.
It’s just one of the important decisions we’ve made.
We’ve delivered the first Budget surplus in 15 years.
We’re getting wages moving in the right direction.
We’re putting downward pressure on inflation.
Cheaper child care is making it easier for families and ultimately giving the economy a boost.
And cheaper medicines saved South Australians more than $15.5 million last year alone.
We’re offering energy bill relief for 5 million households and 1 million small businesses.
The biggest increase in rent assistance in 30 years.
The biggest investment in bulk-billing in 40 years.
We’ve opened 58 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics right across the country, including 5 here in South Australia.
These clinics in Elizabeth, Marion, Morphett Vale, Mount Gambier, and Western in Royal Park have made it easier for South Australians to get fast and free treatment.
And they help take pressure off hospital emergency departments.
Since this event last year, I’ve had the honour of being in Whyalla – still going strong, still well and truly on the map.
And I was there in the Spencer Gulf with my eye on the future – Australia’s future, as a renewable energy superpower and a country that makes things.
It’s a vision my Government shares with your State Government under the leadership of Premier Peter Malinauskas.
Together, we announced a joint investment of $100 million to develop infrastructure in the Spencer Gulf – making Port Bonython South Australia’s first large scale export terminal for hydrogen.
The potential in these regions is immense. The hydrogen infrastructure investments under our agreement – from ports, to pipelines – are critical to unlocking around $13 billion of planned project investment.
They will support over 3000 direct jobs – for steel fabricators, engineers and machinists, concreters and electricians.
By the end of the decade, the Spencer Gulf could be exporting around 1.8 million tonnes of renewable hydrogen – enough to fuel 180 000 vehicles on the streets of Tokyo or Berlin, or cut emissions from gas by around 11 million tonnes.
Partnering with the South Australian Government on investments like the Port Bonython Hydrogen Hub means connecting a region with generations of heavy industrial heritage – in mining, manufacturing, gas and energy – to new global opportunities in hydrogen, green ammonia and zero emissions steel. All made possible by combining South Australia’s longstanding strengths with its world class renewable resources.
My first time in South Australia this year was to talk about the great success story that is fee-free TAFE.
We committed to 180,000 fee free TAFE places to commence last year. We’ve smashed that target with more than 300,000 Australians getting their start through fee-free TAFE.
In South Australia alone, that saved students $35 million. That’s money that’s stayed in people's pockets while they were encouraged to get the skills they need to get a well-paid, secure job while the Australian economy gets the skilled workers it needs. 
As of January, my Government has been supporting more fee-free TAFE places in South Australia.
New skills that build new strengths for our economy, and create new opportunities for our people.
Because when we talk about a future made in Australia, we want it made theAustralian way.
This is about highly skilled workers, making high-value products, and getting the good pay and conditions that successive Labor Governments have fought for and delivered.
It will soon be a year since I toured Osborne Shipyard with Premier Malinauskas to talk about the investment in South Australia as part of the AUKUS project.
AUKUS is the biggest single investment in Australia's defence capability in our history. 
And it is firmly part of my Government’s vision of a Future Made in Australia.
As I said here last year, when work begins on the construction of our nuclear submarine fleet, South Australia will be home to the creation of a vital part of that future – and at the heart of the defence of our continent.
Crucially it will be a catalyst that can help spur the South Australian economy to a higher level of complexity.
The thousands of jobs created will be jobs that create skills that can stay in the community. Jobs that have a multiplier effect and create more jobs.
Just as Curtin and Chifley turned their vision of an automotive industry into a reality that lifted our entire manufacturing sector, this investment will be a catalyst for innovation and research breakthroughs that will reverberate throughout Australia.
Jobs worth staying home for. Jobs that keep the best and the brightest within South Australia, and attract them from across the continent.
The rest of Australia has long benefitted from the talent and energy of South Australians who’ve moved interstate. It’s time you were better positioned to prosper from your greatest resource – your own people.
This is Australia’s decisive decade – and one of the central roles belongs to South Australia.
A future made in South Australia – by South Australians.


I’m very pleased to join you all this morning for the National Small Business Summit.
I’m here because the Government that I lead respects and values every one of Australia’s 2.5 million small businesses - and the more than 5 million Australians employed by them.
We respect how hard everyone in small business works.
We recognise the aspiration at the heart of every small business, the determination to build something for yourself and your family.
We value the contribution you make to the life of our communities - and the strength of our nation.
We know how central you are to the continuing growth and resilience of our economy, from our suburbs to the regions.
And we know how vital you are to Australia’s future prosperity, as job-creators and as innovators.
Because so often small businesses are the first movers, the early adopters.
Embracing new technology and clean energy. 
Seeking out new markets in our region.
Reinventing the way you work and trade and promote your products.
And responding to emerging challenges in the economy, in real time.
In some ways, these are strengths born of necessity.
Small businesses change and adapt and modernise, because that’s how you stand out from the pack and stay ahead of it.
Small businesses move fast because you understand there’s not a minute to waste.
And small business understand that investment can’t just be about scale – it has to be about strategy, about building on what you do best.
There are valuable lessons for our nation in all of this.
Because right now there is a global economic race underway.
Every advanced economy in the world is competing for a new generation of jobs, investment, prosperity and productivity.
And every advanced economy is grappling with the challenges of global inflation, the long tail of the pandemic, the uncertainty of conflict and the transformative impact of new technologies.
For Australia to compete and succeed in this environment, we need to show the dynamism and drive of small business.
The resourcefulness to anticipate change – and shape it.
And we need to show the courage and ambition you demonstrate every day.
The courage to invest in new ideas and new industries, the ambition for our people and our products to win in the world.
This what I mean when I talk about a future made in Australia. 
Investing in our economic self-reliance and lifting our nation up the international value chain.  
Powering new jobs with clean energy, driving new productivity with digital technology.
And building a more resilient, competitive and diversified economy, fully engaged with the opportunities of the Indo-Pacific, the fastest-growing region in the world in human history.
In all this, our Government wants to see Australian small business front and centre.
For example, when we hosted ASEAN last month in Melbourne, we made it clear that one of our key priorities for deepening Australia’s engagement in South East Asia, is helping more of our small and medium exporters access those markets.
Especially those small businesses with diaspora community connections, serving as ambassadors for Australia in these emerging markets.
Our new Australia-Southeast Asia Business Exchange program commences in April, with the first two missions visiting Singapore and Malaysia.
And there will be many more to follow – focusing on clean energy, technology and the service industry.   
Investing in people also means investing in the skills of our workforce.
In our first 100 days in Government, we brought together the States and Territories to launch a national training blitz.
For 2023, we set a target of 180,000 fee-free TAFE places in areas of national priority and in fields essential to small business – like information technology and book-keeping.
By the end of 2023, over 355,000 Australians had enrolled in one of those fee-free courses.
Training and re-training themselves for success in a changing economy.
And we want to make sure that small business owners have the chance to learn new skills as well.
Our Digital Solutions program offers free courses in website development and digital technology for business owners.  
Training workshops and personalised advice on everything from marketing to streamlining everyday processes.
This is about making sure small businesses are prepared to seize the opportunities of digital technology – and ready to manage the risks. 
Particularly in cybersecurity.
For a modern business that trades online, cyber security is as important as having a lock on your door.
It’s essential for protecting your commercially sensitive information, your intellectual property – and your customers’ privacy.
And we should not ask time-poor small business owners to be their own IT department on top of everything else, especially when it comes to dealing with a challenge that is constantly evolving.
That’s where I welcome the leadership COSBOA has shown and the partnership we’ve been able to build with the new Cyber Wardens Program, aiming to train 50,000 cyber wardens in 15,000 businesses over the next three years.
This will work alongside the Government’s Small Business Cyber Resilience service and the Cyber Health Check program, which will help small businesses build their cyber capabilities and bounce back from cyber incidents.
Cyber security requires a comprehensive framework, shaped by the advice and experience of people on the frontline.
And I look forward to this Summit contributing to this ongoing work.
Our Government understands that for small business – as for Australian families – energy bills remain a source of financial pressure.
That’s why the Energy Bill Relief package I negotiated with the States and Territories delivered up to $650 in savings for around 1 million small businesses, along with 5 million families.
And it’s why we created the Small Business Energy Incentive.
A new tax deduction to help any business with a turnover of under $50 million invest in energy efficiency and storage, such as upgrading to more efficient appliances or installing batteries and heat pumps.
Helping Australian families and small family businesses with their energy bills was a key priority in last year’s Budget.
It helped people under pressure – and it helped fight inflation.
And as we put together next month’s Budget, small businesses and families will again be front and centre in our thinking.
We also know that small business have consistently led the nation in embracing solar power to take control of their bills.
Today, nearly 1 in 3 small businesses have rooftop solar.
And nearly 1 in 5 have a battery storage system.
That speaks to a sense of environmental responsibility – but also a practical, commercial reality.
Solar power is a smart investment that delivers an important return to businesses on tight margins.
You heard from the Opposition Leader yesterday about his plan to have a plan to build nuclear reactors somewhere up and down the east coast, sometime before 2050 at a cost somewhere in the hundreds of billions of dollars.
Our Government – like you – is focused on what works and focused on what will make a difference here and now, as well as deliver for the long term.
Solar power is reliable, fast and affordable – and all the more so when combined with storage.
1 in 3 small businesses with solar is a great start – and I’m confident that with the right investments and support and the continuing advances in technology, that number will continue to rise.
We’re working to make sure small businesses get a better deal when it comes to Commonwealth procurement, with a new target of 20 per cent.
And we’re working to make sure small businesses get paid on time.
We know how important cash flow is – and we know how hard it can be for a small business or sole trader to convey that urgency to big companies.
That’s why we’ve adopted all the recommendations of Dr Craig Emerson’s independent review of the Payment Times Reporting Act.
Including naming and shaming big businesses who fail to pay on time.
And we’ve made unfair contract terms illegal – safeguarding small business in future negotiations with large partners.
We want to bring this same accountability and integrity to franchising as well, which is why we commissioned Dr Michael Schaper to review the Franchising Code of Conduct.
Our Government is pro-business and pro-worker.
We will always champion good jobs, fair wages and decent conditions for working people.
Equally, we understand that there are no good jobs, fair wages or decent conditions for employees, without employers.
That’s the constructive and balanced approach we’ve sought to bring to our industrial relations reforms.
Simplifying the Better-Off-Overall-Test.
Giving small business the option of bargaining, through the Single Interest Bargaining Stream. 
And if they choose to do so, making it easier for business to get advice and support from the Fair Work Commission during negotiations.
Legislating a clear definition of a casual employee – and providing an extended service period of 12 months for employees of small businesses to elect to change from casual to permanent.
And creating a fairer test for small businesses to determine if a person is an independent contractor or an employee.
All this matters, because if companies are able to exploit loopholes, cut corners and undermine wages, then it’s never just workers who lose out, good employers who do the right thing and play by the rules get hurt too.
That’s why our Government has made a point of working with big firms, small businesses and unions on these changes.
Because we understand that reforms which create a better system and a level playing field serve everyone’s interests.
I did see when my opponent came here yesterday he warned you about being ‘supine’ and ‘silent’.
Demanding that you criticise the Government more loudly and more often.
Trying to drag you into his politics of negativity and conflict.
I think more of you of than that - and our Government has more respect for small business than that.
That’s why we want to keep working with COSBOA and with all of you - on industrial relations, on energy, right across the economic agenda.
Because unlike our opponents, we don’t think co-operation is a sign of weakness and we’re not interested in talking you down or talking the economy down.
We respect your right - and your capacity - to constructively represent your members and to build better outcomes, based on consensus.
This National Summit underscores the vital and central role of small business, in every part of our economy and every part of our country.
I’m pleased that so many of our Government’s key reform priorities, align with the agenda you’re discussing.
More affordable energy.
New skills for the workforce.
Strengthening cyber security and embracing digital.
Delivering a better and fairer industrial relations system.
And engaging with the transformative opportunities of our region.
Our Government will keep working with you and keep listening to you.
Because we want to make it easier for you to do what you do best: create jobs, drive growth, build new markets in our region and bring new ideas and products to the world.
Every small business represents optimism and resilience, innovation and investment, aspiration and determination.
These are the strengths that will shape our nation’s future.
We are all living in a time of significant economic challenges – and profound economic change.
And no country is better placed to meet those challenges – and make those changes work for our people than Australia.
In all this, small business has a huge role to play and a big contribution to make.
I look forward to working with you, to ensure our nation seizes this moment.


Thank you to Liverpool City Council and Mayor Ned Mannoun for inviting me to today.
I’d also like to acknowledge the member for Fowler, Dai Le, who I know has been a big supporter of this project.
And the member for Werriwa, Anne Stanley, who of course has proudly served as a councillor on Liverpool City Council.
I’m thrilled to join you all for the opening of this magnificent new precinct.
This development sends a strong message about the future of Western Sydney.
It says this region is growing, fast.
Businesses are moving here.
People want to live and work here.
The community is young, talented, diverse, innovative, and aspirational.
Western Sydney is one of the fastest-growing areas in the nation, home to more Australians than Adelaide, Canberra, Hobart and Darwin combined.
And Liverpool is fast becoming Sydney’s third CBD.
So this is a region of immense promise – and it’s crucial to the better future that is within our reach. A Future Made in Australia.
Liverpool Civic Place will bring so much to the local community and wider region in the years and decades ahead.
It will create jobs and help grow the local economy.
It will attract businesses, government agencies, and other organisations — especially those looking to establish themselves ahead of the opening of the new international airport.
It will be home to the local council, and a meeting place for the community.
And, with the Yellamundie library and gallery, it will also be a centre for education, culture and the arts.
Yellamundie is such a fitting name. It means “storyteller” in the Darug language, and it will tell so many stories in so many ways. What’s exciting is the thought of how many stories it will inspire, and how many future storytellers it might create.
The discerning writers at Time Out have described your new library as “an absolute bookworm’s dream” – and with more than 85,000 items on 2 kilometres of shelving on six levels, it’s a seriously big dream.
A whole universe of knowledge and opportunity.
Add to that the access to computers and Wi-Fi, the gallery, and the spaces dedicated to everything from heritage research to expression to scientific programs and you have a true monument to learning, and a building block of the future.
It’s all part of a much bigger transformation.
Western Sydney is growing at a phenomenal rate.
One of the instincts at the heart of my Government is the understanding that we need to shape the future, rather than let it shape us.
With Western Sydney set to keep growing, we are planning ahead and working to seize the economic opportunities.
This morning, I had the great pleasure of watching the first interstate freight train arrive at the brand new terminal at Moorebank Intermodal Precinct.
Then there’s Western Sydney International Airport — a long-standing passion of mine and a transformational infrastructure project.
All of this is happening right here in Western Sydney, adding to your many strengths — from one of Australia’s leading universities, to one of the largest hospitals in the state, to a rapidly-growing information and technology sector.
And, of course, your greatest strength: Your people.
I’d like to thank Liverpool City Council for its vision and ongoing commitment to this incredible new precinct.
I also thank Built CEO Brett Mason — as well as FJC Studio and architect Richard Francis-Jones — for your tremendous work turning this ambitious dream into such an impressive reality.
Liverpool Civic Place is a gift to the community.


In 2007, I was appointed Australia’s first ever Infrastructure Minister, with the creation of Infrastructure Australia was a central policy.
This was about ensuring cost benefit analysis of projects to drive productivity and economic growth were the focus of the national government’s investment, not electoral maps.
There is no greater example of the difference this approach has made than in this transformative project.
The Moorebank Intermodal Precinct will drive the national productivity agenda and today all of us can see for ourselves what a positive difference this project will make to Western Sydney, to our national freight network and to Australia’s future prosperity. 
It’s true that nation-building can take time, it can cause short-term disruptions and frustrations, it can test the patience of governments, businesses, investors and citizens alike.
But when the planning and design are right, when the vision is there, the benefits are truly generational.
That’s why this project will be a generational achievement - powering productivity, serving and supporting growing communities and creating good jobs.
Because – even at this scale - infrastructure is never just about roads or railways or runways.
It’s about lifting living standards and creating economic opportunity and driving growth and preparing our nation to compete and win into the future.    
That’s why, while today brings me real pride in what’s been achieved, it gives me even greater optimism for what’s ahead.
Because this ceremony marks the end of one journey - and the beginning of a much bigger one.
The import-export terminal has been up and running between here and Port Botany since 2019.
The arrival of the first interstate freight train here today signals a new era for rail in Australia.
By moving more container freight by rail, this terminal will save around 3,000 truck journeys a day on Sydney’s roads.
That will make a big difference to traffic on key arterial roads like the M5.
It will also guarantee more resilient supply chains — which the pandemic taught us are vital for our national self-reliance.
It will deliver an economic benefit to Western Sydney of up to 6,800 jobs.
And it will save around 110,000 tonnes of carbon emissions a year.
That’s in addition to the savings from Australia’s largest rooftop solar installation.
I don’t think we could have imagined this 12 years ago, but this entire precinct is going to run on renewable energy.
Of course, rail is one of the most energy-efficient modes of transport.
It will play a growing and vital part in meeting expanding demand for passenger and freight transport, into the future.
Because as well as having a smaller carbon footprint, rail is cheaper — and safer. On a significant scale.
Just one 1,800 metre train can replace as many as 100 B-Double trucks per trip.
That’s why, in major cities all over the world, urban rail and high-speed rail are picking up speed, as nations and cities modernise their transport systems for the 21st century.
Throughout its history, rail has always been both emblem and engine of progress.
And even though it’s 170 years since the first rail journey in Australia – in 2024, rail keeps rolling on.
When you stand here at Moorebank, or at the new Western Sydney International Airport, it’s clear that Western Sydney will be an engine for Australia’s future growth and a driver of our success.
This new chapter in Australia’s nation building story has many proud authors. 
Congratulations to you all.
Your hard work, your vision and your determination has transformed this site and now it will help our nation shape the future.
It is my great honour to declare this Interstate Terminal open.


I acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay respects to all Elders past, present and emerging.
One of my great privileges as Prime Minister is being invited to celebrate anniversaries. Moments when we get to come together in joy and appreciation to mark a milestone in the life of our nation.
What’s less common is to come together and be able to say: Here is something that changed the world.  
That is exactly what St Vincent’s Hospital’s Heart and Lung Transplantation Program has done, and I thank St Vincent’s Curran Foundation for putting together this event tonight.
It’s worth casting our minds back 40 years
Thanks to George Orwell, 1984 gets a bit of a bad rap – but in Australia, especially in the health system, it was a vintage year.
The Hawke Government introduced Medicare, ensuring all Australians could access medical care according to their need, not according to the size of their bank balance.
Universal health care is a proud Labor legacy – one that will keep changing the lives of Australians long after the last of Medicare’s architects is gone.
More than that, it is a source of a pride for all us of Australians – because it speaks so clearly to the innate sense of fairness that we carry within us, and see as one of the most abiding traits of our national character.
That is why strengthening Medicare is one of the biggest priorities of this Government.
In 1984, we saw that same spirit embodied time and time again at St Vincent’s Hospital.
Australia’s first dedicated AIDS ward – 17South – was established there.
For those who weren’t around during that time, it’s hard to imagine what those early days of AIDS were like, a time darkened by that most tragically reliable of partnerships – ignorance and fear.
Yet the ward was established, an early shaft of light holding back the darkness.
And it was of course the year that Australia’s first heart transplantation program began.
Indeed on Monday, it will be 40 years since the then 14-year-old Fiona Coote became the youngest Australian to feel within her body the beat of a heart that she wasn’t born with.
Thanks to that heart, and the pioneering work of Dr Victor Chang and his team, Fiona is here tonight – Australia’s longest surviving heart transplant recipient, and one of the world’s longest living transplant recipients.
Fiona, you are a remarkable Australian in your own right and it is an honour to be here with you tonight.
In you – and in so many Australians – all that Dr Chang dreamed of and strove towards goes on. You are his vision made his real.
As Prime Minister Paul Keating observed when he launched the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute in 1994, Dr Chang was a great Australian, a great surgeon and a great humanitarian.
By that point, Dr Chang had already been gone for nearly three years. The senseless cruelty with which his life was taken, shook our nation profoundly.
Yet, because of all that he did, our nation stands more firmly. Such is the magnitude of his legacy.
It is a legacy that continues to be carried and built upon by St Vincent’s, enhanced – as Prime Minister Keating observed – by the philosophy of compassion that the Sisters of Charity bring to St Vincent’s a guiding star that has humanity at its core.
What it adds up to is something remarkable yet so utterly true to the Australian spirit – a powerhouse of cutting edge science, technology and talent that is available to all Australians.
A powerhouse that has saved so many Australians.
Those first heart transplants were followed at the dawn of the 1990s by Australia’s first lung transplants.
Thanks to the work of Professor Peter MacDonald AM and his team, you showed how to preserve that most sacred of rhythms when you worked out how to keep a heart beating outside the body.
Your Heart and Lung Transplant Program is now the fifth busiest in the world.
You’re a model of international co-operation – reaching out across the world with so much to give, and so much to gain.
You’re providing support to our friend and neighbour, Vietnam, so that they can establish their own heart transplant team.
You are taking your capabilities to Indigenous communities to improve lives in the world’s oldest continuous culture.
And, in partnership with Australian biotech company BiVACOR and Melbourne’s Alfred Hospital, you are working on the world’s first implantable artificial heart.
It’s a technology that could halve deaths from heart failure globally.
I am proud that in February, my Government announced funding of $50 million to help develop and commercialise it.
It is the third-largest grant in the nearly 10 years since the Medical Research Future Fund was established. And on top of all its other benefits, it stands to add $1.8 billion to Australia and Australian society.
When we have an institution like St Vincent’s playing such an important role, it is vital that governments step up and play theirs.
Just as the extraordinary philanthropists here today play theirs. Your acts of generosity do so much more than lighten the load. Thank you for all you give.
Australia has one of the best health systems in the world – because of the extraordinary people who work in it, because of remarkable programs like this one and because places like St Vincent’s and health care workers like you are available to every Australian, on the basis of need. 
It’s difficult to think of a more powerful phrase in the English language than “the gift of life”.
For four decades, St Vincent’s Hospital’s Heart and Lung Transplantation Program – and every single person who makes it possible – have shown the truest meaning of those words through your actions.
And in the process, you have made us a better country.
Here’s to your next 40 years.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I want to acknowledge all my colleagues who are here today.
I’m delighted to be back at the Queensland Media Club to talk about our Government’s vision for a future made in Australia.
I wanted to give this speech here in Queensland because you have such a pivotal role to play in realising that vision and building that future.
I’m here in Brisbane but our Government’s plan is about Gladstone and Mackay and Rockhampton and Townsville and Mount Isa and Cairns as well.
Because for Australia to seize the opportunities of the next decade, for our nation to generate the energy, skills, jobs, technology and investment that will power our future prosperity. We need every community in Queensland included, involved and empowered.
Cities, suburbs and regions alike.
We need Queenslanders – everywhere – to be able to access high quality education and training for good secure jobs.
We need Queenslanders – everywhere – breaking ground on new infrastructure, building new energy projects and mastering new technologies.
And we need Queenslanders – everywhere – to be part of a new advanced manufacturing workforce.
Researching, designing, building and exporting value-added products to the world.
Queensland has always been a great resources state, a great energy state – and a smart state.
Its coal, gas and other resources have helped to power our national economy - and so have the ideas and dynamism of its people.
Queensland’s role as a resource and energy and innovation state will continue
And it will evolve.
Because Queensland resources and energy and technology will contribute to making Australia a renewable energy superpower.
Queensland will be at the forefront in helping the nations in our region grow, industrialise and decarbonise - and help the world achieve its net zero goals.
When I look at the Queensland Government’s Energy and Jobs Plan, I see that scale of ambition.
Australia’s largest solar farm, at Western Downs.
One of the biggest wind farms in the southern hemisphere near Warwick – backed by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
New pumped hydro near Gympie – and one of the biggest pumped hydro projects in the world, planned for Mackay.
Copperstring, running from Townsville to Mount Isa – and connecting the North West Minerals Province to the National Energy Grid.
Making Gladstone a hydrogen hub and a global capital for green minerals.
And the most important national project of all – making sure workers and communities aren’t left behind, starting with the Queensland Job Security Guarantee.
In all this, we need to aim high, be bold and build big to match the size of the opportunity in front of us.
And we have to get cracking.
We have unlimited potential
But we do not have unlimited time.
If we don’t seize this moment, it will pass.
If we don’t take this chance, we won’t get another.
If we don’t act to shape the future, the future will shape us.
That’s the sense of purpose and urgency that drives our Government.
We know that there is a world of opportunity out there – and we know the world won’t wait for us.
If we want to make our future here in Australia, here in Queensland, we have to go forward now.
The first four years of this decade have tested the resilience of our economy and our society alike.
Alongside the devastation of floods and bushfires, Australia has endured a once-in-a-century global pandemic.
Followed by the most significant international energy crisis in 50 years.
Both of which have combined to inflict profound economic consequences on supply chains, energy prices, inflation and interest rates.
These global shocks – and their aftershocks – continue to impact our economy and our budget.
This is why helping Australians with the cost of living is our Government’s number one priority.
And why the Budget that Jim Chalmers will hand down in a month’s time, will deliver a tax cut for every single Australian taxpayer.
All 13.6 million of them.
In January this year, I went to the National Press Club to announce that we were changing the tax plan we inherited from the Morrison Government to make it better and fairer for middle Australia.
To help more women, more young people, more part-time workers, more parents returning to work and more low and middle income earners.
And to boost workforce participation, by creating a greater incentive for people to take another shift or work an extra day.
As a result of these changes, from the 1st of July every Queensland taxpayer will get a tax cut – not just some.
Nearly 9 out of 10 Queensland taxpayers will get a bigger tax cut.
Of course, we knew these changes would generate some political noise.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition promised to fight our tax cuts before she’d even seen them and ‘absolutely’ committed to reverse them.
Peter Dutton called for an election, to stop our tax cuts going ahead.
And the LNP remain determined to roll them back.
But as I explained at the time: when economic circumstances change, the responsible thing for governments to do is to change their economic policy.
That’s true when it comes to helping people with challenges they are facing here and now.
Boosting wages so people earn more.
Cutting taxes so people keep more of what they earn.
Government needs to have this same capacity to respond and adapt, to anticipate change – and shape it – when it comes to building for the future.
I said earlier that for Australia to succeed in the decade ahead, we need every Queensland community and every Queenslander to play a part.
Government has to play its part too.
We need to be clear-eyed about the economic realities of this decade.
Recognising that the game has changed - and the role of Government needs to evolve.
Government needs to be more strategic, more sophisticated and a more constructive contributor.
We need sharper elbows when it comes to marking out our national interest.
And we need to be willing to break with old orthodoxies and pull new levers to advance the national interest.
We have to think differently about what Government can – and must – do to work alongside the private sector to grow the economy.
To boost productivity, improve competition and secure our future prosperity.
Combining market tools, with government action - to create wealth and create opportunity.
We need to take a fresh look at how government can support small business and start-ups and service industries to diversify our economy and our trade.
Not just playing to our traditional strengths with our traditional partners, but offering new products and services to new markets.
We need this change in thinking and approach, because the global economic circumstances are changing in ways far more profound than the consequences of the pandemic or conflict alone.
This decade marks a fundamental shift in the way nations are structuring their economies.
A change every bit as significant as the industrial revolution or the information revolution – and more rapid and wide-ranging than both.
Domestic economic policy settings are being re-shaped by a new set of global economic imperatives.
And domestic economic priorities are re-shaping trade policy.
In the years following the Cold War, people spoke about ‘the end of history’.
The benign assumption that free trade would spread unchallenged and globalisation would guarantee peace and prosperity for all.
Yet even in countries like Australia that have benefited enormously from the opening-up of our economy and engaging in our region, opportunity has not been shared evenly.
In other parts of the world, the fault lines are far wider.
Strategic competition is a fact of life.
Nations are drawing an explicit link between economic security and national security.
The so-called ‘Washington consensus’ has fractured - and Washington itself is pursuing a new direction.
The United States has implemented the Inflation Reduction Act and CHIPS Acts and pursued what they call a ‘small yard, high fence’ approach to critical industries.
The European Union has introduced its European Economic Security Strategy.
Japan has the Economic Security Promotion Act.
The Republic of Korea is re-framing its economic policy around a National Security Strategy.
And Canada has brought in new rules to tighten foreign direct investment in their significant critical mineral reserves.
All these countries are investing in their industrial base, their manufacturing capability and their economic sovereignty.
This is not old-fashioned protectionism or isolationism – it is the new competition.
These nations are not withdrawing from global trade or walking away from world markets or the rules based order, and let me be clear, nor should Australia.
27 per cent of our economic output depends on trade.
And so do 1 in 4 Australian jobs.
We will continue to champion global markets and free trade, to build bilateral and multilateral co-operation and forge agreements.
Equally, we must recognise that the partners we seek are moving to the beat of a new economic reality.
In their different ways, they are re-aligning their economies to better drive and distribute growth across their own populations.
Re-building the social licence for economic reform, through better job security and higher wages.
They are preparing their businesses and workforces to adapt to digital technology, to grasp the opportunities of artificial intelligence and also safeguard against its risks.
They are investing in more clean energy, producing more clean energy and exporting more clean energy.
And they are upgrading their ports, roads, rail, broadband and energy grids.
Of course, not every element of every other nation’s approach will be right for us.
But we must recognise there is a new and widespread willingness to make economic interventions on the basis of national interest and national sovereignty.
And – critically – none of this is being left solely to market forces or trusted to the invisible hand.
The heavy lifting of economic transition and industrial transformation is not being done by individuals, companies or communities on their own.
It is being facilitated, enabled and empowered by national Governments from every point on the political spectrum.
Because this is not about ideology, it’s about opportunity – and it’s about urgency.
Securing jobs, attracting investment and building prosperity has never been a polite and gentle process where every nation gets a turn - it’s always a contest, it’s always a race.
Governed by rules, driven by competition.
And Australia can’t afford to sit on the sidelines.
Being in the race does not guarantee our success – but sitting it out guarantees failure as the world moves past us.
An inescapable lesson of the past half century is that Australia cannot isolate ourselves from global economic change, even if we wanted to.
Our challenge and our great opportunity lies in anticipating change, shaping it and making sure it delivers for our people.
And doing this in in our own uniquely Australian way.
We are a trading nation, an outward-looking economy, we are engaged in the Indo-Pacific, a leader in our region, a middle power in our own right.
Australia is in this race, no matter what.
Our Government wants Australia to be in it to win it.
We can do this by building on our existing strengths – and also looking beyond them.
In so many important ways, Queensland perfectly captures the unique set of advantages and imperatives Australia has:
Our resources – both in and above the ground - essential to the future of global energy.
Our location – on the doorstep of the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
Our natural environment – a unique treasure and an international drawcard.
Our people - smart, skilled, resilient and adaptable.
And - never to be underestimated – our democracy and our society.
A social safety net that empowers people, a world-leading superannuation system, remarkable universities and TAFEs, and a multicultural society that gives us a family connection to every nation in the world.
We can make this a winning combination – but only if we work at it.
By adding value to our resources here.
By turbo-charging our engagement with our region - diversifying our exports, deepening our ties and building new markets for our expertise and our services as well as our products.
By investing in our people – education and skills but also the housing and infrastructure and quality, affordable care that boosts productivity and quality of life.
By protecting our environment – for tourism, for farming and for future generations.
And strengthening our society – delivering the services and care that nourish aspiration and help people lead better lives.
These established strengths are essential – but they are not enough.
Drawing only on what we already have, guarantees a diminishing return.
The wasted decade of our predecessors is proof of that.
Australia cannot afford another ten years running on the fumes of past economic reforms.  
We cannot afford another decade where government is a drag on business investment and productivity instead of a driver of it.
A decade where businesses investing in the future – from embracing renewable energy to promoting gender equality – were acting in spite of government, not in concert with it.
We know the high price of the last decade: low productivity growth, low business investment and a narrowing of our economic foundations.
As the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, has put it – Australia’s economy is not productive enough, not resilient enough and not competitive enough.
We need a new wave of economic reform to change this.
To drive growth, improve competition, lift productivity and create the next generation of prosperity and opportunity.
This new wave demands a new approach - and since the last election, our Government has been laying the foundations to deliver it.

Embracing clean energy
Securing a landmark National Skills agreement
Creating the National Reconstruction Fund; and
Establishing the Net Zero Economy Authority
Putting Science together with Industry under Ed Husic, to make sure we commercialise the opportunities arising from Australian innovation.

In next month’s Budget – and beyond – we’ll be building on that foundation.
In this time of transformative opportunity, our Government will not be an observer or a spectator – we will be a participant, a partner, an investor and enabler.
We will be guided by three principles.
First, we need to act and invest at scale.
Moving beyond a ‘hope for the best’ approach where the priority has been minimising government risk, rather than seeking to maximise national reward.
Second, we need to be more assertive in capitalising on our comparative advantages and building sovereign capability in areas of national interest.
For too long, Governments have taken a reactive, patchwork approach which has been more about managing an immediate crisis rather than maximising long term opportunity.
Our Government will be proactive when it comes to backing Australia’s comparative advantages and delivering on our national interests.
The investment we’ve made through our SunShot solar manufacturing program is proof of that, as is our Hydrogen Headstart program and our Critical Minerals Facility.
Thirdly, we will continue to strengthen and invest in the foundations of economic success.

Affordable and reliable clean energy
A better and fairer education system
Skilled workers, secure jobs, fair wages
Modern infrastructure
Shared ambition with business and private capital
And a positive regulatory environment.

We recognise that for Australians to fully share in the rewards, Government needs to be prepared to use its size and strength and strategic capacity to absorb some of the risk.
Only Government has the resources to do that.
Only Government can draw together the threads from across the economy and around our nation.
To anchor this reform and secure this growth, today I announce that this year our Government will create the Future Made in Australia Act.
We will bring together in a comprehensive and co-ordinated way a whole package of new and existing initiatives.
To boost investment, create jobs and seize the opportunities of a future made in Australia.
We want to look at every measure that will make a positive difference.
Investing in new industries – and ensuring that workers and communities will share in the dividend.
That means giving the new Net Zero Economy Authority every tool it needs to support resource communities in particular through the coming period of economic change.
Town by town, worker by worker.
This isn’t something that happens overnight, it’s the work of a generation.
But the preparation for what comes next, has to start now.
This means looking at how government procurement can support small business and local manufacturing, as well as sustainability and the circular economy.
Putting together the most efficient and effective combination of financing facilities and investor incentives to drive new economic growth.
Securing greater sovereignty over our resources and critical minerals.
Driving competition reform, to deliver a better deal for Australian consumers, Australian farmers and producers and Australian workers.
Delivering better and broader community benefit from renewable energy projects and fast-tracking the infrastructure that supports them.
Maximising the strategic value of our government investment funds – and our national superannuation system.
And opening the doors of opportunity, by giving more Australians in our regions and suburbs the chance to get a TAFE qualification or a university degree.
That’s just some of the reform agenda we will be outlining this year.
We are open to all good ideas – from business, from industry, from unions, from state and local government and from across the Parliament.
This won’t be a one-off. It’s about building an enduring framework that can adapt over time.
Obviously, Australia cannot go dollar for dollar with the United States’ Inflation Reduction Act.
But this is not an auction – it’s a competition.
And Australian can absolutely compete for international investment when it comes to our capacity to produce outcomes, the quality of our policies and the power of our incentives.
As the Treasurer has said, part of the objective here is about Australia presenting potential investors with ‘a single front door’.
A clear path to investing in Australia, in Queensland, in hydrogen, green metals and advanced manufacturing.
And the right skills, supply chains and processes to get projects up and going and see this investment realise a return.
Above all, this is about giving Australian businesses, Australian communities and the Australian people every possible opportunity to benefit from this moment.
Such a central part of the story of Queensland is the capacity of people in this big state to do the big things.
Transforming Brisbane to the global city we’re in today.
Transforming Gladstone to an international industrial centre.
Transforming the Gold Coast from a beautiful strip of beach to one of the world’s great tourism destinations.
Safeguarding the extraordinary natural treasures of the Great Barrier Reef and the Daintree.
Building the railways and infrastructure and ports to spread the opportunity of the resources boom across the regions.
Reviving Queensland unis and research centres and TAFEs through the Smart State agenda.
All this speaks for Queenslanders’ capacity to build – but also the creativity to reinvent.
The foresight to turn the dividends flowing from one wave of growth into surfing the opportunities of the next wave.
That’s never been more important – for Queensland and for Australia.
Our Government is investing in manufacturing to make more things here.
We’re building the infrastructure and clean energy to power new growth.
We’re training people in new technologies.
We’re facilitating private sector innovation and catalysing new investment.
We’re building an economy with more secure work and fairer wages.
That’s what I mean by a future made in Australia.
A future where we compete and win for the great prize of new prosperity.
And win our way – by staying true to the values that make this the greatest country on earth.
Fairness at work, equality in society, compassion and dignity in our social safety net and an unshakeable belief in opportunity for all.
Reform that holds no-one back, progress that leaves no-one behind.
A stronger, fairer and more prosperous future – made right here in Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is a special honour to join with you all here at the Anzac Memorial. For very nearly 90 years this has been the scene for many acts of memory, both powerful and poignant.
Today, with James Blundell’s new song Almost Anzac Day, we are adding one more. And what a fitting time to launch it.
In a fortnight, we will gather in the darkness before dawn because those first Anzacs did.
This year on Anzac Day I will be in Isurava on the Kokoda Track in Papua New Guinea taking the opportunity to show my respect to the remarkable effort to protect our nation at one of its darkest hours.
We will gather in the peace that is the gift to us from generations of Australians who have taken up arms in our name.
We will gather to remember all who have served and all who serve now.
We will remember all who lost their lives. All who survived and came home.
And all who came home, but carried the war within them. It is a fight that so often lingers after the final gunshot. Tragically, it is a fight that is not always won.
As James sings:
We came back in pieces, no one of us the same
Just as they stepped up for us, we must step up for them. And that’s exactly what this song is doing, with all royalties going to vets via the not-for-profit SMEAC Veteran Hub.
This song is also an important addition to an Anzac tradition. Just as we remember our fallen and our veterans in silence, we also remember them with music.
The solemn lament on the pipes. The majestic simplicity of the Last Post on the bugle.
And the great heartbeat of music in every Anzac Day march in every town and city across Australia.
Music is a crucial part of our Anzac observance because sometimes words alone aren’t enough to tell the truth about war, about what war means and the toll it extracts.
To find the words that convey all of that can be a hard task, but when they are found, they can be lifted higher with music.
This is a tradition to which James Blundell has now added his distinctive voice.
With lyrics by Terry McArthur and music by Mika Kuokkanen, this song is a powerful expression of humanity.
It is an expression of empathy.
It is an expression of gratitude.
Perhaps most importantly, it now becomes part of our shared refusal to forget.
How brightly the eternal flame of memory burns depends on how carefully we tend it.
With Almost Anzac Day, James Blundell makes that flame rise higher and cast its glow even further.
I’d like to invite James to the stage to do just that.


I’ve always been an optimist about Australia’s future - and communities like Gladstone give new cause for optimism every day.
All of us are living in a time of profound, global economic change.
Australia has had to deal with the shocks – and aftershocks – of a once-in-a-century pandemic, followed by the most significant international energy crisis in 50 years.
And alongside this, there is a global economic transformation underway.
Nations around the world are re-investing in their economic sovereignty, modernising their industrial base and embracing clean energy.
This is the global race for a new generation of jobs and industries and opportunities.
Australia has to be in that race – and we should be in it to win it.
And when you stand here in Gladstone, you know we can win it.
We can make our future here in Australia.
The great story of Gladstone is one of reinvention and renewal.
Transforming this community into an international industrial centre.
And building the infrastructure that connects Queensland resource communities, throughout the state, to this port and to our region.
That’s what the milestone you mark today is all about.
Australian resources, including Australian gas, helping power the economies of the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
Helping to underwrite the global energy transition.
And creating good secure jobs, here in Australia as well.
Gladstone shows precisely what Queenslanders and Australians can achieve when we anticipate economic change – and act to seize its opportunities.
And Gladstone is once again embarked on that work of transformation.
This has long been a great resources and energy centre, in a great resources and energy state.
It will remain so – even as its role evolves and expands.
Because Gladstone can be a global hub for green metals, green minerals and green hydrogen.
And it can be home to a new generation of secure jobs for good wages.
Australia is home to the resources the world needs to reach net zero.
Extracting those resources is vital for our economy, it always will be.
But we should aim to do more than just extract and export, watching as the value gets added and the jobs get created elsewhere, before we buy the products back.
We have the people, the skills, the science and research.
We have the energy and technology.
We have businesses committed to innovation and production.
We can do more, to build on our strengths.
To make the most of our advantages.
To make our future here in Australia, here in Queensland, here in Gladstone.
This is a time of significant change.
But above all, it is a moment of great opportunity – for this proud community and for our great country.
Together, I know we can seize it. Together, we can shape the future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I had the great privilege of launching this project in June 2022, during my first visit to Melbourne as Prime Minister.  
Back then this Centre was still very much a vision.
A vision of hope — for patients and their families.
What a transformation there’s been since.
The Alfred isn’t a newcomer to healthcare, or research. It’s been at the forefront for more than 150 years. And this building is a masterclass in both.
From the ‘bench-to-bedside’ approach to research, to the concern for patient wellbeing that shaped every design decision.
I congratulate everyone involved — your expertise, ingenuity and forethought is clear in each detail.
Today, as we celebrate the vision that conceived of this magnificent facility, we also recognise the generosity of the benefactors who helped make it a reality. Your willingness to walk the talk makes such a difference.
Of course, the name of the Paula Fox Melanoma and Cancer Centre gives a clue to the identity of at least one of those donors.
I’ve heard Lindsay say that ‘whatever Paula wants, Paula gets’.
Paula, I’m delighted that this is the case. And that you chose this project as your passion.
I congratulate you, too, on your partners on the journey.
Together with the Fox family, Minderoo Foundation, Monash University and the Victorian and Australian governments, the Alfred Hospital has been able to build something tremendous.
Chris Glanville, a melanoma survivor, knows the Alfred well.
He’s been working with the team to make sure that wellness — in body, mind and spirit — is at the heart of this building. And of every patient’s journey.
Chris’s experience as a patient taught him that:
“Time is precious when you’re dealing with cancer.”
And, when it comes to skin cancer, we’ve got no time to waste.
With some of the highest rates of melanoma in the world, it takes an unacceptable toll on our nation.
Two out of every three of us will receive a skin cancer diagnosis in our lifetime.
Each year, more than 1000 Australians die from it.
They call it Australia’s cancer. And it’s our challenge to beat.
Australia has one of the best health systems in the world, and that is not a happy accident. It’s the result of deliberate decisions over multiple generations.
Decisions that are true to the Australian spirit, made in the knowledge that their outcomes will lift us all together.
And that’s the spirit we see embodied here in this centre, which lifts us to a new level of excellence and sets the standard for cancer care into the future.
Where we stand today is living proof that partnerships between governments — and collaboration between government and philanthropy — can make great things happen.
On that note, today I am pleased to announce that my Government will invest $12 million to purchase and install a Quadra PET/CT Molecular Imaging scanner.
And working in partnership together, the Victorian Government and the Alfred will match our investment.
This scanner will mean Victorians have access to a cutting-edge scanner which will support cancer research, diagnosis and treatment, and will be able to detect cancers earlier.
This scanner will reduce wait times for Victorians who need a PET/CT scan and double the number of scans performed in Australia each year. 
It’s believed this will be the only scanner of its kind in Australia that is used for research, and cancer treatment and diagnosis.
It is expected to be operational by June 2025. And it belongs here.
Thanks to care with which it has been designed, the Paula Fox Melanoma and Cancer Centre is a building that lets the light pour in.
Thanks to all that has gone into it, I am confident that, in time, it will become a building that makes its own light shine out.
And in what has been at times a dark week for our nation, we can all do with more light.


We gather here in Bondi to grieve for all that has been stolen from us.
All the possibility and potential, all the kindness and humanity.
All the love and laughter of the six lives snatched away on that hardest of Saturday afternoon.
We keep this vigil for them - to honour all they were, to pay respect to all they meant.
We mourn for all the years of joy they should have known.
All the memories they should have had the chance to make.
The new life they would have lived, here in their new country.
The success they would have achieved in whatever career they embraced.
The happiness they would have created, the care they would have shown.
The beautiful children they would have raised with such love.
We gather here to remember them, our candles held against the darkness.
And we offer the condolences of this community, our city, our state and our entire nation to all who loved them most.
As we keep this vigil for the six souls we have lost, we keep a place in our heart for everyone affected.
All those who were injured. All those caring for them.
The people still in hospital and those taking the first steps on the hard road to recovery.
Survivors carrying the invisible scars of trauma and fear.
We think of Inspector Amy Scott who ran towards danger.
The security guards who made that same courageous choice.
The first responders who acted with such speed and skill.
And the everyday people who could never have imagined they would face such a moment and yet when that sternest test arrived, their first instinct was to help others, people that they did not know.
We think of everyone still trying to come to terms with the hole in their life where a loved one should be.
To the families and friends who are here with us – and to all who are with us in spirit.
Please know this - that every Australian is thinking of you.
We are with you.
As a community, as a country.
Today, tomorrow and always.
May those we have lost, rest in eternal peace.
Forever in our hearts.


I begin by acknowledging the owners of the land on which we gather tonight. I pay my respects to the Motu Koitabu people.
Prime Minister Marape and Mrs Marape, Ministers and distinguished guests.
Gutpela nait long yupela olgeta.
[Good evening to you all].
Thank you, Prime Minister, for your warm welcome and for this wonderful reception. It is an honour and delight to be in Papua New Guinea again.
During my last visit, I had the honour of becoming the first foreign Head of Government to address your National Parliament.
It was a great pleasure to reciprocate that honour in February, when Prime Minister Marape became the first ever Pacific island nation leader to address Australia’s Parliament.
Both our nations share a desire to shape the future, rather than let it shape us.
We are united in a vision of what we want to achieve together: a region that is prosperous, unified and secure.
It is also a vision of what we can achieve together as partners, neighbours and friends.
We are already achieving real economic benefits for the people of both our countries – together.
Our infrastructure partnership will help deliver major capital projects, including upgrading six key ports across PNG – making it easier for the region and the world to enjoy the famously high quality of your coffee, cocoa and seafood.
It is also connecting up to 40,000 households, schools and health clinics to grid power for the first time and better connecting remote villages to services, and farmers and producers to city markets, with over 1800 kilometres of roads.
The act of connecting takes so many forms.
More than 2000 Papua New Guinean workers deploy to Australia under our Pacific Australia Labour Mobility scheme each year.
That contributes to sustainable skills development and creates income streams for PNG communities. It also fills critical labour gaps in rural and regional Australia. PNG workers are very welcome in Australia.
We are also working on long-term environmental and energy security. That includes construction of Papua New Guinea’s first two solar farms and a new partnership with the Rai Coast District Development Authority that will deliver solar power to 12,000 homes, 22 community buildings and 750 streetlights.
Together, we are literally creating a brighter future.
Of course, so much of what we do has its beginning in education.
It is both crucial and heartening that Papua New Guineans and Australians are teaching together in PNG schools, and studying together at Australian universities and TAFEs.
Our longstanding security cooperation – which we strengthened in December with our Bilateral Security Agreement – is also delivering tangible benefits.
Through our defence partnership, we are boosting our shared maritime and aviation security capabilities.
We are building lasting institutional and personal links with joint training and secondments.
And we are improving critical facilities, including through Australia’s support for the continuing redevelopment of Lombrum Naval base.
The trusted cooperation between our Defence Forces has also allowed us to quickly respond to crises.
Our humanitarian partnerships meant Australia could amplify PNG’s response to the recent earthquakes in East Sepik and landslides in Chimbu, and to the Mt Bagana and Mt Uluwan volcanic eruptions.
We keep building on our proud history of working together.
We are delivering on the commitment made by Pacific leaders to ensure an effective, Pacific family-led approach to regional security.
It was wonderful to see the Royal PNG Constabulary and Australian Defence and Police personnel side by side supporting Solomon Islands’ successful delivery of its historic joint elections.
The Australian Federal Police’s partnership with the RPNGC is their largest bilateral partnership.
It includes investing in a Police Recruit and Investigations Training Centre of Excellence at Bomana Police Training College and investing in police barracks and housing to improve living conditions so that RPNGC recruits and officers can deploy across the country
Indeed, we’ll be breaking ground on new barracks in Port Moresby within weeks, and in Kokopo and Mt Hagen later in the year.
And two weeks ago we launched the new Australia-Papua New Guinea Law and Justice program which Prime Minister Marape and I announced in February.
As regional leaders, together we can play a role in helping shape a region that is stable and at peace, where all Pacific nations are free to pursue their own destiny and secure their own future.
Crucially, what gives us greater confidence in that better future is that we build on the strong foundations of our shared past.
It is a truth perfectly captured on a small monument outside Parliament House in Canberra. Dedicated to all who have served in war, it says: "Look around you – these are the things they believed in."
The legacy of those who fought for Papua New Guinea and Australia eight decades ago surrounds us, and warms us in its embrace.
Our free societies. Our democracies. The very fact that we can gather here at peace and in friendship.
Tomorrow, I have the privilege of walking in their footsteps along the Kokoda Track with Prime Minister Marape. Together, we will attend the Anzac Day Dawn Service at Isurava on Thursday.
The Kokoda Campaign and Kokoda Track are part of our national story and our shared history.
So, too, are the battles fought right across your country – in Gona, in Buna, in Sanananda, and at Milne Bay.
Our two people – fighting alongside each other for the same thing: home.
From that great crucible of courage, suffering, resilience and mateship, what emerged was the powerful bond between the people of our two great lands.
From the darkness of war to the joyous dawn of your independence and through the decades since, it is a bond that has only grown stronger.
As the 50th anniversary of Papua New Guinea’s independence approaches, we reflect on what is not just a bond between equals but between friends.
In Prime Minister Marape’s words, “We are joined at the hip.”
Through storm and sunshine alike, we have stood tall together.
We always will.
Tenk yu tru olgeta na, lukim yu bihain.
[Thank you very much everyone, see you again].


Thank you for the extraordinarily warm welcome to the Oro and Northern Provinces.
I’m told Oro means welcome. And that couldn’t be more appropriate. So thank you again.
To the children who sang the national anthems for us - the Australian national anthem has never sounded better. Thank you for that honour.
In a short while we’ll set out on the footsteps of giants.
Our people fought together in World War Two on the Kokoda Track and defended Australia and defended Papua New Guinea.
And the Australian people will never forget the extraordinary bravery, courage, resilience and support that the soldiers, but also, those who were assisting Australians from Papua New Guinea, did during that darkest hour of 1942.
The Prime Minister, my dear friend, James Marape and I will walk side by side, step by step, together.
It symbolises the fact that Australia and Papua New Guinea's future is together.
Whether it be on defence issues.
Whether it be in tackling climate change and the challenges of the 21st century.
Whether it be through our economic support.
This is a relationship that is based upon the people to people relationships. They were forged during that period at the Kokoda Track.
And even as your national anthem proudly asserts, you now have been through 49 years of independence and freedom.
And next year will be an important celebration of 50 years of remarkable achievement from a nation that includes such diverse cultures.
I thank those who shared the culture with your Australian visitors today.
More than 830 languages in this great country, but you are united.
And I thank you, Prime Minister Marape, for your leadership of this nation, for your friendship with Australia.
I pledge that our journey over the coming days until we will commemorate the sacred day for Australia of Anzac Day on Thursday at the Isurava Memorial, will be regarded as when we took that extra step forward in forging a relationship of brothers and sisters.
Together as one, we will go forward.
Thank you very much for the very warm welcome and for giving me the honour.
I am humbled by the reception that we have received.


We gather today on ground made hallow by Australian sacrifice.
Where we now have the privilege of joining together in peace and liberty, Australian soldiers fought to hold back a relentless enemy.
Six hundred and twenty-five Australians were killed on the Kokoda Track. Of those, 99 fell in the Battle of Isurava and 111 more were wounded.
And we remember and honour them this morning.  
We gather today in the final shadows of night because the first Anzacs did.
Half a world away and already more than a century distant, they clambered into their boats their voices barely whispers, the water a rippling darkness stretching before them to that most fateful of shores.
Year in, year out we gather before the dawn for the generations of Australians since Gallipoli who have served in our name.
Every Anzac Day, across Australia and in battlefields like this one, we honour all who have served, and all who continue to serve today.
It is a collective act of remembrance, reflection and gratitude carried out by multiple generations of Australians.
Those who enlisted for the Second World War grew up in an Australia scarred by the memory of the First.
They were the first generation to have attended dawn services. They knew the names of the dead on the cenotaphs and memorials.
Indeed, some were the sons and nephews of the first Anzacs – and there were even some of those Anzacs among them. Whatever sense of romance and adventure there had been in 1914 was long gone.
Yet they came.
We are gathered in a place that has known the most pitiless ferocity of battle, fought with bullet, bayonet, mortar, and the desperation of bare hands.
It is also a place that has seen the unadorned strength of the Australian spirit.
What happened here resulted in the first Victoria Cross awarded to an Australian on what was then considered Australian territory.
The recipient of that Victoria Cross was Private Bruce Kingsbury of the Second Fourteenth Battalion. In the words of Lieutenant-Colonel Ralph Honner, he gave “his life that his comrades and his country might live”.
In our pride we feel the weight of history as we gather here along the Kokoda Track, this great artery of mud and suffering and perseverance that has come to occupy a place of singular power in Australia’s shared memory.
We also look beyond the Kokoda Track to where Australians fought on land and sea and air right across Papua New Guinea.
With the growing sense our truest security lay here in our region, they fought in Gona, in Buna, in Sanananda and at Milne Bay where, at Australian hands, a Japanese amphibious landing was decisively defeated for the first time. Field Marshal Slim described it as the breaking of a spell.
If that spell was broken, something far greater was forged – our friendship, our powerful bond with the people of Papua New Guinea.
We thank every one of them who helped Australians in the face of retribution and sometimes unfathomable cruelty.
The troops, the coast watchers and the shipping pilots.
Soldiers like Warrant Officer Class 2 Bengari of the Papuan Infantry Battalion, who repeatedly volunteered for dangerous missions behind enemy lines.
The villagers who risked their own lives to feed and guide and shelter Australians in desperate need. The stretcher bearers whose courage was matched only by their kindness.
And the carers like Nurse Maiogaru Gimuleia Taulebona who put herself in danger by hiding wounded Leading Aircraftman John Francis Donegan from the Japanese.
They were angels walking tall through the hell of war. 
To the people of PNG, I offer Australia’s promise: We will never forget.
For the Papua New Guineans, this was not a theatre, a backdrop or a battlefield. It was home.
And ultimately, that was what Australians were fighting for, too. How far away home must have sometimes seemed.
They served through days of camaraderie. Through days of grinding exhaustion and disease.
Days that brought infernos of gunfire, or the ghostly finality of a sniper’s bullet.
The cruelty of random chance. The silence of sudden death, the terrible suffering of a lingering end.
Soldiers fighting together alongside their mates, soldiers fighting in profound loneliness. Boots carried by hand because the feet could no longer bear them.
The desperation of digging defensive positions with bayonet and helmet and bully beef tin. The hunger that gnawed endlessly, as unrelenting as the flies.
Final diary entries in which the handwriting faded into an almost childlike state – almost as if life’s approaching end carried within it echoes of the beginning.
This was the experience of Australians from across the continent – farmers and gold miners, factory hands and office workers alike thrown against an implacable, disciplined enemy.
As Corporal John O’Brien would reflect on his time fighting at Gama River:
“… when I thought I was going to die I wasn’t frightened, it was only when I realised that I might live, I got scared.”
As we gather here, we remember that 80 years ago, Australian and Papua New Guinean troops were fighting together in Madang and Sepik provinces.
We also remember Australian military personnel were in Europe as part of preparations for the D-Day landings in June.
And here in the Pacific, they would take part as the liberation of the Philippines got under way.
Every soldier, every aviator, every sailor, every nurse and medic seeing us through what Prime Minister John Curtin called “the gravest hour in our history”.
We gather each Anzac Day because how brightly the eternal flame of memory burns depends on how carefully we tend it.
That is what we do here today.
We come in gratitude. We come in sorrow. A pilgrimage of memory as we keep the long vigil of a grateful nation.
We hold to the solemn promise our countries made to the fallen all those years ago: We will remember them.
Anzac Day has never asked us to exalt in the glories of war.
Anzac Day asks us to stand against the erosion of time, and to hold on to their names. To hold on to their deeds.
In the silence, we try to picture them. We try to hear their voices, maybe their laughter, maybe their songs and the jokes they told even as their faces grew waxen, their beards matted with dirt and their dream of seeing home again hung by the flimsiest of threads.
We think of how gravely they were tested.
We remember them — not just for their courage, even though there were times their courage was almost beyond our comprehension.
But we also remember their fear – young, far from home, and confronting the unimaginable as it became reality.
In the words of Private Bill Spencer:
“You don’t want to give up, but you wish to Christ you were somewhere else!”
Even in their extraordinariness, they were human beings of flesh and blood.
As were their families.
Decades of war have built a universe of loss, constellations of grief spelt out on tombstones, inscriptions from loved ones aching with all that has been taken, and all that might have been.
We gather for all who went in our name, and never came home.
We gather for all who came home, but never fully left the battlefield.
And we thank all veterans. Just as they stepped up for us, we must step for them.
We have seen what horrors Australians have defeated. We have seen the difference Australians have made in the world – and continue to make.
We thank all serving members of the Australian Defence Force.
The world changes. The battle – and the battlefield – moves. But because of their courage, the cause of peace remains, and hope for it lives on.
Now, as darkness begins to lose its grip on the land, we think of those nights that must have seemed without end – here, and across continents, across wars, across generations.
And we give thanks that because of them, we can await what they made possible: the gift of a brighter dawn.
Lest we forget.


We gather today to mourn the joy Faraz Tahir should have known.
We grieve for the long and happy life he should have had the chance to make here in Australia.
The birthday he should have celebrated on Wednesday – and for many years to come.
We imagine the great success that a person of his drive and determination would have achieved and the profound contribution that someone of his boundless generosity, deep faith and powerful community spirit would have made.
We mourn for all the possibilities stolen from him.
And we grieve also for what was taken from us: his family and friends, his proud community and our nation as a whole.
In doing so, we honour all that he was, all that he meant and all that he gave.
Because Faraz Tahir’s life in Australia was defined by giving back.
Every tribute paid by those closest to him, has touched on the sense of obligation he felt to the nation that had given him refuge and the community that had embraced him.
His kindness uplifted all those it touched – and it inspired all those who witnessed it.
It is so fitting that the Ahmadiyya Muslim community are helping honour Faraz Tahir’s life with a blood drive.
A vital contribution that one person makes to the life of another, without expectation of recognition or reward.
You don’t know who you are helping, you only know that you are helping.
Faraz Tahir gave everything to help others: his time, his energy, his optimism and dedication, his heart and his soul.
And on that devastating Saturday afternoon at Bondi Junction, he gave his life.
Running toward danger, to protect people he had never even met.
Without doubt, he helped save lives that day.
Without question, Faraz Tahir died a hero.
And he will be remembered as a hero - in the history of this hard time and in all our hearts.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I offer our deepest sympathies to all of you who knew Faraz Tahir best and loved him the most.
Faraz Tahir counted himself lucky to have come to Australia.
In truth Australia was lucky to have him.  
He was grateful to Australia.
Today, as our nation remembers his bravery and honours his life.
We affirm that Australia will always be grateful to Faraz Tahir.
May he rest in eternal peace.


I'm proud to be here with women, men, boys and girls saying - We want violence against women and children to stop.
To be clear, we did ask to speak, myself and Katy, and were told that that wasn't possible and that's fine. I respect the organisers’ right to do that.
We are here today to demand that governments of all levels must do better, including my own, including every state and territory government.
We're here as well to say that society, and Australia, must do better.
We need to change the culture. We need to change attitudes. We need to change the legal system. We need to change the approach by all governments - because it's not enough to support victims.
We need to focus on the perpetrators and focus on prevention.
On Wednesday morning, I will convene a National Cabinet. It has been agreed with every Premier and Chief Minister.
We'll talk about what we can do, including as part of the national plan to end violence against women and children, where in the first two budgets, we've added $2.3 billion.
In the time that we have been in Government, we've allocated funding for 500 domestic violence workers. We now have 10 days paid domestic violence leave. I agree it's not enough. I said that. We need to do more. 
We have an escaping violence payment. And we have access to housing through the Housing Australia Future Fund. We do have funding for training for frontline workers, $50 million that we put in the last Budget.
So, I will see if the Minister for the Status of Women, Katy Gallagher, a proud ACT Senator as well, will want to say some things. But I say this.
I know. And that's why I'm here.
That's why I'm here.
I know that we all must do better.
But I know this as well. And I've got to be honest.
It's not just governments' problem. It's a problem of our entire society.
And this is a national crisis. 
And the reason why there's a disagreement with some of the language re emergency, is emergency is something that we use when there's a flood or bushfires, where things kick in for one month or two months of funding.
We don't need one month or two months. We need to address this in a serious way.
Week by week. Month by month. Year by year. 
And we need to make sure that this isn't just up to women. It's up to men to change men's behaviour as well.
And yes, people do need to be made accountable. And I'll be accountable for what my Government does. Just as I'm accountable for delivering on all of the Jenkins Report. I'm accountable for delivering the first ever paid domestic and family violence leave. I'm accountable for delivering 500 extra community workers in order to address this crisis.
But I want us to work together.
I want us to work together as a society to build a better Australia.
Because an Australia where women and children are safe, is a better Australia for women, for children and for men.
Thanks very much.


It’s such a pleasure to be with you here tonight. Thank you to the sponsors who’ve made this event possible, and, of course, the producers who give us such cause to celebrate.
If Beef Week showcases the best beef on the planet to the rest of the world, tonight shines a light on the very best of the best.
I have to say I don’t envy the judges. When the quality is this high across the board, none of them are having an easy time.
For those who didn’t make shortlist this year, may tonight offer that little bit of extra inspiration for 2025.
Everyone who is here tonight has shown the scale of their commitment to this industry. Through good times and the more challenging times, you have all walked the talk.
The result is there for everyone to see and, importantly, to taste.
What you produce matters at our kitchen tables – literally. You’re in our homes. You nourish us. You are a part of Australian family life.
We know it’s anything but easy. What you do calls on an extraordinary range of talents. It demands patience and perseverance. It needs you to be able to think quickly on your feet, but also to plan for the long term with clear eyes.
It requires what are sometimes almost superhuman energy levels, all of it held together with sheer strength of character. And every step you take, you are carefully and painstakingly navigating your way towards reward through a minefield of risk.
As much as we are here to celebrate the world-beating standard of what you produce, what we are ultimately here to celebrate is you.
Day in, day out, you show what commitment truly is. You deserve nothing less than a government that is every bit as committed to you.
A government that has your back. A government that listens to you.
A government that instinctively understands just how significant your industry is not just to Australia economically, but to our agricultural reputation internationally – a reputation that has been carefully built and nurtured over generations.
With 70 per cent of Australian beef leaving our shores, one of the keys to my Government’s commitment to you is biosecurity.
Since the outbreak of foot and mouth disease in Indonesia, the Government has provided significant assistance to Indonesia, Timor-Leste, and Papua New Guinea, including 4 million doses of FMD vaccine to Indonesia.
Meanwhile, implementation of the National Lumpy Skin Disease Action Plan released in late 2022 is on track.
Another crucial key is improving and strengthening Australia’s international trade relations.
China is vital, and we are making great progress in resolving agricultural issues and getting fully loaded ships once again leaving Australian ports for China.
There is of course still work to be done – and we are getting on with it.
The Australia-UK Free trade Agreement is already yielding dividends. In the six months leading up to January, beef exports to Britain leapt 411 per cent compared to the same period the year before.
And we have worked hard to recommence live cattle trade with Indonesia and Malaysia. It’s work we’re backing with an investment of $8.8 million over two years.
What we have found along the way doesn’t count as a major revelation – the greatest successes are achieved when government works closely and constructively with your industry.
It is an industry in which all Australians can take pride.
Australian beef is a byword for quality, which is why there is always a place for it on plates across our country and far beyond our shores.
My Government will always work to make it easier for you to be your very best.
Congratulations to all the winners and the nominees tonight.


I’m delighted to join with all of you in celebrating the biggest and oldest cattle company in our country.
A major operator, employer and exporter here in Central Queensland.
And an extraordinary contributor to Australia’s national success for two centuries.
Can I thank Beef Australia’s Chair, Bryce Camm, the Board of Directors, the CEO, Simon Irwin, and everyone involved with organising Beef Australia 2024.
This is such a great event for Central Queensland, and for the cattle industry across our nation.
It delivers a big boost to the local economy, helps drive the growth of an essential national industry.
And it helps Australia showcase the best beef in the world, to the rest of the world.
That’s especially important as we welcome international visitors and global export partners for the first time since 2018.
Bringing this event to life takes an extraordinary amount of work from so many dedicated people.
I’m proud our Government has backed your efforts, with a $6 million commitment that we made at the Gracemere Saleyards ahead of the last election.
And I’m so pleased to stand here in the Beef Capital of Australia — and see firsthand the world-class event we are supporting.
Beef 2024 is a reminder of how important the agriculture sector is to our economy but also to our Australian identity and our Australian story.
Australians – everywhere – respect the hard work that farmers and producers do.
We are grateful for the contribution you make to our quality of life.
And we can only admire the resilience you demonstrate when times are tough – through fires and flood and drought and all the other unpredictable challenges of life on the land. 
I know that even as we gather to celebrate 200 years of proud history, you are looking to the future.
To new markets and new opportunities, new science and technology, new ways to thrive and succeed.
Our Government is proud to be backing you in all this.
When I talk about my vision for a future made in Australia, it’s about us being more self-reliant, standing our own two feet as an economy and making sure that every part of our country shares in the opportunities that are ahead of us.
Our regions and suburbs as well as our big cities.
A strong agriculture sector is central to all that.
You help us succeed at home and win in the world.
I know the next hundred years of AACo will be even bigger and better, for the benefit of all of us.
Congratulations everyone, thank you and have a great Beef week.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I do want to take a moment this morning to express my heartfelt sorrow to the parents of Callum and Jake Robinson. 
Their beloved sons have been murdered in Mexico. 
And right now they are trying to come to terms with what is every parent’s nightmare.
I join with all Australians in offering them my deepest sympathies and condolences.
It’s great to be back in Perth and I want to thank our hosts - Business News and 9News.
I acknowledge all my Federal colleagues joining us today, along with so many other distinguished guests.
Our Government understands that here in Western Australia and around our nation, people are under financial pressure.
Which is why next week’s Budget will deliver new help with the cost of living for all Australians.
We’ll be building on the two years of work we have done to make Medicare stronger and medicine cheaper.
Adding superannuation to our expanded Paid Parental Leave. 
Investing in skills and education, carrying forward the success of fee-free TAFE.
Backing the aspirations of everyone who works hard to gain a place at uni and studies hard to earn a degree by wiping $3 billion off student debt and making the system simpler and fairer for the future.
As well as providing financial support for the next generation of teachers, nurses and social workers while they do their practical placements.
We are maintaining the GST guarantee – so WA schools and hospitals will continue to get their fair share of funding.
And we’ll be making new investments in productivity-boosting projects like METRONET and backing new infrastructure to drive growth into the future.
Including the funding we’re announcing today to get work moving on Westport.
Planning a new container port at Kwinana, with connecting road and rail infrastructure.
Creating jobs in Western Australia’s regions – and boosting exports to our Indo-Pacific region. 
And at the centre of this year’s Budget will be a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer.
All 13.6 million of them, not just some.
Eight out of 10 WA taxpayers will get a bigger tax cut than they would have under the Morrison Government’s old plan.
Our new tax cuts are better for women, for part time workers, for low and middle income earners and for parents going back to work.
And they’re better for business and the economy too – because they will boost workforce participation.
Our Government’s number one priority is taking action to help with the cost-of-living, without adding to inflation.
And we do this while building for a future made in Australia.
Because it’s the job of responsible Government to deal with the challenges of the here-and-now, while preparing for the opportunities of the future.
That’s true even in times of international uncertainty, indeed especially in times of international uncertainty.
Because securing a future where living standards, wages and productivity rise together and building an economy that is more competitive, more resilient and more prepared for the next global shock means working together to shape the future, not waiting for the future to shape us.
Western Australians know this better than anyone. 
And you understand that in order for our nation to seize the transformative opportunities of this decade, we must begin by recognising the economic realities of this moment.
Advanced economies around the world are engaged in a new competition for the next generation of jobs, investment and prosperity. 
They are committed to net zero by 2050.
They have endured the shock of the pandemic - and the long aftershock of its impact on supply chains.
They are emerging from the most significant global energy crisis in 50 years.
And they are learning - and applying – the lessons of these events.
Seeking greater economic sovereignty and greater energy security.
And central to their approach is the capacity of government to be a catalyst for private capital.
To help businesses grow and thrive by providing tax credits, investor incentives and cutting red tape to accelerate projects and boost productivity.
As well as direct investment to support pre-commercial activity and a combination of loans and subsidies to attract private capital.
The United States’ Inflation Reduction Act is the best known example.
But the same economic and strategic imperatives are at work in the European Union, Japan, the Republic of Korea and Canada.
And let’s be clear - this is not a political fashion trend, or a passing ideological fancy.
It is not nostalgia for old-fashioned protectionism – or a retreat to it.
This is the economic course some of our most significant trading partners are setting for the future.
This is where the world is heading.
And no-one is waiting for around Australia to make up our minds, no-one is holding the door open for us to follow.
If we don’t move now, this world of opportunity will go right past us.
That’s why our Government’s plan for a future made in Australia is about acting with purpose and urgency.
Building on our unique national strengths – and growing beyond them.
Making the right investments in skills and training, research and education, infrastructure and clean energy – and advanced manufacturing.
So when a researcher at an Australian university makes a breakthrough in green hydrogen, or vanadium battery technology we turn that discovery, into industry.
Making products here. Manufacturing technology here.
Creating secure jobs for good wages here.
Moving Australia up the international value chain.
Taking more Australian ideas and innovations and green products to the world.
This doesn’t mean pulling up the drawbridge, or cutting ties with our trading partners.
Our plan is about diversifying our economy to deepen our engagement with the region.
Building on Australia’s hard-earned reputation as a reliable energy provider for the economies of North Asia.
And capitalising on the new global demand for clean energy by supplying the metals, minerals and technology and - through green hydrogen - the energy itself.   
In all of this, Western Australia has a central and vital role to play.
WA metals, minerals and resources.
WA universities, research and technology.
And WA businesses and workers – the global respect your skills and knowledge command.
This is the compelling combination of strengths that Western Australia brings to the table.
And it’s also powerful proof that Australia can absolutely compete and succeed in a changing global economy.
Time and time again, the companies in this room and across this state have embraced new technology and the productivity gains that come with it.
That’s why mining today employs robotics experts and automation specialists, as well as engineers and geologists.
You’ve invested in clean energy.
From Hydrogen Hubs in Kwinana and the Pilbara to Synergy’s Collie battery energy storage system – which will be one of the biggest grid-scale batteries in Australia.
You’ve engaged with the opportunities of our region.
Western Australian gas and iron ore helps build our nation’s wealth – and power Asia’s growth. 
And the workers of this state have learned new skills and achieved new standards in safety and sustainability. 
As it has grown and adapted, the resources industry has invested in the regional communities that support it.
Creating local jobs, upgrading local infrastructure and working with traditional owners to create economic opportunity in remote communities.
All of that should give us confidence and optimism for what’s ahead.
Because while it’s true that the resources industry has been a great constant in your state’s economy and our national prosperity.
It has achieved that by constantly evolving - and adapting.
By anticipating and shaping the next opportunity - and that next opportunity is upon us.
Our Minister for Resources, Madeleine King, always says that the road to net zero runs through Western Australian resources.
Gas is playing an important role in firming and energy security, as our economy transitions.
And we know that making more solar panels, batteries and clean energy technology means exploring and extracting more lithium, cobalt, nickel, copper, critical minerals and rare earths.
The world needs more of these resources - and our Government is going to help Australia find more.
Today I announce that next week’s Budget will invest in a new era of mineral exploration.
We will fund the first comprehensive map of what’s under Australia’s soil – and our seabed.
Meaning we can pinpoint the new deposits of critical minerals and strategic materials we need for clean energy and its technology.
As well as traditional minerals like iron ore and gold.
And potential storage sites for hydrogen.
This landmark new funding commences on the 1st of July this year and it will be long term - with $566 million provided over the ten year medium term.
The best time to start this generational project was a decade ago – the next best time is right now.
A future made in Australia relies on providing confidence to investors, and supporting those who take on the task of exploring our vast continent.
The world-leading experts at Geoscience Australia will drive this work.
And our Government will ensure their findings are freely available to industry.
So companies know where to drill, dig and explore to find the mineral resources that will power our future growth and prosperity.
This is a map to greater community certainty as well.
Because it will assist with infrastructure planning, environmental assessments and supporting the agriculture sector.
And help create a sustainable pipeline of projects – on an orderly timeline.
So much of our future prosperity depends on finding more critical minerals, extracting more critical minerals – and doing more with critical minerals before we export them.
Too often, ‘comparative advantage’ is the reflexive reason given for why we don’t make things here in Australia.
We’re told it’s not worth trying - that there are too many other countries with more people willing to work for less money. 
Our abundance of cleaner, cheaper energy changes that equation.
It signals a new era of comparative advantage.
Because as the emissions footprint of technology becomes more important to buyers being able to power refining, processing and manufacturing with clean energy becomes more valuable for sellers.
On the east coast, over 30% of homes have rooftop solar.
Here in the west, it’s over 40%.
More and more of us make use of renewable energy in our daily lives.
And by using clean energy to power heavy industry - we can make Australia a renewable energy superpower.
This will be a clear priority in the Budget – and beyond.
As will the opportunity presented by co-locating extraction and production.
Providing the investment incentives and the regulatory framework to support more downstream processing, on our shores.
Taking raw materials to the nearest regional centre for value-adding, rather than shipping them other side of the world.
Creating jobs, cutting transport emissions – and reducing costs.
One of the lessons many nations took from the pandemic was to pursue greater diversity in their supply chains, rather than relying too heavily on any one country.
For example, in the European Union, the Critical Raw Materials Act sets a target of no more than 65 per cent of annual consumption of each strategic raw material to come from a single country. 
That’s a market open to us - and it’s a reminder of another great national advantage we hold.
Australia is a stable democracy. A trusted trading partner.
We engage with global markets, we champion the rules-based order.
We are home to diaspora communities that give us a family connection to every part of the world.
We are a leader in our region. A middle power in our own right.
And when nations are drawing a clear connection between their economic and security interests - all of this matters, all of this counts in our favour.
Everyone in this room appreciates that Australia is a great investment.
Government has work to do to ensure that our nation continues to attract new investment, drive new projects and deliver better returns.
This isn’t always a matter of government doing more – or spending more.
There’s a key role for government in de-risking private initiative.
Funding discovery, investing in research and supporting the commercialisation of breakthroughs.
And helping new industries and start-ups get over the hump.
But just as market forces alone won’t get us to net zero, fill the gaps in our skills base, build resilience in our supply chains or strengthen our communities - this task can’t be left to government alone – or funded by government alone.
I’ve made it clear that in this time of fiercely contested global opportunity, our Government is not going to sit on the sidelines and watch the game unfold.
Nor are we trying to play every position.
Because we know a big part of the value government can add is in building the right regulatory framework for business.
One of the key objectives of our Future Made in Australia Act will be to help streamline international investment in national priority projects.
Offering faster pathways to approvals while maintaining important environmental standards.
As the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, explained last week – this includes simplifying the process for international investors with proven track records.
We need faster and better processes to local investment in local projects as well.
Whether it’s critical minerals or renewable energy – the current environmental approval process is far too slow. 
That’s why we are investing nearly $100 million to speed up decision-making.
More support for staff reviewing business proposals for renewables and critical minerals.
More support for business to help them comply with environmental law.
Providing a better steer on site selection, with more surveying work ahead of time.
And better planning and co-operation with state and territory governments.
To make it clear where development can occur – and where the no-go areas are.
And to join-up community and industry needs, so priority projects have the right surrounding network of roads, rail – and community infrastructure.
Many of you have heard me say it before: our Government is pro-worker and pro-business.
That’s never been a point of tension or compromise for us – it’s a matter of logic.
We know that without thriving businesses, there are no secure jobs or fair wages.
And our plans for a future made in Australia are also about making it easier to do business in Australia.
Our agenda is pro-trade and pro-investment too.
Because so much of what we want to achieve for Australia, depends on our engagement with the region and the world.
For our Government, it’s not a matter of taking sides or picking winners.
Our plan is for workers and businesses to succeed together.
Profits and wages and productivity and living standards to rise together.
Investment and trade and industry and agriculture to grow together.
And our regions, suburbs and cities to share in new jobs and prosperity – together.
Because we can all win from this opportunity.
Two years ago and about a kilometre from here, I launched Labor’s campaign for Government.
I asked the Australian people to trust us with the honour of serving as their Government - and join us in the work of building a better future.
For all the challenges we’ve known since then, for all the global uncertainty our nation has endured.
We still have every reason to believe that better future is ours to seize - and nowhere is that more true than here in WA.
Western Australia is home to the resources the world needs.
And we can make Western Australia home to the energy and technology and skills the world needs too.
Working together, we can convert this moment of opportunity into a generation of prosperity.
We can make the most of our nation’s boundless potential.
We can make this decade our own.
We can make our future, here in Australia.


Welcome back, friends.
And tomorrow's Budget, of course, will be a big night.
And for Jim and Katy and all the team, all the Ministers who've put this together, congratulations.
This will be a night of which you can all be very, very proud.
There will be, of course, two main things that have driven our government for the last two years that we'll celebrate next week.
But tomorrow night - help with the cost of living, the number one priority we have had.
And secondly, though, always having our eye on the future and making our future here in Australia.
It is a Labor budget through and through, because it's a budget for every Australian, not just some.
New investments in Medicare and the health system.
More help for households doing it tough.
More homes in every state and territory.
Importantly, cost of living relief that doesn't add to inflation, indeed, that reduces inflation.
And a tax cut for every single taxpayer, not just some.
This is a true Labor budget because it helps people who are under pressure right now.
But it's also about investment.
Investment in our future, in jobs, in skills, in infrastructure, in housing, in social care, be it health or education.
And that's what Labor governments always do - deal with the urgent necessities that we have to deal with, things that we're confronted with, but always with our eye on a better future.
Always how we can create and, indeed, after anticipating that better future.
Now, that means, as I said two years ago on election night, opening those doors of opportunity for people.
And that's what our extension of Fee-Free TAFE, the measures that you'll see tomorrow night about universities arising from the Universities Accord and the other work that Jason Clare has done.
The support that we have to make sure, as we committed to, that no one be left behind and no one held back.
No one left behind is why we are making sure that we take these cost of living measures in order to provide assistance for people who need it.
But no one held back, which is about what does our economy look like in five, ten, twenty years’ time?
The decisions that we make this decade will set Australia up for the decades ahead.
And that is what a Future Made in Australia is about.
Making sure that we seize the opportunities that are there.
We've been very fortunate to now be positioned with comparative advantages located, as we are, in the fastest growing region of the world in human history, with the resources under the ground and in the sky that are the best in the world.
The resources that the world needs to power this century going forward.
And our most important resource, of course, is our people.
And we'll be investing in them to make sure that they can seize these opportunities.
Creating secure, well paid jobs in our suburbs and our regions.
Making sure that we are well positioned to take advantage of where we are in 2024.
We live in uncertain economic times, but what we've ensured is that we deal with some of those pressures whilst, of course, making sure we have our eye on the future.
Last year's Budget, of course, was the first surplus that has been produced in this country for fifteen years - responsible economic policy.
So, we await later this week, there'll be the third reply.
We're yet to see a fully costed policy on anything. Maybe third time lucky.
If not, it will be strike three in their credibility as an alternative government.
Because whilst they are quite capable of saying ‘no’ to everything, eventually at some stage, they have to say what they're in favour of.
Where their nuclear reactors will be, what cuts they will make, to do what they say they want to do when they opposed our tax cuts for every Australian.
So I'm really proud to be a member of this caucus and to have the great privilege of being Prime Minister, but I'm so proud of the team that we have.
And Jim, as Treasurer, will hand down his third speech, his third budget, tomorrow night.
It's a great speech. I've had a chance to have a squiz, it's been put to bed.
And tomorrow night when that happens, I'm sure that each and every one of you will be very glad that we're in this end of the corridor, because this means that we can make a difference for the people that we want to represent.
And our tax cuts for every Australian is a reminder that we want to represent, and indeed we will in tomorrow night's budget, every single Australian.
Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging. 
Thank you Jacinta, for that very warm welcome on what is a big weekend for you. 
It’s a special moment to stand in front of your friends and colleagues as leader of the party and Premier of the State you love. 
Because – as Jacinta and all her Victorian Government colleagues appreciate – the true honour and the real purpose of public life is the chance to serve. 
To aim high, build big – and build to last.
JA, everyone in this room knows how hard you work and how much you care. 
And every day, more and more Victorians are seeing that as well. 
I acknowledge all my Federal colleagues here today. 
A great friend and an even better Deputy Prime Minister, Richard Marles. 
The local member and an outstanding Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, Bill Shorten.
And so many other Members and Senators. 
25 Victorian Labor MPs out of 39 seats.
A reflection of the fact this great branch keeps supplying quality candidates and the dedicated true believers and volunteers in this room keep driving winning campaigns. 
We saw that in Aston last year – and we saw it in Dunkley this year. 
And on that note, can you please join me in welcoming our new Member for Dunkley, Jodie Belyea. 
And soon to be our newest Senator for Victoria, Lisa Darmanin. 
As we welcome these two new members of our Federal team, we remember two dear friends we have lost: Peta Murphy and Linda White. 
Both had contributed so much to our party and our nation – both had so much more to give. 
And while they followed two very different paths to Parliament, both Linda and Peta were bound by the same belief in the power of our movement to make a positive difference to people’s lives and the responsibility of Labor Governments to change the country for the better. 
We saw that with all the work Linda did to help deliver 10 Days Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave. 
And everything Peta did to drive new action on the gender pay gap. 
We miss them today – we will remember them always.
Delegates
The Budget we delivered on Tuesday was about the two things that have driven our Government for two years: 
Helping people with their cost of living. 
And making our future here in Australia. 
It’s a true Labor Budget, through and through -because it’s a Budget for all Australians. 
Every taxpayer gets a tax cut. 
Every household gets $300 off their power bill. 
Every state and territory gets more help to build more homes and build more social housing sooner. 
Everyone on the top rate of Rent Assistance gets extra help every fortnight. 
Everyone who wants to go to TAFE or university gets a crack at that opportunity.
Everyone with a student debt gets a fairer deal. 
And every working parent gets superannuation added to their government paid parental leave.  
Our Budget builds on everything we’ve done over the past two years to make medicine cheaper, for everyone. 
And it makes Medicare stronger, for everyone. 
Over the last two years we’ve opened 58 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics. 
In Ballarat, Frankston, Geelong, Heidelberg, Carlton, Prahran, Shepparton, Sunbury, Werribee and Narre Warren. 
Already, over 105,000 Victorians have visited one of these clinics. 
Bigger than a Grand Final crowd! 
Able to get the treatment they need – for free. 
Our Budget keeps writing that success story. 
By investing in an additional 29 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics – including more for Victoria.
Taking pressure off public hospitals. 
And making it easier for people to see a doctor, with just their Medicare card. 
Here in Victoria - the Education State - you are led by a Government that understands the transformative power and lifelong value of a good education. 
Education is the single most powerful weapon we have against disadvantage. 
And it’s the single best investment we can make in our nation’s future. 
That’s why we’ve already delivered 350,000 fee-free TAFE places. 
And we are rolling out another 300,000 from this year. 
Plus 20,000 spots reserved for tradies to build more homes. 
And we are going to ensure that more Victorians in the regions and in Melbourne’s growing suburbs can choose TAFE or university. 
By investing in more uni places. 
And paying students doing their pracs – so our next generation of nurses, carers, teachers and social workers get decent support while they’re gaining vital experience. 
In our party, we know that education opens the doors of opportunity. 
That’s why we’re backing the aspiration of Australian students and graduates by wiping $3 billion off HECS and HELP debts.
And fixing the student loan system, so that it is simpler and fairer into the future. 
Because under Labor Governments, higher education is about changing lives, not a lifetime of debt. 
Victoria is home to some of the best universities in the world. 
And students come from all over the world to study here.  
That’s good for the state and the national economy but we recognise it also puts pressure on housing, especially for renters. 
That’s why we’re going to make the system more sustainable for everyone. 
So that if Monash or Melbourne, or Deakin or RMIT want to bring in more international students – they have to build more student accommodation.
Universities will continue to benefit from student demand – provided they contribute to housing supply. 
One of the things Jacinta Allan and I have in common is that we could talk about infrastructure, forever. 
And the one thing we enjoy more than talking about it – is getting it built. 
So I’m very proud our Government is working with Victoria to build the roads and rail this growing state needs. 
$5 billion for the North East Link, the missing link in Melbourne’s freeway network. 
$2 billion to back the Suburban Rail Loop. 
$450 million to upgrade regional roads and suburban streets.
And upgrading the Camerons Lane Interchange – connecting the Hume Freeway to the new Intermodal Freight Terminal we are building near Beveridge. 
I love this project. It will create 20,000 jobs. 
It will mean trucks can put freight onto double-stacked trains, up to 1.8 km long.
It will cut transport costs for Victorian businesses – and it will cut emissions. 
We’re building new infrastructure and we’re building more homes. 
Making a $32 billion investment in social housing, public housing and more affordable housing across Australia – and in every part of Victoria. 
Training more tradies, freeing up more land and cutting red tape to speed construction. 
And investing $1 billion in more crisis accommodation for women and children fleeing family violence.
We are doing all this in spite of the opposition we’ve faced – from the Liberals and the Greens. 
The Liberals have a pathological problem with affordable housing, always have. 
And while the Greens Political Party may talk a lot about housing – the only thing they want to build is their profile. 
They vote against building more homes in the Parliament. 
And then they protest against housing in their electorates. 
They treat housing as a platform to campaign on - we know it's the foundation people build a life on. 
They want to campaign on the problem - we want to deliver the solution. 
They want more names on their petitions - we’re focused on building more homes for Australians.
That’s why we’ll keep working with the states and territories, with the construction industry and local councils. 
Our opponents are the blockers – but we are the builders. 
And we will keep building the homes Australians need. 
Delegates
Two years ago, I was at a press conference out at Box Hill, in the final two weeks of the Federal election campaign, I was asked if I would support an increase in the minimum wage of one dollar an hour. 
I gave a one word answer. 
Absolutely!
And that one word, the very idea that the lowest-paid workers in Australia should not go backwards, that was enough to send the Liberal Party off the deep end. 
They said it was ‘loose’, they said it was ‘irresponsible’, they said the sky would fall in and the economy would shut down.
In other words, they said exactly what the Liberal Party always say when there’s a chance to improve people’s wages and conditions, or workplace safety, or job security. 
The Noalition say no every time - and they are wrong every time. 
Think about this. 
820,000 jobs have been created in our first two years in Government.
A record for any first term Government in Australian history. 
Unemployment is at a near 50-year low. 
Participation is up.
Inflation is down. 
Productivity is up. 
Business investment is up. 
We are forecasting back-to-back Budget surpluses - the first time in two decades. 
And at the same time, we’ve supported back-to-back real increases in the minimum wage for the lowest paid.   
We’ve delivered annual growth in real wages, for all workers.  
We’ve passed an important law, to deliver a simple principle: Same Job, Same Pay. 
We’ve revitalised enterprise bargaining, to drive improvements in productivity and security. 
We’ve made industrial manslaughter a national crime. 
We’ve abolished the ROC and the ABCC.
And we’ve legislated the Right to Disconnect. 
Because if you’re not being paid 24 hours a day, you shouldn’t have to be on call 24 hours a day. 
We’ve taken the gender pay gap to a record low – and we are not done yet. 
In last week’s Budget we once again backed better wages for working people. 
Funding a further pay rise for aged care workers.
And making provision for a long overdue pay increase for early educators and carers.
Because whether you’re helping young Australians get a great start in life or older Australians enjoy dignity and security in retirement, you deserve more than thanks and praise – you deserve fair pay. 
And delegates, because Victoria led the nation on labour hire reform. 
We are going to make Victoria the host jurisdiction for a national labour hire licensing scheme. 
No more second-class status for labour hire workers. 
Delegates
This is what Labor Governments do. 
We deliver growth and fairness; more jobs and better wages. 
Because we know that an essential part of building a stronger economy – is making sure that the people who build it share in the reward. 
And everyone here knows that this doesn’t just happen on its own. 
Fairness isn’t automatic, it’s not a natural force or a law of gravity. 
It’s not the default setting of a society or an economy. 
Fairness is hard work - and it’s hard won. 
It takes the dedication and advocacy of trade unions. 
It takes the organising and energy of true believers. 
And it takes Labor Governments to deliver - to get things done. 
That requires a lot more than the stroke of pen. 
Making meaningful change can be patient and painstaking work. 
And making change last takes time. 
We know there is more to do on cost of living, on Medicare, on housing, on education, on climate change.
And more to do to seize the generational opportunities of this moment. 
To invest in new energy and skills and science.
To take advantage of our resources and our proximity to the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
To bring new jobs in manufacturing and technology to our regions and suburbs. 
Because the story of Holden at Fisherman’s Bend or Ford at Geelong, wasn’t just about one company in one factory.
It was a huge ecosystem of flow-on jobs and skills and services for those communities.
That’s the transformative economic opportunity we can create with cheaper, cleaner energy and new technology. 
The chance to make things here again.  
To create a new generation of secure, high-wage jobs. 
A future made in Australia - that will be a defining feature of our Government. 
Reform that holds no-one back, progress that leaves no-one behind. 
And we were reminded again this week that our opponents only ever define themselves by what they are against. 
They make it their mission to oppose progress in Opposition – and undo it in Government.
Ten years ago they drove the car industry out of Australia.  
And five minutes after the Budget was handed down, they said no to making things here in Australia. 
The Liberal Party are scared of the present but terrified of the future. 
They are stuck in the past – and set on dragging the rest of Australia back there to keep them company. 
Dragging the country back to denial and delay on climate change. 
Back to an economy where low wages were a deliberate design feature. 
Back to wage theft, insecure work and the law of the jungle in industrial relations. 
Back to a Liberal Government in Canberra that treated Victorians like second-class citizens. 
And back to cutting and freezing and taxing Medicare. 
This week marked the 10 year anniversary of that notorious 2014 Budget. 
When a certain Health Minister by the name of Peter Dutton. 
Cut $50 billion from public hospitals. 
And tried to whack a new tax on medicines for sick people. 
A new tax on every patient going to hospital. 
And a new tax on every Australian who needed to see a doctor. 
A GP tax designed to destroy Medicare once and for all. 
It’s no wonder the doctors of Australia voted Peter Dutton the worst Health Minister our nation has ever had.
And on Thursday night, in his third Budget Reply speech, two years into the job the only thing Peter Dutton proved is he has nothing positive to offer our country. 
No costed policies, no plans to help with cost of living. 
His one initiative was lifted from Tony Abbott’s crime policy from 2010. 
No new agenda – just the same old vendetta. 
The first thing he said No to, was making things here. No to Australian jobs.
He declared he would rip up the rights of casual workers. 
He tried to pretend that his nine years in Government – when he broke the migration system and smashed Medicare – never happened. 
He refused to tell Australians about where he is going to put his nuclear reactors, how many there will be, how much they will cost and who will pay for them. 
All he offers is a return to the denial, delay and division of the wasted decade he inflicted on Australia last time. 
Australians can’t afford that, our country can’t risk it.
Delegates
This decade is not even four years old - but it has already visited all manner of challenges on Australia and indeed Victoria. 
Black Summer in Gippsland. 
Floods at Rochester and the Maribyrnong River. 
The impact of the global pandemic and the aftershock of economic uncertainty. 
In all this, you looked after each other. You helped each other through. 
And you’ve worked to preserve and nourish the great national asset of our social cohesion and our respect for one another - even when it’s been tested by conflict and tension overseas. 
The worst of times, always reveal the best of our people – their compassion and their courage. 
And those same qualities will be at the heart of the future we make for ourselves. 
The compassion to help each other through uncertainty, to deal with the pressures of the here and now. 
And the courage to seize new opportunities, to invest in new ideas, to harness new energy and embrace new technology. 
The courage to build a stronger economy, where no-one is held back. 
And the compassion to build a better society, where no-one is left behind. 
A mission worthy of our movement. 
An aspiration worthy of our people.  
A decade we can make our own. 
A future we can make, right here in Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a great pleasure to be joining you on Public Education Day – and to celebrate what is one of the most potent forces for good that we have.
All Australians can proudly point to public education as one of our great strengths as a nation.
A quality education system that is available to everyone regardless of their postcode, their wealth, faith or ethnicity.
An education system that is an intrinsic and transformative part of our social fabric.
An education system that does so much to ensure that our cherished values of equality and the fair go are also our day-to-day reality.
All of this stands on the shoulders of generations of your members.
Hardworking, dedicated educators who have slogged hard through the terms, through the years, all of them working to make sure that holding open the doors of opportunity is not a lofty ideal, but a lived reality – and an Australian tradition.
On election night two years ago, one of the priorities I outlined was to widen the doors of opportunity.
Nothing holds those doors open like education. That is something that has sat in the forefront of my mind all my life.
I want it to be possible for everyone to be lifted by education the way that I and my great colleague Jason Clare were.
Even as I say that, I can picture the faces of every teacher, lecturer and tutor who helped me along the way.
Educators who didn’t just make me able to see a bigger world, but gave me the gift of understanding how it worked – then carefully and patiently taught me how to find my way in it.
Education gave me possibility. Education opened my eyes to my own potential, then gave me what I needed to fulfil it.
My formal education came to an end some time ago, but its glow still reaches out from the past to brighten my present.
And education is what puts the glow into the future.
When it comes to a Future Made in Australia – the future that will allow our nation to stand proudly and firmly on its own feet in a shifting world – there is no greater building block than education.
And the great heart of that building block is public education.
Whether it’s tapping into new energy, making things here, or moving up the value chain, a Future Made in Australia depends on what education makes possible.
The skilled workforce, the research and development, the science, and the creativity of our people.
One of our duties as a government is to add to that building block, to keep enhancing it and making it stronger. It won’t come as news to anyone in this room that there is much work to be done.
There is no job in the world more important than being a teacher.
Yet we don't have enough of them.
We have a teacher workforce crisis that has been a decade in the making.
And the problem isn’t just recruiting teachers, it’s keeping them in the classroom.
I applaud Prue Car – Deputy Premier and Minister for Education and Early Education – for the work she and the State Government have done to boost teachers’ pay. 
Another challenge is workload, and for teachers that is something that spreads well beyond the hours marked out by the school bell.
That is why we are working together on ways to reduce workload through the Teacher Workload Reduction Fund.
Then there’s respect. I was glad to have had the chance add my voice to the Be That Teacher campaign.
As Education Minister Jason Clare put it, it’s fundamentally about changing the way our country thinks of our teachers, and the way our teachers think the country regards them. 
Just as we’re working to make it better to be a teacher, we’re making it easier to become one.
For the first time in a long time, the Government is rolling out Commonwealth Teaching Scholarships worth up to $40,000 each.
That $40,000 comes with an important string attached. You have to commit to working in a public school for up to four years.
We are also establishing a Commonwealth Prac Payment to support student teachers and others, who are undertaking the workplace placements that are such a crucial and mandatory part of their studies.
However, that work is unpaid – and many students have to do it for weeks at a time. Sometimes they’re commuting far from home. It can mean having to give up the part-time work that has sustained them through their studies.
It’s an expensive double whammy – and it means too many students aren’t finishing their degrees. Dreams are left unrealised, potential left unfulfilled, callings left unfollowed.
And critically, it leaves teacher shortages unaddressed.
If we are to have a future made here in this country, we must have more young Australians studying to become teachers.
We cannot afford to leave unpaid prac standing as a barrier between them and their dream job.
They need the experience – and Australia needs them.
The Commonwealth Prac Payment will provide $319.50 per week to around 68,000 eligible higher education students and 5000 vocational education students during their clinical and professional placement periods.
What guides my Government is a very straightforward imperative: to shape the future rather than let it shape us.
We are investing in more university places, and making it easier for young Australians in the suburbs and the regions to get a degree.
We’re backing the aspiration of Australian students and graduates by wiping $3 billion off HECS and other HELP debts.
We’re also fixing the student loan system, so that it is simpler and fairer into the future. 
We do it because Labor Governments understand that higher education is about changing lives, not a lifetime of debt. 
We have some of the best universities in the world. That so many students across the world want to come study here is understandable.
It’s good for the economy, but we recognise it also puts pressure on housing, especially for renters. 
That’s why we’re going to make the system more sustainable for everyone. 
So that if a university want to bring in more international students – they have to build more student accommodation.
Universities will continue to benefit from student demand – provided they contribute to housing supply.
I’d like to speak now about another priority. Put simply: We need to fund our public schools properly.
That is why my Government is working with the states and territories who run public schools to get all schools to their full and fair funding level.
We have put $16 billion in additional funding for public schools on the table – this would be the biggest ever increase in Commonwealth funding to public schools.
And Jason Clare is working hard to reach agreement with the States to reach 100 per cent of the School Resource Standard. It is not an easy process but we are hopeful of a positive outcome.
There is much to be proud of in our public education system.
However, we can’t ignore the hard fact that the number of our children finishing high school is going backwards. Especially in our public schools.
In just seven years – seven years that included the seismic disruption of Covid, home schooling and all the rest of it – we have seen the figure slide from 83 per cent to 74 per cent. We have to arrest this slide, then turn it around.
Education is the single most powerful weapon we have against disadvantage. 
And it’s the single best investment we can make in our nation’s future. 
Invest wisely and it doesn’t take long to see the results. TAFE is a prime example.
In 2022 we made a commitment to delivering 180,000 fee-free TAFE places to train, retrain and upskill Australian workers.
I’m pleased to say we kept the commitment. I’m even more pleased to say that the 180,000 target has been reached and comprehensively exceeded.
Last year, more than 350,000 Australians took up the opportunity of fee-free TAFE and enrolled.
We’re rolling out another 320,000 places from this year.
This helps to address the skills shortages that act as such a handbrake on the economy and everything that a strong economy makes possible while at the same time making it easier for young Australians to carve a path into a fulfilling career.
We’re certainly hoping more will choose a career in early childhood education.
Early childhood educators and carers deserve more than just our gratitude and our praise, no matter how richly it is deserved.
That is why my Government has made raising wages in the child care sector a priority.
As Treasurer Jim Chalmers said last week as he handed down the Budget, the provision we’re making for a pay increase will help recruit and retain more early childhood educators, giving more Australian children the best start we can.
There is a process in the Fair Work Commission currently underway examining gender under-valuation of wages, including in the ECEC sector.
When we know the result of this Commission process – hopefully soon – we will move on our commitment to early childhood educators.
It will be a critical step in delivering our ambition of universal early childhood education and care.
Like universal health and universal superannuation – both proud Labor legacies – this will be another pillar that strengthens Australia.
They are powerful pillars, but we cannot take them for granted. Each must carefully tended and strengthened, and that is something that continually informs our decision-making.
When it comes to the pillar of health, we cannot be bystanders watching as vaping addiction consumes a new generation – like smoking did decades ago.
That’s why we’re working to stamp out vaping – particularly among young Australians – and we’re doing it through stronger legislation, enforcement, education and support.
Another way we can improve the quality of life for our children is tackling the reality of social media.
I know I’m not the only one who is relieved it didn’t exist in my school days.
The challenge of what social media has become – and the often overwhelming proportions it can take on in a child’s life – has to be tackled.
My Government will provide resourcing to conduct a pilot of age assurance technology to protect children from harmful content, like pornography and other age-restricted online services.
Last week’s Budget contained funding for a new pilot that will be part of a suite of interventions aimed at curbing easy access to damaging material by children and young people, and tackling extreme misogyny online.
The pilot will identify available age assurance products to protect children from online harm, and test their efficacy, including in relation to privacy and security.
The outcomes will inform the existing work of Australia’s eSafety Commissioner under the Online Safety Act – including through the development of industry codes or standards – to reduce children’s exposure to age-inappropriate material.
As we do so, we are reminding the social media giants of their own serious responsibilities.
Of course, responsibility is something that belongs to all of us.
It’s too easy – and far too common – for society to look at the health risks of vaping or the dark side of social media and say these are problems should solve.
These aren’t challenges that begin and end at the classroom door. They are whole-of-society challenges that we need to work together to address.
We can’t rely on school rules, we need a comprehensive approach.
After all, teachers already have the most important job there is.
We’re also working more broadly to improve things for working Australians, teachers very much among them.
We’ve been steadily closing workplace loopholes.
That includes ending the concept of a forced permanent casual.
And we stopped unpaid, unreasonable overtime for workers by legislating the Right to Disconnect.
Because if you’re not being paid 24 hours a day, you shouldn’t have to be on call 24 hours a day. 
We’ve taken the gender pay gap to a record low, while the participation rate has reached historic highs.
All 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report are being implemented.
We’ve taken new action on pay equity and pay transparency.
These are just some of the changes that have seen Australia climb from 43rd in the Global Gender Gap rankings to 26th.
It’s real progress – but we need to keep making progress. And that is the spirit with which last week’s Budget was imbued.
Our Budget was about the two things that have driven our Government for two years: 
Making our future here in Australia – a future that involves working towards a net zero economy and ensuring our country takes its rightful place as a renewable energy superpower.
It’s important for us now, and even more important for our children and their children.
And it was about helping people with their cost of living. 
Last week’s Budget was a Budget for all Australians. 
Every household gets $300 off their power bill. 
And, from July 1, every taxpayer gets a tax cut. All 13.6 million taxpayers will get a tax cut.
And for 84 per cent of taxpayers, and 90 per cent of women, a bigger tax cut than they would have under the previous government.
This is about rewarding the hard work of people like our teachers.
And it’s about embracing the spirit of fairness embodied by the membership of the AEU.
It’s not a spirit Peter Dutton identifies with.
Our nation’s teachers suffer the distinction of being one of the groups that Peter Dutton only mentions when he’s attacking them.
When most of us look to our educators – from early childhood through to tertiary – we see a diverse, hardworking group guiding forward our children and our young adults.
We see people of dedication, talent and stamina working to making that door of opportunity even bigger. Working to make a difference.
Peter Dutton, on the other hand, sees a group he’s ready to scapegoat every time they aren’t on his same bleak, negative wavelength.
I’d encourage him to get out of his grim little echo chamber, park his anger for a few minutes, and take a look at the Be That Teacher campaign.
I’d like him to be reacquainted with the reality of who you are, and the equally great breadth of what it is you do.
One of the truly special memories you can have as an adult is the teacher – or teachers – who made a difference in your life.
The teachers who inspired you. The teachers who showed you that obstacles can be overcome, and that the challenges you face can also hold opportunities.
The teachers who opened more of the world to you, and helped you find and grow your inner world along the way.
The teachers who flicked that switch for you and turned on the lights.
What a remarkable effect to be able to have.
Multiply it over and over again, across suburbs, towns, cities and regions, and it all adds up to something extraordinarily powerful.
It’s a power that can be described in so many words, but is best captured in just two: Public education.
Two words that sum up the work and dedication of so very many people.
Thank you for the invitation on this important day.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I thank our hosts, the Western Sydney Leadership Dialogue.
And I acknowledge all my colleagues here today, every one of them a champion for this great part of our nation. 
Western Sydney reflects the aspiration that drives Australia.
The courage, compassion and community spirit that our Government works every day to reward and to nourish.
The enterprise and initiative of small businesses.
The construction workers and apprentices building the new homes and infrastructure our nation needs.
The workers of the care economy: our early educators, health care workers, aged care workers and disability carers. So important to our national quality of life and so central to the future strength of our economy.  
Young people striving to save for a first home, or looking to start a family of their own. 
And everyone studying hard at TAFE in Blacktown or Richmond or Mount Druitt or at Western Sydney University, many of them the first in their family to gain a qualification beyond secondary school.
In all this, Western Sydney tells the bigger story of Australia.
Every parent wanting better for their child, every generation determined to do better in the future, every one of us making a contribution to our nation’s success. 
And I’m here today because I recognise that Western Sydney is also a place where these aspirations are under pressure. 
Western Sydney has made a significant contribution to the 820,000 jobs that have been created in our first two years in Government.
Here, and nationwide:
Inflation is down.
Business investment is up.
Productivity is up.
Participation is up.
Annual real wages growth is back.
We are projecting back to back Budget surpluses, for the first time in nearly two decades.
Unemployment remains at a near 50 year low.
And the gender pay gap is at a record low. 
Achieving this powerful economic combination in a time of global uncertainty is a tribute to the resilience of Australian businesses and Australian workers.
But we understand that there are still people doing it tough right now.
And I know that when you are living week to week, it’s hard to even find the time to think about the future, let alone plan for it with confidence.
That’s where economic security – from fair wages to reliable services - is not just about making ends meet, it’s the foundation for aspiration.
And that’s why last week’s Budget was about delivering on the two things that have driven our Government for two years.
One: helping people with their cost of living.
Two: making our future here in Australia.
These are the priorities that drive us - and this is also the balance that defines us.
Managing the immediate pressures and challenges people around our nation are facing.
And doing so in a way that builds and invests for the future.
Two years ago – almost to the day - I promised as Prime Minister to lead a Government for all Australians.
Our Budget kept faith with that in every way:
A tax cut for every taxpayer.
Help with energy bills for every household - and for small business.
Getting wages moving again for workers in every industry.
Making Medicare stronger in every community.
Adding superannuation for every working parent on government paid parental leave.
Expanding access to TAFE and university for everyone in the suburbs and regions.
And building more homes and new infrastructure in every part of our country.
All of this continues and expands the work we have done for two years now.
Making child care cheaper for over 1 million families.
Making medicine cheaper for everyone. 
Over 350,000 fee-free TAFE places.
Increasing Rent Assistance two years in a row - and expanding access to the single parent payment.
At the last election, we promised to open 50 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics.
58 are open already – including in Rooty Hill, Penrith and Westmead - and have helped hundreds of thousands of Australians see a doctor for free.
And in last week’s Budget we funded another 29 of these clinics. 
For two years we’ve been focused on helping people deal with the economic shocks and aftershocks of the pandemic, conflict and the most significant international energy crisis in half a century while also learning and applying the lessons of what we’ve been through.
Taking pressure off families – while putting downward pressure on inflation.
Working to build an economy and society that is more prepared and more resilient ahead of the next shock.
And acting on our responsibility to go beyond that.
Because while it is important that Australia is ready to weather the next storm - we must also be ready to seize the next wave of opportunity.
That’s how true security and lasting prosperity are made - not just responding to change but anticipating it and shaping it.
And while economic shocks are – by their very nature - unpredictable, the biggest change underway in the global economy right now, indeed the biggest economic change of our lifetimes, is signposted for all to see.
Nations representing 92 per cent of the global economy - and 97 per cent of Australia’s trading partners – are signed up to Net Zero.
To get there, every one of these countries will need much more clean energy – and much more of all the resources and technology that go into it.
The metals and minerals, rare earths and resources our nation has in abundance.
Today I make this point: if you could have designed a global opportunity for Australia, you could not have chosen a better starting point than this.
And I say ‘starting point’ very deliberately.
Because this moment of opportunity must be about more than us extracting and exporting a new mix of resources to a new range of markets.
More than just shipping things overseas, watching someone else, somewhere else, create the jobs and add the value, and then buying them back.
This is about using the comparative advantage of our clean energy – our solar and green hydrogen - and our skilled workers to add value here in Australia.
Making things here again. 
Moving up the international value chain.
Creating a new generation of jobs in clean energy and advanced manufacturing and design and technology.
And all the flow-on opportunities that will bring, economy-wide.
That ecosystem of economic growth that drives new breakthroughs and innovations and supports them into commercialisation.
So, just as our Government’s plan for cost of living is about helping every Australian under pressure, our plan for a future made in Australia is about bringing new jobs and opportunities to every part of our country.
Western Australia and Western Sydney.
The resources industry in our regions - and small businesses in our suburbs.
Drawing on the talents of all our people, to build an economy and society and environment that is better for our whole nation.
And so while Western Sydney may not have vast reserves of nickel or lithium – you are home to a wealth of resources that are absolutely critical to our future.
Great universities and researchers.
Australia’s largest health and biomedical research precinct.
One of the largest industrial and distribution hubs in the southern hemisphere.
Dynamic small businesses and start-ups.
Skilled workers in every field: engineers and architects, designers and manufacturers, cybersecurity and digital experts.
And diaspora communities that help build and strengthen our international relationships and trade ties.
Like the new headquarters of the Centre for Australia-India Relations in Parramatta.
A vital connection between Western Sydney, the third biggest economy in Australia – and India, on track to be the third biggest economy in the world.
A reminder that the success story of modern multiculturalism is a powerful national asset.
And our social cohesion is not something we’ve lucked into, it’s something we’ve built together over generations.
You see it here, people of every background and faith and tradition, living side by side.
That respect and harmony is something all of us can take pride in – and in testing times such as this, it’s something that all of us must work to uphold and defend. 
Our vision for a future made in Australia – like our plan for cost of living – has people at the centre.
On election night, I spoke about opening the doors of opportunity – and widening them.
Nothing does like that education. That’s why we are expanding university for Australians in growing suburbs – and making the student loan system fairer, for everyone. 
We’re funding more fee-free TAFE places to train the carpenters and electricians and plumbers we need to build new homes.
We’re supporting the next generation of nurses and teachers and social workers, with paid pracs.
And we’re recognising the extraordinary contribution of this generation of aged care workers and early educators, with pay rises.
After a decade of neglect that allowed the national energy grid to fall into disrepair, we’re putting cleaner, cheaper and more reliable power back into the system. 
And after a decade in which so many funding decisions were degraded by a pathology of pork barrelling and political conflict, we’ve created a National Anti-Corruption Commission to help restore people’s trust in our institutions.
And we are restoring integrity to the infrastructure process as well, co-operating with the state government and local councils – and backing that up with real funding dollars.
We continued that work in last week’s Budget.
Partnering with the New South Wales Government and delivering record investment in social housing, public housing and affordable housing.
$1 billion for crisis and transitional accommodation for women and children fleeing family violence.
And new funding for urgent works required to support new residential construction.
Because too often a delay in one minor project – like a local road upgrade, or access to energy or water – holds up work on hundreds of new homes.
We’re building new homes for this growing part of Sydney and we’re building the infrastructure to service that growth.
To make local roads safer, to make moving freight easier.
And to make sure that people spend less time stuck in traffic and more time where they want to be. 
This year’s Budget takes our total investment in Western Sydney infrastructure to $17.3 billion.
We’re backing 14 new projects, including key upgrades to:
Mamre Road Stage 2.
Elizabeth Drive.
Richmond Road.
Garfield Road East.
Memorial Avenue and Appin Road.
We are doubling Roads to Recovery funding for every local council.
And providing $20 million to work with the New South Wales Government to expand the scope of South West Sydney Rail Planning, including extending that line to Macarthur.
We’re matching this investment – and this ambition – with proper planning.
On Tuesday, I was in Westmead.
A major housing public-private housing project that our Government funded within our first six months in office.
Four hundred new units, half of which will be affordable homes.
Meaning that essential workers in Westmead’s health and service will be able to afford to live closer to their work and closer to the community where they are needed.
Good economic policy – and good social policy.
It reminded me of something my mentor, Tom Uren, often used to say about his time as Minister for Urban and Regional Development:
‘We can’t deal with things in boxes’. 
Because in a fast-growing, fast-moving community, everything is interconnected.
You can’t wait until a project is complete before you start thinking about supporting infrastructure or public transport links.
That’s especially important right now, when we are two years away from the first plane landing at Western Sydney Airport.
Opening that airport, will open the world to Western Sydney - and it will re-align the dynamic of Sydney.
For the first time, instead of everything turning in, towards the CBD and Sydney Harbour.
The city will be looking outward. We'll be looking to the West.
To the new state of the art airport and the new jobs of the Aerotropolis. 
Two of the biggest generators of economic activity a region can have are an airport, or a university.
Western Sydney will be home to both.
And we’re building the infrastructure and housing and energy to make sure this region and our nation get the best from both.
I’ve spoken to the Western Sydney Leadership Dialogue before about the contribution infrastructure makes to our economy and our community.
The role the Commonwealth can play in the health and strength of our cities and suburbs and regions.
It’s something I’ve been passionate about for a long time - and it takes patience as well as passion.
Earlier this year, I opened the Moorebank Intermodal Interstate Rail Terminal.
A world’s best practice project – public private partnership, fully powered by renewable energy.
Saving 3,000 truck journeys a day - especially on the M5. 
I’ve been a supporter of that project since 2008.
Whereas I advocated for a new airport for Western Sydney in my first speech in the Parliament back in 1996.
Building big, building to last, building for the best - that always takes time.
It’s true for infrastructure, but it’s true for the work of Government as a whole.
And in the same way that you can’t evaluate an infrastructure project on the basis of whether or not you’ll be around to open it, you can’t decide whether or not to tackle a problem based on how quick or simple it is to solve.
Government isn’t about making the easy decisions - it’s about making the right decisions, for the right reasons. 
That’s the approach my colleagues and I have taken.
In job creation and job security, wages and productivity.
In Medicare. Aged Care. Child Care.
Energy and education and the environment and housing and infrastructure.
Equality for women – be it pay, opportunity or safety. 
It’s true here at home – and on the world stage.
The work we have done to invest in our capabilities and invest in our relationships.
To get Australia back at the table as a respected voice, a valued contributor and a trusted partner, particularly in the Indo-Pacific.
To stabilise our relationship with China and clear away impediments to trade.
Of course, in all these fields, we know there is more work to be done.
There are still problems we have to solve – still opportunities we must grasp.
What I want every Australian to know is that the challenges we have faced through the past two years have only strengthened my determination to deliver and my confidence that our country can succeed.
I’ve always been an optimist about Australia.
And everything I have learned and seen as Prime Minister has only made me more optimistic for our nation’s future.
In my first speech as Labor Leader, back in 2019, I talked about Australians suffering from ‘conflict fatigue’.
The frustration and exhaustion people felt at the fact the then Government treated every issue as just a pretext for picking a phoney fight with Labor, with the states, with local government, with unions, with scientists and experts, with each other.
We’ve made it a priority to change that.
To consult, to co-operate, to listen, to respect people’s views and seek common ground.
By contrast, my opponent goes around telling business leaders who look to work with us that they are ‘supine’ and weak.
But there is a world of difference between talking tough and working hard.
In politics, wrecking is always easier than building. And looking for someone to blame is much simpler than finding a solution. 
But that’s not strength – that’s the soft option. And we know where that takes us.
We’ve seen what happens when the only test that politicians apply is their political self-interest.
We saw it with Scott Morrison, we’re seeing it again with Peter Dutton.
Saying no to everything is the easiest thing to do in Opposition - but it builds nothing, it helps no-one and it takes our country nowhere. 
Governing Australia requires more than soundbites - you need substantial propositions.
The stakes right now are too high for the shallow and shambolic approach we see too often from the Opposition.
The challenges we face are too urgent for a retreat to denial and delay.
The progress we have made together is too important to go back to fear and division.
The opportunities we have before us are too big for small-minded negativity.
And Australians have worked too hard to be dragged back to the era of conflict fatigue.
Serving as Prime Minister is the greatest honour of my life.
I count every day of the two years I’ve spent in this job as an extraordinary privilege - and I’m determined to make every day count.
Because the true privilege of public life – at every level – is the opportunity to make a positive difference to people’s lives.
I understand Australians are doing it tough right now – and I haven’t forgotten what it’s like to struggle and strive.
To worry about your family’s economic security, to wonder if you’ll get the opportunity to pursue your aspirations.
That understanding drives our Government:
Helping with the challenges Australians are facing here and now.
Building for the opportunities of the decade ahead.
Delivering the reforms that ensure no-one is held back.
Achieving the progress that sees no-one left behind.
So Australians can make a good life for themselves.
And so we can make our future, right here in Australia.


Good evening, friends.
Buona festa della repubblica!
It’s such a pleasure to be with you to celebrate Italy’s national day.
The story of Italian Australians is deeply and proudly woven into the fabric of our nation.
Over so many generations, Italian families have made their lives here and enriched this country beyond measure.
You have played such a cherished role in the shaping of our modern nation that Australia without Italians is quite simply beyond imagining.
We are so profoundly interwoven that Italy’s joys and sorrows are also ours to celebrate and to mourn.
Italy’s national day is a time to recognise the contribution that generations of Italian migrants, their children and grandchildren, have made to Australia.
As the modern Italian Republic marks its birthday, it is the perfect time to celebrate the land that for, so many Australians, holds their beginnings.
I am proud of my own Italian connections and all that they mean to me.
Which is why I’m so happy to join you here at the Fullerton Hotel.
Once Sydney’s general post office, this building remains a landmark.
Think of the great river of letters between Australia and Italy that has flowed through here.
All those words of love and longing exchanged between friends and family, separated by oceans.
News of the new world, news of the old. Accounts of dreams come true and ambitions thwarted.
Of opportunities lost and found.
There is such a poignancy at the heart of the decision to settle in a new country – to pull up roots and head to a strange and distant land.
And such courage.
Sometimes it’s a decision driven by the desire for new opportunities or a fresh chance, sometimes by the very real need for sanctuary.
Australia has been in the fortunate position of being able to offer all of that. And what we have gained in return is extraordinary diversity, the breadth that is one of greatest strengths as a nation.
We both celebrate our differences, and draw strength from our unity as Australians.
That is the big beating heart of our great nation’s story.
And Italians are such an important part of it.
No organisation knows that better than our generous hosts tonight, Co.As.It..
Co.As.It has been working with and for Italians here since 1968, striving to the urgent welfare needs of Italian migrants, and preserving Italian language and culture.
But focusing on the priorities of the present didn’t mean losing sight of the future.
Co.As.It. has grown and changed alongside the people it serves.
Through aged care and community services, family history, cultural activities and an Italian bilingual school, Co.As.It. continues to support people to make connections and find a sense of belonging.
Co.As.It. was established as an investment in the Italian community in Australia, because it believed in its future.
And that faith has been rewarded tenfold – to the benefit of us all.
When I spoke to Co.As.It.’s family history group in 2017, I said that discovering my Italian heritage found a missing piece in my life.
It is so important for people to know where they come from. To have that family connection. To celebrate their heritage with pride.
It has enriched my life beyond measure and I congratulate Co.As.It. for giving the same gift to its community.
It’s a pleasure to be with you this evening in honour of Italy’s national day, and the history we share.
Thank you.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
To the magnificent duo of Michele O’Neil and Sally McManus, thank you for your leadership, your friendship and all you do for working people.
It is a great honour to address this Congress for the first time as Prime Minister of Australia. 
I have to say, over the years, some of us from New South Wales and Queensland always had a suspicion that the Victorians and South Australians were running this show.
And now we have the proof: the outrageous decision to hold Congress in Adelaide on State of Origin Night.
I acknowledge the Premier of South Australia, Peter Malinauskas and members of his Government.
And my federal colleagues here this evening:
Our outstanding Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations, Tony Burke.
Tony has delivered more in two years – for workers, for employers, for Australia - than his sorry string of Liberal predecessors delivered this century. 
Murray Watt, who is doing a great job as Minister for Agriculture.
And the former President of the ACTU and now our wonderful Assistant Minister for Health and Aged Care, Ged Kearney.
It has been just over two years since my colleagues and I asked the Australian people to trust us with the responsibility of serving as their Government and to join us in the work of building a better future.
Every day since then, we have sought to repay that trust and bring that future within reach.
Because we know government is not about occupying the space, it’s about changing Australia for the better.
It’s about investing in aspiration and opportunity, so no-one is held back.
And it’s about strengthening the safety net and social wage, so no-one is left behind.
In so much of that work, the mighty trade union movement has given us strength and inspiration.
Indeed, in the very first week that Parliament sat, the first piece of industrial relations legislation our Government introduced was about making 10 Days Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave, part of the National Employment Standards.
Because it should never be the case that a woman in Australia has to choose between her safety and her job.
The labour movement campaigned on that principle – and under our Labor Government it is now the law of the land.
That’s the thread that runs through so much of what we have achieved together, over the past two years.
Workers calling out the abuse of labour hire to undercut their pay and security and our Government closing that loophole to deliver Same Job, Same Pay.
Workers and business seeking a clear and fair definition of casual employment leading to our reforms which have preserved flexibility while providing new security for workers who want to become permanent.
Unions standing up for gig workers and owner-drivers - and working with us to establish a new jurisdiction that will deliver world-leading minimum standards.
Because 21st century technology shouldn’t mean 19th century conditions for delivery workers.
The union movement came to the table at our Jobs and Skills Summit with a plan to revitalise the broken bargaining system.
And our Government’s supported bargaining reforms have created the framework for some of the lowest-paid workers in Australia to negotiate a better deal.
Australian seafarers have led a long campaign for sovereign capacity in shipping and we backed that in this year’s Budget, with a pilot program for an Australian-flagged strategic fleet.
The union movement gave a strong and clear endorsement to the Respect@Work report – and our Government turned those ideas into action, implementing all 55 recommendations.
Workers put the deadly scourge of silicosis on the national radar and we worked with the states and territories to put a national ban on the manufacture, use and importation of engineered stone.
The union movement put the spotlight on companies that were avoiding paying redundancies by restructuring their operations and our Government closed that loophole, so workers can be confident that their entitlements are secure.
In all this, in your capacity to take issues direct from the frontline of the workplace and put them on the national agenda.
In your ability to ignore phoney outrage and focus on real outcomes.
And in your enduring commitment to the patient work of meaningful change, we see the trade union movement at its very best.
Strengthening the foundations of the fair go.
Standing up for fair pay, for decent conditions, for the right to be treated with respect in the workplace – and for the right to come home safe at the end of the day.
And never solely for your members, not just for the workers in your industries.
Always in the service of the best interests of every worker in Australia - and the best interests of our economy as a whole.
Because solidarity has always been about more than standing together against unfairness.
It’s about working together to achieve progress.
That’s what the Liberals and Nationals have never been able to comprehend.
For them, everything is always about conflict.
It’s always a fight, always a false choice between growth and fairness, between employers and unions.
And every step forward is always the end of the world as we know it.
We saw it during the last election campaign, when I was asked if I would back a $1 an hour increase in the minimum wage.
Would I support a $1 an hour increase to ensure some of the lowest paid workers in Australia, wouldn’t go backwards.
I gave a one word answer: “Absolutely”.
The Liberals spent a thousand words saying no.
They said it would wreck the economy, they said it was dangerous, they said it was irresponsible, they said it was loose, they said the sky would fall in.
Well, guess what.
We backed that real increase in the minimum wage in 2022.
We backed it again in 2023.
And we backed it again this year – and on Monday the Fair Work Commission ruled to increase award rates by 3.75 per cent.
Back to back to back wins for 2.6 million of the lowest paid workers in Australia.
And – importantly - through this same period, 820,000 jobs have been created.
A record for the first two years of any Government in history.
The majority of these jobs are full time – just like we said they would be.
Wages are growing at their fastest rate in a decade.
Inflation is down. 
Business investment is up.
The gender pay gap is at a record low.
Real annual wages growth is back – and the Budget is back in surplus.
And every single Australian taxpayer – not just some – will get a tax cut on the first of July.
Including 2.9 million Australians earning under $45,000 who would have got nothing, under the Liberals.
The Liberals used to brag that low wages were a deliberate design feature of their economic architecture.
Our Government has made strong wages the foundation of a stronger economy.
That’s why our last two Budgets have funded an historic pay rise for aged care workers.
And now that the Fair Work Commission has outlined a clear way forward on gender-based wage increases our Government will move quickly to deliver on the commitment we made in last month’s Budget: an overdue pay rise for workers in early childhood education.
Because we know that the people who look after our older Australians and teach our youngest Australians, do their all-important work with such dedication and humanity.
And you deserve more than thanks for what you do – you deserve fair pay.
In the trade union movement you stand up for working people, each and every day - and you never stand still.
You are always looking to the future, to the next challenge – and the next opportunity.
That’s what our Government’s vision for a Future made in Australia is all about.
Seizing the opportunities of the global shift to clean energy, to power a new generation of advanced manufacturing jobs.
To make Australia a renewable energy superpower.
To make the most of our natural resources and our national advantages. 
To make things here again, in Australia.
And to unlock all the flow-on economic benefits for our communities.
Creating new, secure, well-paid jobs in our suburbs and our regions.
And making sure this transformative economic opportunity is shared with every Australian – town by town, worker by worker. 
Our Government is investing in new skills and technology and infrastructure and energy because we are determined for Australia to compete and succeed in the global economy, on our terms.
Not by entering a race to the bottom on pay and conditions - but by playing to our strengths.
We think more of our country than those who say that all Australia can hope to do is extract and export our resources while we wait for someone else, somewhere else, to add the value and create the jobs and make the product before we buy it back.
We want greater sovereignty for our nation than that.
We want more economic security for our people than that.
We want a future made in Australia – by Australian workers.
Of course, as soon as we announced our plan for new investments in Australian jobs and Australian manufacturing, the Liberals came out against it.
Ten years ago, they drove the car industry out of our country.
They stood in the Parliament – as the Government of Australia - and dared Holden to leave this state.
No thought about what it meant for all those workers and their families.
No understanding of all the connected jobs and businesses and skills that would be damaged by this act of economic vandalism.
And now, ten years later, they are at it again.
Saying no to Australian jobs, talking down Australian workers, telling Australians we can’t compete and shouldn’t bother to try.
The Liberals haven’t learned – and they will never change.
There is only one political party that believes in Australian manufacturing – and I am proud to lead it.
Every member of our Labor Government takes pride in the positive change we have delivered for working people.
And every member of the trade union movement understands that this progress has been years, sometimes decades, in the making.
That’s the enduring story of Australian fairness - the hard work of generations.
Building on the struggle and sacrifice and solidarity of those who have gone before us.
And safeguarding the progress we have made, against those whose only purpose in political life is to take it away.
Two years into the job, the current leader of the Liberal Party has offered Australia nothing in the way of positive policy.
No ideas to help with cost of living.
No plans to build a single home or create a single job.
No information about where his nuclear reactors are going to go.
He never talks about what he’s for – he only defines himself by what he is against.
And on that he has been crystal clear.
He voted against secure jobs and better pay.
He voted against closing loopholes in labour hire.
He’s promised to rip up the better deal for casuals.
And he’s even committed to abolishing the Right to Disconnect.
There is a lot that gets the Opposition angry in Parliament.
But nothing sets them off quite like the fear they might have to sit on a Friday, or even a Saturday.
These are people who rage against penalty rates and overtime, they think workers should have to be on call 24-7.
But, if you even suggest they might have sit an extra hour on an extra day, suddenly they are all for collective action.
The Liberals want Australians to work longer for less – we are helping Australians earn more and keep more of what they earn.
And just last week we saw new media reports of what the Liberals are planning next.
Secret documents revealing the Liberals want to:
Scrap the Better Off Overall Test.
Water down protections against unfair dismissal and bring back Workchoices-style individual contracts.
And strip away award protections for every worker earning over $100,000 a year. 
Their gut instinct is always to gut workers’ rights.
That’s the one-way, dead-end road of their negativity.
A nastiness and a laziness born of the fact that wrecking is always easier than building and entrenching privilege is easier than expanding opportunity.
But none of us joined the labour movement because we thought it would be the easy thing.
We are not here in search of the smooth ride or the quiet life.
We do what’s right, we do what matters.
Just like at the beginning of this year when we reformed the tax cuts to make them better and fairer.
That wasn’t the easy decision – but it was the right decision, taken for the right reasons.
And in less than a month, every working Australian will see the benefit.
That’s what drives us: reform that holds no-one back, progress that leaves no-one behind.
In all this, we are a better party because of the energy and intellect of the members of the trade union movement.
We are a better Government because of your ideas and your advocacy.
And Australia is a better country because of your commitment to a fair go for working people.
Thank you for everything you do.


Today we mark the 80th anniversary of D-Day. We give our thanks to all who stood for liberty – and we remember all who fell.
I’m pleased to inform the House that the Governor-General, David Hurley, and Mrs Hurley are in France representing Australia at the commemorations.
D-Day was an unprecedented feat of collective willpower and daring – the free world’s decisive reply to the poison of Nazi tyranny.
It rightly holds a place in our collective hearts as one of the most extraordinary turning points in history – and it turned on the courage of nearly 160,000 soldiers, sailors, air crew and medics on that first day alone.
It was the greatest armada of ships, landing craft and aircraft the world had ever seen. Rarely has a shore been as fateful as the Normandy coast was that day.
As General Eisenhower told them:
The eyes of the world are upon you. The hopes and prayers of liberty-loving people everywhere march with you.
They carried those hopes and prayers across sky and sea. And they carried them on to those beaches, where they fought in the knowledge that the fate of the world hinged on them.
Cinema has given a sense of how it looked, yet what will always remain elusive to us is how it truly felt.
The chaos. The noise. The desperation and fear.
Yet also the determination. The camaraderie. The overwhelming sense of purpose.
From that fierce cauldron of heroism and sacrifice would flow a force that ultimately swept half a continent.
Among all the British, Canadians and Americans, our tendency is not to think of D-Day as a story with Australian voices.
So many Australians were defending us much closer to home by then.
Yet there were 3300 Australians serving on D-Day, and they acquitted themselves as bravely and nobly as in any theatre of war.
There was even an original Anzac among them – George Dixon, a Tasmanian who was wounded at Gallipoli after managing to enlist aged just 15.
So he was no stranger to fateful shores when, decades later, he took charge of one of the Canadian tank-landing craft at Juno Beach.
His story is just one of the thousands of those who were there at the beginning of this most extraordinary mission, this headlong drive to lift Europe out of the darkness into which it had been plunged.
Eight decades on, we are reminded tragically often that peace is far from a foregone conclusion.
Yet as we remember D-Day, we are also reminded about one of the most important truths – peace is always worth fighting for.
On those French beaches eighty years ago, that is the great light those courageous thousands held up for the world.
Lest we forget.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m grateful for the invitation to address this second annual forum on Australia’s Economic Outlook.
Ahead of today, I looked back to the economic challenges we spoke about this time last year:
The aftershocks of the pandemic and the impact on inflation and supply chains.
The continuing devastation of conflict in Ukraine - and now the Middle East as well.
The most significant international energy crisis in half a century.
And the heavy toll of natural disasters for communities and our country.
All of that uncertainty is still with us, all those issues are still live.
Which is why the progress our economy has made through the past year stands as such a powerful tribute to the hard work and resilience of the Australian people.
This time last year, we could say with confidence that annual inflation had passed its peak.
Today, inflation is half that peak.
Unemployment remains at near 50 year lows.
The gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
Business investment is up.
Annual growth in real wages is back.
From the 1st of July, 2.6 million of the lowest paid workers in Australia will be getting a pay rise.
And every Australian taxpayer will get a tax cut. Not just some.
From the 1st of July, Australians will be earning more - and keeping more of what they earn.
And for the first time in nearly two decades, we are on track for back to back Budget surpluses.
From the outset, our Government has made it a priority to get fiscal policy working in concert with monetary policy.
Banking revenue upgrades, cracking down on waste.
Bringing new rigour to the infrastructure pipeline – investing in real projects, on realistic timelines, in the national interest.
Delivering better value, boosting productivity – and putting downward pressure on inflation.
Indeed, by taking $300 off the power bill of every Australian household from the 1st of July as well as delivering a second consecutive increase in Commonwealth Rent Assistance.
Our cost of living relief is expected to cut three quarters of a percentage point off inflation this year, and another half a per cent next year.
I want to emphasise this: we are getting inflation down – not in spite of the help we are providing with the cost of living but because of it.
We are focused on winning the fight against inflation.
Helping families and businesses deal with the pressures they are facing here and now.
And while we do this, we always have an eye on the future, for the opportunities ahead.
Because that’s the responsibility of Government, that’s the balance you have to bear in mind.
You can look all the way back to John Curtin and Ben Chifley and the creation of the Ministry for Post War Reconstruction at the end of 1942.
Those were the very darkest days of the war, the most testing times any Australian Government has ever known.
Yet they were already planning for the society and economy they wanted to build in peacetime.
It’s something I spoke about during the pandemic – the responsibility we had to aim for more than just getting through the crisis and putting it behind us.
Learning the lessons - and applying them - to build something better.
That’s what our plan for a Future Made in Australia is all about.
Building our economic sovereignty and strengthening our energy security - so we’re no longer the last link in the global supply chain.
Deepening and diversifying our trade links - what we trade and who we trade with – so we’re not overly reliant on any one country or commodity.
Moving ourselves up the international value chain with our quality products and our services and expertise.
And investing in clean energy to power a new generation of advanced manufacturing.
Making Australia a renewable energy superpower – and making more things here.
Right now, we are in the early stages of the most significant global economic change since the industrial revolution - and also the most clearly signposted.
Nations representing 92 per cent of the world economy are committed to net zero.
This includes 97 per cent of Australia’s trading partners.
We don’t need Andrew Clennell’s crystal ball to see where the global economy is heading.
We know the destination - and we know how virtually every nation plans to get there.
By embracing clean energy: solar power, wind power, green hydrogen.
And in order to meet their targets, every nation will need more of the resources and technology that go into producing this energy: the metals and critical minerals and rare earths that Australia has in such abundance.
According to the International Energy Agency, without any change to current policies mineral demand for clean energy technologies will double between now and 2030.
If countries continue to ramp up their efforts to meet net zero, demand will triple by 2030 and quadruple by 2040.
This is not a bubble, or a blip.
It’s not a nuclear fantasy dreamed up to delay real action on climate change.
This is not a passing economic shock – it is a lasting economic shift.
And Australia is home to everything we need to put ourselves at the very centre of it.
Catering to new and growing global demand for our resources.
And converting the global imperative to cut emissions into a national source of comparative advantage.
Because we are moving to a world where the emissions profile of a product will become an increasingly significant consideration and cost factor.
That’s part of the new global competition we are in - one that puts a premium on manufacturing powered by clean energy on green metals and critical minerals and on co-locating extraction and processing and manufacturing, minimising transport costs and emissions.
Winning the race for these new opportunities isn’t about cutting wages, or cutting corners.
It’s about safe, skilled and sustainable work.
In other words: if you could have designed a global economic opportunity from scratch - you could not have created a better starting position for Australia.
We have a strong foundation – now we have to build on it.
That’s why we legislated our emissions targets the first time Parliament sat, backed by so many of you in this room.
That’s why we created our Safeguard Mechanism – providing the framework and certainty for Australian businesses to invest in reducing their emissions.
Our Rewiring the Nation policy and Capacity Investment Scheme are making overdue investments in the national energy grid, after a decade of neglect when it was allowed to fall into disrepair.
And last month’s Budget delivered new incentives to drive business investment in critical minerals and green hydrogen.
New Production Tax Credits that reward companies which move first, invest and create jobs.
And new funding to speed up project approvals.
Cutting red tape for local investment in renewables and making the framework for foreign investment simpler and stronger.
This is where our new Future Made in Australia Act will provide commercial rigour, ensure value for public money and help us attract more private capital.
Because Australian small business and Australian families already know the value of renewable energy and they’re investing in it.
1 in 3 small businesses have rooftop solar - and nearly 1 in 5 have a battery storage system.
Last year, around 330,000 homes and businesses installed rooftop solar.
Building on 316,000 the year before.
New South Wales - on its own - added 1 gigawatt of solar capacity, a record for any state or territory.
Our Government wants to continue to support the take-up and roll-out of solar for small businesses and households.
And we also see big opportunities here for superannuation funds and institutional investors to drive the national energy transition.
We will work with industry to deliver bankable projects in generation, transmission, critical minerals and beyond.
From the outset, I’ve made it clear that we are not looking to go dollar for dollar with the United States Inflation Reduction Act or copy wholesale the approach of the European Union or Japan or the Republic of Korea or the many other advanced economies that are working to grow their industrial base.
Australia has to do this our way.
We can’t rely on sheer weight of numbers - we have to be smart and strategic and play to our strengths.
That includes our expertise as an outward-looking, trading economy, a trusted middle power, a partner and provider of choice.
Because while nearly every nation is currently seeking greater economic resilience for itself. For most, this is more about diversifying their supply chains rather than becoming entirely self-reliant.
Buying from a broader range of partners, rather than making it themselves.
That’s another big advantage Australia brings to the table.
The skills and productivity of our workers, the stability of our democracy and financial institutions.
The connections created by our diaspora communities and the proximity we have to the fastest-growing region of the world in human history.
So making our future in Australia means investing in skills and science, start-ups and small business as well.
Too often in the past when Australian researchers have made a world-leading breakthrough, they’ve had to go overseas to commercialise it.
We want to change that.
We want to see more Australian discoveries create more Australian jobs.
A strong manufacturing base helps build the ecosystem that supports this.
The culture of innovation and ideas, in businesses big and small. The opportunities for companies with complementary skills and objectives to learn and compete.
And of course, you need to invest in people to make this work.
That’s why our Government is funding another 300,000 fee-free TAFE places from this year, on top of the 350,000 we delivered last year.
We’re massively expanding fee-free enabling courses and opening more university hubs in regional centres and in our growing outer suburbs.
We know education opens the doors of opportunity – and we’re making sure that cost and distance don’t block the way.
That’s what our new prac payment is about – supporting the next generation of teachers and nurses and social workers while they do their placements.
And that’s why we’ve intervened to wipe $3 billion in student debt and make the system fairer for Australian students and graduates into the future.
Because we need Australians studying and learning those vital new skills in robotics and digital and engineering and cyber.
We need a new generation of carpenters and mechanics and electricians and plumbers and welders to build more homes, new infrastructure and more clean energy – from rooftop solar to large-scale.
And we need to support and sustain this economic growth by investing in the surrounding infrastructure and services.
The roads and rail, ports and airports – and new best-practice facilities like the intermodal terminal at Moorebank and the one to be built at Beveridge.
Projects that boost productivity and make it easier for products to get to market – and people to get where they need to be.
As well as the schools and hospitals and housing that make us a community and a society, not just an economy.
In the past two months, going around the country talking to people about our plan, I’ve spoken about the new jobs and opportunities it can bring to our regional communities.
Whether it’s Gladstone in Queensland becoming a global hub for green metals and green hydrogen.
New downstream processing opportunities in Port Hedland in Western Australia.
Or new solar manufacturing jobs at the site of the old Liddell power station.
But just as our Budget was about delivering tax cuts for every taxpayer and energy bill relief for every household, our plan for a future made in Australia seeks to bring new growth, new secure jobs and new opportunities to every part of our country.
Our cities and suburbs, as well as our regional communities.
And businesses and workers across the economy.
That’s why I spoke about this plan to manufacturing and transport and mining and energy and construction workers in Adelaide on Wednesday.
And why I’ve made it the focus of my speech today.
This plan – like our Government - is pro-worker and pro-business.
We want every Australian to share in this opportunity for our nation.
And we need to draw on the talents of our whole population.
We need to move now.
For the global economy, net zero is the future.
And our choice is simple – either we shape that future, or the future shapes us.
This is no time for the negativity that says Australian businesses and workers can’t compete and shouldn’t try.
This is a time to aim high and build big - not settle for the self-defeating view that says the best Australia can do is watch someone else, somewhere else, add value to our resources before we buy them back at a higher price.
Our Government has spent two years working to turn around the neglect of the national energy grid and repairing the damage that climate denial did to clean energy investment and our international relationships.
Australia cannot afford to go back to the days when energy policy was about fighting for power in the Coalition party room rather than powering the nation.
And we cannot afford to waste 15 years down a rabbit hole about nuclear reactors.
Because just as we will not find our security in isolation, we will not build our prosperity by standing still.
Every business leader in this room understands that the world isn’t waiting around for Australia.
You didn’t get to the top of your fields by hoping opportunity would come knocking on your door.
And you didn’t stay at the top by assuming that whatever had brought you success in the past, guaranteed you would succeed in the future.
You have built your success by anticipating change – and shaping it.
Seeking new markets, looking to add value.
Investing in innovation and research and development, embracing the productivity gains of new technology.
Identifying your own sources of comparative advantage, building your own competitive edge.
And you undertake all of this with the understanding that it is a constant, evolving process.
In business, there is no final point of perfection.
In economic reform, there is no last word.
In government there are always new pressures to manage, new challenges to meet, new global uncertainties to confront.
But I can tell you, two years after I had the extraordinary honour of being elected Prime Minister of this nation, I have never been more optimistic about Australia’s future and never been more determined to deliver for the Australian people.
Because when you look at where the world is heading and when you look at what we have here - this moment is made for us.
This moment is made for the dynamism and drive of Australian business, the skills and smarts of Australian workers.
This moment is made for the aspiration and creativity and resilience of our people.
This is an opportunity made for every one of us – and now it’s up to every one of us to make the most of it.
To make our future, right here in Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure to be with you today to open one more element of Australia’s better future – a future we will make here, together.
I’d like to thank Flinders University for inviting me here. And of course Premier Malinauskas, for once again hosting me in your great state.
When I visited Flinders earlier this year, I met with students and the impressive staff who have the great responsibility of opening their minds and expanding their horizons.
And I left feeling confident that the students I spoke with will be instrumental in shaping a Future Made in Australia, especially as part of the skilled workforce helping to drive the AUKUS project.
A project that will become an essential component of the security on which so much of our nation’s wellbeing relies.
So it’s particularly pleasing to be back at Flinders for something that addresses an even more fundamental aspect of our wellbeing.
Designed in consultation with traditional owners, and powered by cheap, clean renewable energy, the Health and Medical Research Building will be home to more than 600 medical researchers, clinicians and professional staff.
It is the centrepiece of the Flinders Village development, which when complete will be a biomedical research precinct that is expected to drive $1.5 billion in economic activity.
That’s a figure that will include more than 20,000 direct and indirect jobs.
What is even more exciting – and far harder to calculate – is the sense of possibility that now stands before us.
Consider how many lives might be saved because of what happens here.
Consider how many lives might be made better.
Consider the possibility of history being made here when a disease is consigned to history.
Whether it’s better understanding neural pathways to control chronic pain, unravelling the secrets in our DNA to address debilitating genetic conditions, supporting the health of mothers and babies, or increasing survival rates of diseases such as a cancer, this building will provide the facilities and the connections its 600 researchers need to succeed.
What it all represents is the courage and the imagination that true vision requires. A vision that extends far beyond the horizon.
This – and all that will grow up around it – will be making breakthroughs and changing lives for the better for many generations to come.
When I speak about a Future Made in Australia – this is what it looks like.
Australian research, hard work and ingenuity keeping us at the global cutting edge.
Because our vision for a Future Made in Australia is about Australians making breakthroughs too.
Just as we want to do more with the minerals that are under our feet, we want to do more with what’s within our minds.
We want to draw on all our resources, including the greatest one we have – the genius and creativity of our people.
That is what will deliver the groundbreaking discoveries that will in turn deliver the reality of better lives, better industry, and an even stronger, more confident Australia.
Projects like this one help fuel my government’s commitment to a future made here – and instil such faith in our ambition and our ability to rise to this moment.
Earlier this year, I had the honour of speaking at the 40th anniversary of the St Vincent’s Heart and Lung Transplantation Program.
It was a great milestone in the life of our nation, but as I said that night, what was so moving was to come together and be able to say: Here is something that changed the world. 
As we join together here at the dawn of this wonderful new facility, I say with every confidence that here is something that will change the world.
Because if somewhere is good at being first, it’s South Australia.
It gives me great pleasure to declare the Flinders Health and Medical Research Building open.


It is my honour to welcome you, Your Excellency, Mr Li Qiang, Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China.
And to welcome all the distinguished guests who join us today.
Premier Li, it is an honour to represent the Government and people of Australia as your host.
And it is a pleasure to reciprocate the generosity with which I was welcomed in China last year.
It was my seventh visit to China, but my first as Prime Minister.
And it was an important opportunity to advance the engagement between our nations.
I have long believed that ongoing dialogue is beneficial.
Whatever the issue, it is always better if we deal direct with each other.
And consistent, steady engagement helps build and maintain stability across our region.
A region undergoing change and growth that matters to us both.
What connects our nations today – and will into the future – goes beyond our economic opportunities and the dynamic region we are both part of.
The ties between our people are at the heart of it.
Just as diplomacy and economic co-operation add to our prosperity, our human links add to the connection between our nations.
Our people share an exchange of ideas and culture in many fields of endeavour, including trade, tourism, education and the diaspora.
The Chinese-Australian community is a powerhouse of innovation, creativity and drive.
Thanks to migration that began at the dawn of the 19th century, Australia is now home to 1.4 million people of Chinese ancestry.
These diverse communities are an important part of the story of our modern nation.
So it is important and fitting that you have joined us here in Australia’s Parliament House.
A place that represents so much of who we are as a nation.
Near where we are gathered now, a pair of ceremonial stone lions stand sentinel at the entrance to a formal garden.
Carved from Han marble, they were a gift from China to commemorate the opening of Parliament House in Australia’s bicentennial year of 1988.
This Parliament, the seat of our democracy, is fundamentally a place of dialogue.
Where we recognise the importance of engaging with each other as we discuss competing views and work to find shared opportunities.
Premier Li, our recent efforts to engage in a dialogue on the issues affecting our people, our countries and our region have been most welcome.
When I saw you and President Xi in Beijing, I spoke about stabilising the relationship.
It is a relationship in which we must always be ready to engage with each other as mature nations.
There is much that remains to be done, but it is clear that our nations are making progress in stabilising and rebuilding that crucial dialogue.
We won’t always agree – and the points on which we disagree won’t simply disappear if we leave them in silence.
We share an interest in protecting a stable order in our region.
We share a responsibility to build and strengthen the foundation for talking through our differences and for building collaboration in areas where we do find mutual interest. 
Creating channels of dialogue and building understanding is how we make it possible for benefits to flow.
Across business, trade and education.
Climate and health.
Culture and the arts.
All represented in this room today.
Premier Li, together, let us continue to work towards a productive relationship in our national interests.
A secure and stable region.
A peaceful and prosperous future for our children.
So allow me to, once again, welcome you to Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
Thank you to Chung Wah Association and the organisers of this event.
It is always such a pleasure to celebrate the great Chinese-Australian community here in Western Australia – as it is anywhere right across our great continent.
And to celebrate you in the presence of Premier Li is truly significant.
This is, of course, the first visit to Australia by a Chinese Premier since 2017.
It follows my visit to China last year – the first by an Australian Prime Minister since 2016.
Welcoming Premier Li to our shores is a timely opportunity to showcase our national values, the qualities of our people, and the strengths of our economy. 
We are also showcasing one of Australia’s great success stories.
It is a story that the Chinese-Australian community continues to write in our cities, suburbs and regions.
It is a story written in the ink of aspiration and ambition, of energy and hard work.
And it is a story bound so powerfully in the strength of your community.
The Chinese-Australian community – and the proud, beating heart of your community culture that you carry within you – are such an important part of our national story and our national identity.
It’s a story that has been written for two centuries now, generation by generation, ever since the 19th century, when the first Chinese people came south seeking opportunity in a land that was at once both new and ancient.
Australia is now proudly home to some 1.4 million people of Chinese ancestry.
The energy carried by all who come here with that greatest of aspirations – to make a new life for themselves and their families – is an energy that has ultimately made Australia a better nation for us all.
Chinese-Australians stand as an important link between the land that is your home, and the land that is home to your beginnings.
And just as you have kept the conversation going at a personal level, it is essential that the governments of Australia and China keep engaging with each other.
My trip to China last year coincided with the 50th anniversary of diplomatic relations between our two countries, relations that began with the Australian Labor Government’s recognition of the People’s Republic of China.
In those 50 years, we have seen China go through extraordinary change. What cannot be overstated is the sheer scale and the speed of the achievement.
In recent decades, China’s economic transformation has lifted more people out of poverty than has been achieved over that period of time in any nation.
Western Australia’s role in that achievement is undisputable. Indeed, this great state’s contribution is spelt out across the skylines of Beijing and Shanghai.
Ninety-nine per cent of Australian iron ore exports to China come from WA.
And when we turn to the fuels of the future energy revolution – including lithium and other critical minerals and rare earths – WA is right there.
That is the extraordinary power of this state.
Like Premier Li’s presence here now, my visit to China last year was a step forward in stabilising the relationship between our two nations.
We continue to cooperate where we can, disagree where we must, and engage in our national interest.
And every step of the way, I can tell you that the Australian Government recognises this community as an intrinsic part of the nation we have become.
A nation in which every individual counts and is respected.
A diverse and democratic nation enhanced by people of every faith, background and tradition.
Just as the true magic of an orchestra is that it isn’t just the same instrument over and over, our power is that we all play our different parts yet come together in harmony and unity.
And the part your community plays in that is definitely worth celebrating.


Premier Li
Minister Wang
Minister for Trade and Tourism, Don Farrell
Minister for Resources and Northern Australia, Madeleine King
Premier Roger Cook
I’m delighted to be here in Western Australia, where I am almost a local, I think, Premier, with my engagement here with this great state.
I make the point that whilst China is the destination, overwhelmingly above other countries, bigger than the second, third and fourth destination for Australia’s exports. 75 per cent of those exports are from the great state of Western Australia.
Making major contribution to our national economy, but also to the growth and expansion and industrialisation that we have seen in the People’s Republic of China over recent decades.
I want to thank our co-chairs, Bran Black of the Business Council of Australia and Zhao Huan, for their insights and for all the hard work that you have done to bring this roundtable together of significant business leaders from both of our nations.
Behind every thriving business in this room, right across the sectors you represent, is optimism and determination.
The optimism to seek new markets and new opportunities.
These are the qualities that have underwritten half a century of business-to-business connections between Australia and China.
Ever since the Whitlam Government had the foresight to recognise the People's Republic of China, something that we commemorated last year, the 50th anniversary, with my visit for the resumption of the leader to leader dialogues when I visited not just Beijing for those meetings, but importantly, at the invitation of Premier Li to the world's most significant trade event, which is held in Shanghai.
And I took a number of business leaders, including many of you in this room, from Australia to that trade event there in Shanghai, of which there were literally hundreds of businesses from Australia represented. And literally many hundreds of millions of dollars of deals done while that trade event was going on.
These are the bonds that are strengthened by the aspiration and contribution of our remarkable Chinese Australian community, some 1.4 million people strong, and we will engage with them at a luncheon after this event, and I'm very much looking forward to it.
Our ties have endured and evolved through decades of profound growth and change - both within our nations and across our region.
For over fifty years now, Australian businesses, resources and ideas have helped build and power and shape China’s extraordinary economic transformation.
An economic transformation which we must acknowledge has lifted more people out of poverty in recent decades than any nation has achieved in human history. A remarkable achievement of the people and the government of China.
This has also of course benefited Australian companies and Australian workers who have shared from the benefits because of our trade.
The economic ties between Australia and China rely on a regional and global architecture that enables fair trade, drives innovation and facilitates those vital personal and cultural connections nourished by education and tourism and, of course, business.
That’s why our Government has made it a priority to invest in our capabilities and invest in our relationships.
Because we know the prosperity that has benefited all of us, depends on peace and stability built by all of us.
A security upheld by sovereignty and shaped by dialogue.
The capacity to acknowledge our differences and manage our disagreements by talking to each other – government to government, leader to leader.
And I appreciate the personal relationship with my friend, the Premier, that we have developed over many meetings, just as our respective Trade Ministers have developed such an important relationship over the two years in which I've had the privilege of being Prime Minister of Australia.
Of course, dialogue is more than just a critical diplomatic pressure valve.
It is also an essential element in the continued success of so many firms in this room.
That’s what the resumption of this Roundtable represents.
Business leaders in China and Australia engaging more closely, co-operating in areas of shared interest and gaining a new sense of the opportunities that are there to be seized.
We know the scale of what we can achieve together.
And last year in Shanghai, at the very crowded room I must say Mr Premier, where I think it was a room that probably fitted three hundred people but we managed to fit six hundred people in there, because there was such an enthusiasm from the Australian and the Chinese business community for the engagement that was taking place there.
China is Australia’s largest trading partner and since the Free Trade Agreement came into force in 2015, our goods and services exports to China have more than doubled, and Chinese exports to Australia have increased by 76 per cent.
And we can already see the positive difference that clearing away the recent trade impediments has made, for both our nations.
Australian farmers, growers, producers, miners and exporters are benefiting from being able to sell their cotton, copper, coal, timber, oat and hay, barley and wine to China again.
Equally, Chinese consumers and businesses are benefiting from being able to buy these high-quality, high-value Australian exports.
Once again a win-win for both of our nations.
It is fitting that we gather to discuss the future strength of Australia and China’s trade and business ties, here in Western Australia.
A state home to such a proud and dynamic Chinese community – and a state whose resources and expertise have played such a pivotal role in China’s modernisation.
Three quarters of Australia’s exports to China come from here in WA.
And nearly 60 per cent of everything that this state exports, goes to one nation, it goes to China.
In every sense, WA has traded on its strengths: a skilled and educated workforce, a record of safety and reliability, abundant natural resources and world-class industry capabilities.
Our Government’s plan for a future made in Australia is about building on this success.
Investing in our nation’s capacity to cater to growing global and national demand for the components and expertise essential to clean energy technology and future industries.
Moving Australia up the international value chain.
Processing, refining and manufacturing more green metals and critical minerals here.
And, through our exports, helping China and other nations in our region meet their net zero commitments.
Let me be clear: our commitment to investing in local manufacturing doesn’t mean cutting trade ties or pulling-up the economic drawbridge. Far from it.
International partnerships and the inflow of foreign investment will continue to be crucial for Australia as we modernise and diversify our economy, even as we take steps to secure our economic sovereignty and build resilience in sectors that are vital to our national interest.
Making more things here in Australia is about ensuring our businesses can sell a wider range of products to a broader range of markets.
Our plan is about Australia building on our strengths, engaging in our region and succeeding on our terms.
And there is so much for Australia and China to gain from working together including in the global shift to clean energy, advances in manufacturing supply chains and the research and innovation that will drive this progress.
That’s why we must work together, and that’s why this forum is so important going forward. And that’s why I was very pleased to commit with Premier Li to expand engagement on climate change, energy and environment when I visited Beijing in November last year.
The agreements the Premier and I signed yesterday in Canberra: on climate action, education and research, the further implementation of our free trade agreement and the resumption of high-level economic dialogue between our governments will all provide a stronger foundation for closer and more constructive co-operation.
Friends
The resumption of this roundtable is yet another encouraging sign of the stabilisation of the relationship between our two great nations.
It reflects the commitment to dialogue that Australia and China can use to manage our different views and advance our common interests.
This event also speaks for the determination and optimism that we must draw on to meet the challenges of this moment – and build for the opportunities ahead.
The determination to preserve peace, act on climate change, embrace new technologies and build new co-operation.
And the optimism that recognises the value of deeper understanding - the power of personal connections and the essential value of talking to each other and learning from each other.
Let us draw on that determination, go forward with that optimism and work to achieve greater shared success into the future.
For Australia, for China, for the Indo-Pacific and for all who call our region home.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure and an honour to join with you all here today.
I particularly want to acknowledge the reason we are all here: His Excellency, the Governor-General, and Her Excellency, Mrs Linda Hurley.
Just as it belongs to an important tradition, the unveiling of this official portrait is also an expression of our respect and gratitude. Something that travels beyond your office or title and goes to your character.
It is also, in its way, an expression of gratitude to your children. Caitlin, Marcus and Amelia – thank you for so generously sharing your father with the nation.
The unveiling of an official portrait for the Historic Memorials Collection is a special occasion that recognises the service of Australia’s highest officeholders.
In my role as Chair of the Historic Memorials Committee, I was delighted to see the portrait some weeks ago.
I want to congratulate the artist, Jude Rae, on her remarkable eye, and the brilliance of her hand as it painted this wonderful work into being.
I also wanted to acknowledge the Governor-General’s own commitment to the collaboration with this fine artist. This is the second time she has painted your portrait, and what shines through in the work is a shared understanding.
It is a portrait that captures not just a moment, but holds before us the essence of a life.
It’s a life that began in Wollongong in 1953, when David Hurley was born to Norma – a grocery store worker – and James, an Illawarra steelworker.
After an education that encompassed Port Kembla High and Royal Military College Duntroon, he joined the Australian Army in 1972.
It was the beginning of a distinguished, 42-year career in the Australian Defence Force, which culminated in his appointment as Chief of the Defence Force.
As I said at the announcement of his appointment as Governor-General, his leadership as Chief of the Australian Defence Force was authentic and ethical.
And that was in a period with as complex a cultural challenge and as intense an operational environment as any since Vietnam.
David Hurley then served as the 38th Governor of NSW, before being appointed Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia in 2019.
It seems fitting that someone who grew up in Port Kembla, which has played such a central part in the life of our nation, would himself go to do just that in multiple roles.
And in all these offices, he has served Australia with distinction.
Across the water from here, in the collection of the Australian War Memorial, there is a very different sort of portrait of the man we honour today.
Taken just over 31 years ago by George Gittoes, it is a photograph of then Lieutenant Colonel Hurley in Somalia, where he was leading the 1st Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment during Operation SOLACE.
His khaki is bathed in sunshine, but what is most striking is his smile.
Even in the shade cast by the brim of his hat, it is the brightest feature of that informal portrait.
What it conveys is both strength and gentleness – surely one of the most powerful of combinations a person can contain within their being.
And with that combination, a sense of quiet dignity and unbending duty.
So much can change in three decades, but that never did.
Through the great breadth of his roles in his long career, that is precisely how David Hurley has served his country.
Your Excellency, as you approach the end of your term as Australia’s 27th Governor-General, this new portrait represents the culmination of a remarkable life of public service.
As it hangs in place here in the heart of our nation’s democracy, this portrait will be another very welcome facet of your legacy, and an enduring reminder of your example.
Yours has been a life of compassion.
A life of devotion.
A life of quiet strength, and a sense of courage that has always been as understated as it has been undeniable.
Your nation thanks you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
This ‘State of the Nation’ Conference is one of the many ways that CEDA helps drive the big ideas and shape the important debates about our nation’s future.
In the big economic conversations of the past six decades, CEDA has always been a participant and a contributor, not just an observer.
Bringing together a wealth of perspectives and experiences and engaging in broad-ranging research.
Ahead of this morning, I was thinking back to when CEDA hosted my first major speech as Labor Leader, in Perth in October 2019.
That’s when I first spoke about my vision for an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
A growing economy with good, secure jobs that strengthen families and communities.
Fair wages that reward hard work and nourish aspiration.
And the new skills, clean energy, innovation, infrastructure, competition and technology to boost our productivity and lift our living standards.
An economy where we do not hide from change, or run from it – but strive to shape it and make it work for our people and our nation.
This is the vision that shaped our policy agenda in Opposition and has driven our approach in Government, even as Australia has grappled with global uncertainty.
The economic aftershocks of the pandemic and its impact on supply chains and inflation.
The biggest international energy crisis in half a century.
The devastating toll of natural disasters around our nation.
And the harrowing consequences of conflict in Europe and the Middle East.
It is a powerful tribute to the resilience of the people of Australia that, in spite of these challenges:
Australia has a faster rate of economic growth than most of the G7.
With a lower unemployment rate.
Stronger jobs growth.
A higher participation rate.
Smaller gross debt.
And, unlike every nation in the G7, we are delivering budget surpluses.
Since we came to Government, just over two years ago.
Nearly 880,000 jobs have been created.
More than half a million of them, full time jobs.
Inflation is down.
Annual real wages growth is back.
Unemployment remains at near 50 year lows.
And the gender pay gap is at a record low.
My colleagues and I are proud of this record.
But we know there is more to do, especially when it comes to helping Australians with their cost of living.
There are three vital ways we do this:
Getting wages up for workers.
Getting costs down for families.
And getting the Budget onto a stronger foundation, putting downward pressure on inflation.
Making the responsible revenue and savings decisions that have put us in position to deliver back-to-back budget surpluses.
And calibrating the cost of living relief we have provided through the past two years, so that it takes pressure off people, without putting pressure on inflation.
For example, at the start of this year, our Government made the decision to reform the tax cuts we inherited, so they would benefit every taxpayer.
All 13.6 million of them, not just some.
And in making these tax cuts better for low and middle income earners, better for young people, better for women and better for part-time workers, we made them better for workforce participation too, safeguarding against inflationary pressures.
It’s the same approach we’ve taken to strengthening Medicare, making child care cheaper, expanding Paid Parental Leave and investing in fee-free TAFE.
These measures deliver immediate and meaningful help for people – they are also productivity measures that are good for our economy as a whole.
And our energy bill relief and increase in rent assistance – last year and this year – are designed to cut inflation, as well as cutting costs for households and small businesses.
This is what building an economy that works for people looks like.
Stronger wages, lower taxes and fairer prices.
And investing in the productivity and participation that will power and secure our prosperity for the future.
These are the two priorities that have driven us for two years.
Helping people under pressure.
And making our future here in Australia.
Both were key to the Budget that Jim Chalmers handed down last month.
And this sitting fortnight is a big two weeks for action on both these fronts.
Next Monday, the 1st of July – we are delivering more help with the cost of living for every Australian.
Starting Monday, we are freezing the cost of medicines on the PBS, we are adding another two weeks to Paid Parental Leave, we are cutting $300 from the power bill of every household and more for small business, 2.6 million Australians on award wages are getting another pay rise and every Australian taxpayer is getting a tax cut.
There will be more help with cost of living to follow throughout the year.
Including the increase in the Commonwealth Rent Assistance.
New reforms to strengthen the Grocery Code of Conduct, ensuring Australian shoppers and farmers both get a better deal.
And wiping $3 billion from student debt, while changing the system to make it fairer and simpler for everyone into the future.
Next week, is also when we will bring our Future Made in Australia Act, into the Parliament.
This Act builds on the work we have being doing for two years to put Australia at the economic centre of the global shift to net zero.
Delivering the clear, detailed, costed energy plan we took to the last election and secured a mandate to deliver.
A plan to end the uncertainty of the climate wars and seize the opportunities of the move to renewables. 
That started with legislating our 43 per cent 2030 emissions target and our commitment to net zero by 2050.
A move supported by so many of the organisations represented in this room and the full cross-section of the business community, the union movement and civil society.
We’ve legislated the Safeguard Mechanism, providing the certainty and incentive for business to invest in cutting their emissions.
Our Rewiring the Nation policy - repairing and modernising the National Energy Grid after a decade of neglect.
Our Hydrogen Headstart, Solar Sunshot and New Vehicle Emissions Standards.
We’ve legislated our Capacity Investment Scheme and the first auction has now been held.
Six gigawatts of capacity were up for auction – and the government has received 40 gigawatts worth of bids.
That speaks for the strength of demand.
And it represents a pipeline of new projects that will generate clean energy and create new jobs.
From now on, our Government will be holding these auctions every 6 months.
And overall the Capacity Investment Scheme will deliver 32 gigawatts of dispatchable and variable energy capacity by 2030.
The equivalent of half the current National Electricity Market.
This is what happens when we provide the clarity and certainty for investors to act.
This is why we have already seen a 25 per cent increase in renewables in the national grid in just two years.
Backed by record new investment in batteries and storage.
Meaning we are already half way to meeting our 2030 renewables target.
We’ve approved over 50 new renewable projects since coming to Government, enough to power 3 million homes.
And alongside this, households and small businesses are forging ahead with renewables.
For two years running, more than 300,000 homes and businesses have installed rooftop solar.
Australians are investing in solar because solar saves them money - it works, it is safe, it is reliable and it is ready to go.
Our Government is backing clean energy for these same reasons.
Because getting investment in renewables up brings wholesale prices down.
And it builds our energy sovereignty, protecting us from future global shocks.
Solar and wind and green hydrogen are energy sources where Australia has a powerful natural advantage.
And in a world where 92 per cent of the global economy is signed up to Net Zero, we can turn clean energy into a source of enduring comparative advantage, powering a new generation of advanced manufacturing.
That’s what our Future Made in Australia Act is all about.
Setting out a clear and comprehensive framework to drive new investment in making things here.
Working alongside the Production Tax Credits for green hydrogen production and critical minerals that we announced in the Budget.
As well as our National Reconstruction Fund and its established mandate to invest in value-adding and manufacturing in priority areas including agriculture, defence capability, medical science and transport.
And our new act will ensure that Government investment attracts and enables the flow of private capital into lasting partnership and long-term projects.
The generation, storage and transmission infrastructure that will make Australia a renewable energy superpower.
And the refining, processing and manufacturing centres that will create a new generation of good, secure jobs.
Bringing a new a wave of industry and opportunity to our regions and suburbs alike.
Investing in our energy sovereignty, to strengthen our economic security.
This is about learning a fundamental lesson of the global pandemic – and identifying a lasting shift in the global economy.
And in doing so, creating an economy that is more diversified, more resilient and more decentralised.
By legislating clear Community Benefit Principles to support secure, well-paid jobs, invest in local skills and supply chains and support greater economic development, including in remote communities.
This is something I know CEDA has always championed.
The understanding that for Australia to realise its full potential, we must draw on the talents of our whole population and extend opportunity to every part of our country.
Whether that’s green iron and steel in the Spencer Gulf or the Pilbara; hydrogen-drive supply chains in the Hunter or Gladstone or clean energy start-ups and manufacturers in our suburbs, turning Australian innovation and ingenuity into high quality products.
This is about lifting Australia up the international value chain, by lifting our national ambition.
Australia is the best in the world at extracting and exporting our natural resources.
We set global standards in safety and sustainability and skill.
And this will always be a vital part of our economic success.
We also have the best clean energy resources in the world – the critical minerals and rare earths under the ground, the sunlight overhead.
Some of the best universities and researchers and innovators in the world.
Some of the most skilled workers in the world.
One of the best social safety nets in the world. 
One of the most diverse and harmonious societies in the world, with diaspora communities that give us a family connection to every nation and culture.
And we are located on the doorstep of the fastest growing region of the world, in human history.
Our vision for a future made in Australia says that all these national strengths and advantages can be brought together to build something greater than the sum of the parts.
Striving for more than watching other nations create jobs and add value to our resources, before we buy the finished product back at a higher price.
Aspiring for more than Australian scientists and researchers having to go overseas to commercialise their breakthroughs.
And delivering more for our growing suburbs and regional communities.
Opening the doors of opportunity by creating new university hubs and TAFE places in our regions.
Building more homes and infrastructure – the ports and roads and rail that create local jobs in construction and connect farmers and producers and manufacturers to national and global markets.
And ensuring that the transformative economic opportunities of clean energy are shared with the communities and workers who will deliver it. 
Our vision for a future made in Australia, is powered by our clean energy plan. 
Both are driven by a determination to seizing this moment – and seeing Australians share in its benefits.
This progress, these jobs and this transformative opportunity all depend on the foundation of certainty.
A detailed plan. Clear targets.
Legislation informed by consultation and engagement across industry and agriculture, business and civil society.
And Government working to incentivise and enable the flow of private capital.
To anticipate change - and shape it - in Australia’s interests.
That’s why we see investors queuing up to back solar and wind – and the opportunities in green hydrogen.
Equally, we know that for too long, through a decade of chopping and changing and 22 different energy policies, the business community were in the hard place of moving ahead of government.
Or acting in spite of Government.
In the past two years, you know how far we have come, the progress we have made.
And you know the grave risk and great cost of falling back.
That’s the true cost of nuclear power in Australia.
Not just the hundreds of billions of dollars in the cost of constructing the reactors more than a decade away.
Not just the price households and businesses would pay for energy that is 8 times more expensive than renewables. 
But the danger that another decade of denial prevents the action on climate and investment in energy we need now.
We cannot go back to the politics of conflict undermining business certainty and driving up power bills.
We cannot afford nuclear power to be deployed as just another weapon in the culture wars.
Australia has every resource imaginable to succeed in this decisive decade.
Critical minerals, rare earths, skills and space and sunlight, the trade ties to our region.
The only thing our nation does not have, is time to waste.
In the two years I’ve had the extraordinary honour of serving as the 31st Prime Minister of Australia, I’ve visited communities in every part of our nation that have been devastated by natural disasters.
People battling floods, bushfires, drought – and the long, hard work of rebuilding.
These are reminders of the risk that extreme weather and climate change present to our country.
But in these, the worst of times, I’ve been witness to the best of Australians: resilience, courage and compassion. 
And those same qualities are what will shape our future.
The resilience to face adversity and overcome it.
The courage to compete and succeed in the world.
The compassion that ensures every Australian is lifted up by opportunity.
That’s how we continue to build an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
A nation where no-one is held back, and no-one is left behind.
A better future, made right here in Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It’s an honour to join all of you here this evening, as we continue a great Australian sporting tradition.
Ever since 1984 and the LA games, this dinner has brought together champions of Australian Olympic history and leaders from across the business community and civil society to support the extraordinary men and women who will be representing our country on the biggest stage in world sport.
I want to thank everyone who has worked so hard to bring this remarkable evening together.
In particular, the Team Appeal Committee, led by Peter Fox.
In less than a month from now, Australians in every part of our country will be glued to the coverage from Paris.
Cheering on our athletes as they compete at the very pinnacle of their sport, against the very best in the world.
We will share in all the drama and excitement with our friends and families and colleagues.
And the heroes of this generation will inspire the next generation to dream of wearing the green and gold.
Because every champion representing Australia in the weeks ahead began their journey to Paris, their climb to the highest level, at Little Athletics, or in the local pool or at their community sports centre.
And behind every Olympian and Paralympian is a lifetime of commitment and sacrifice from them and also from everyone who believed in them – their parents and family and junior coaches.
Sport brings us together. It unites us – and it inspires us.
That’s true all the way from the grassroots, to the elite level.
And it needs investment and support at every stage.
That’s why evenings like this are so important: raising valuable funds to support our athletes, coaches and support staff.
For forty years, the generosity of this dinner has been a hugely significant contributor to Australia’s Olympic success.
And I know – like our athletes – all of you will be looking to break records tonight.
Our Government is doing its part too.
Yesterday, I was proud to stand alongside Cate Campbell to announce a record of $283 million in new funding will flow to our elite athletes, coaches and support staff over the next two years.
This investment represents a 50 per cent increase on the previous Government’s high performance funding.
It also represents a doubling of the investment for Paralympic athletes.
This new funding is in addition to our $102.8 million annual grant funding and brings the Government’s total high-performance investment to $489m over two years.
The funding package for Paralympians is the biggest ever, as our Government addresses systemic and structural barriers to performance for para athletes that had been ignored for too long.
The investment will be a major boost for Aussie spirits ahead of Paris next month, and will strengthen Australia’s hopes for gold at LA in 2028, Brisbane in 2032, Winter and Commonwealth Games events.
This is on top of the $250 million we announced last month for the redevelopment of the AIS and the more than $3 billion we have committed to Olympic infrastructure for Brisbane.
Melbourne’s famous ‘Friendly Games’ changed the Olympics forever.
Sydney 2000 set a new global standard.
And I’m confident Brisbane will once again show the very best of Australia and our people to the world.
Thank you all for being here tonight, thank you for digging deep.
And to our Chef de Mission, the legendary Anna Meares, to all the athletes and everyone else with a part to play in Paris, our nation is cheering you on and we know you’ll do us proud, as you always do.
All the very best.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure to be here with you on this momentous day.
I thank all the members of the diplomatic corps and all members of the Australian Defence Force who have joined us.
I also thank my parliamentary colleagues and, of course, the reason we are here: our new Governor-General, Sam Mostyn, and her husband, Simeon Beckett.
The swearing in of a Governor-General is a bright moment in the life our nation, but it is not one we approach lightly.
We are a young nation on an ancient continent – yet the democracy that has defined us for 123 years is numbered among the world’s oldest, and the Governor-General has always been at the heart of it.
It is high office, but it is not lofty. For all the pomp of its origins, the role of Governor-General is one that has become firmly rooted among the Australian people.
In the course of their duties, a Governor-General meets so many Australians from so many different walks of life, and in so many different circumstances.
A Governor-General stands by us, celebrating our good times, and offering comfort and quiet strength during our times of trial.
And while guided by tradition, it is not blind to the future.
Over the years, we have seen different Governors-General applying an emphasis of their own choosing, whether it was Sir Ninian Stephens with his touch of healing, Sir Zelman Cowen’s vision of the Governor-General as interpreter of a nation, or Dame Quentin Bryce and her desire “to strike a balance between observing traditions and protocol and being thoroughly contemporary”.
Over the past week, we have expressed our admiration for the retiring Governor-General and Her Excellency, Mrs Hurley, and the great calibre of their contribution. They go with the thanks of a nation.
Today, we begin a new chapter with Australia’s 28th Governor-General, Sam Mostyn.
We share the great fortune of living in a modern and optimistic nation.
A nation made generous and courageous by its people.
In Sam Mostyn, our nation has the right leader.
Sam, you are a person of intelligence and compassion. Of loyalty and integrity.
You have clear eyes and a big heart – and both have shaped your vision of who and what we can be as a nation.
Throughout your life, and across your great breadth of experience in the worlds of law and business and sport, in corporate Australia and the not-for-profit sector, you have always been ready to put yourself forward for others.
They are the qualities that she will bring to representing our nation as Governor-General.
You have walked the talk, a human catalyst with an unrelenting capacity for making things happen.
You have blazed so many trails for women. You have pushed open the doors of opportunity and equality.
You have made a real difference for Indigenous Australians.
You have added to the environmental and cultural health of our nation.
For decades you have been driven by a desire to make a difference in the lives of your fellow Australians – now, and for future generations.
The very sense of fairness that is the beating heart of our identity as Australians is something you embody.
In 1999, the Australian Financial Review described you as “bound for glory”.
Yet glory is something you have never sought.
In 2019, your good friend, the playwright Suzie Miller, had this to say of you: “She inspires me. I wish she would be less modest.”
While Suzie’s wish may never be granted, she is one more reminder of how profoundly you value and nurture friendship – and everything that true friendship means.
I am glad you have Simeon with you on this journey. As a public law barrister who has worked in many crucial realms, he too has made a positive difference in the lives of so many.
Together, you are a truly wonderful partnership.
Your Excellency, you have lived your life in the service of a powerful Australian principle: when more people have the opportunity to fulfil their potential, our nation is a better place.
With you as Governor-General, our future is in good hands.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge our distinguished guests, in particular all the members of the Australian Paralympic Team. 
Men and women from every part of our country, who all of us will be cheering for when the games begin at the end of August.
It is an honour to join with all Australians in wishing all of you and every member of our Paralympic Team every success in Paris.
Every one of you representing our country at the Paralympics also represent years of dedication and determination.
The extraordinary commitment required to reach the absolute pinnacle of your sport and to compete against the best in the world.
So much of that hard work is done on cold mornings like this, days when I’m sure the warmth of the French summer or the glow of the international spotlight seems a world away.
And that’s where the sacrifice and support of your families, your coaches, your training partners and teammates is so important - and why they will feel such deep pride in seeing you on the world stage.
The Paralympics represent so much that is great about sport.
The lasting power it has to teach us, unite us and inspire us.
The success of Team Australia means so much to our nation.  
And our Government is proud to be investing in that success.
In May, we committed $250 million to the redevelopment of the Australian Institute of Sport.
And I was delighted that the Co-Captain of Team Australia for 2024, Angie Ballard was with the Minister for Sport and me at the AIS last Friday, as we announced record new funding for our Olympians and Paralympians.
$283 million in new money, on top of $102 million in annual grant funding.
Including an additional $54.9 million for Paralympic Sport – the single biggest increase in Paralympic investment by an Australian Government.
We are doubling the national funding for Paralympic programs.
That means better, fit-for-purpose training facilities.
Ongoing financial support for elite athletes.
New specialised coaching and high performance support. 
And more access to domestic and international competitions – testing yourselves against the best.
This is about breaking-down those systemic barriers that have been ignored for too long.
Investing in your success - and investing in the success of the next generation as well.
All the girls and boys who will be watching on at home, seeing what you achieve in Paris and dreaming of doing the same in Brisbane in 2032.
That’s what is so powerful about what you do.
You bring all Australians together to cheer for you.
You demonstrate the greatness of the Paralympic ideal, spirit in motion.
And you inspire young Australians to strive for greatness themselves.
We wish you all the very best of success in Paris.
And we know you will do Australia proud.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It’s such a pleasure to be here with you. Even on the coldest winter’s night, you can be assured of a warm welcome here in Canberra.
When the Australian people gave Labor the privilege of forming government, one of our priorities was fulfilling our vow to bring the Australian Council of Local Government back to the table – where you belong.
Local government is the level of government that Australians interact with at a personal level the most.
Councils are the lifeblood of Australia’s cities, towns, and regions.
You’re dealing directly with the services, facilities and infrastructure people need and use day to day.
Just as you are uniquely placed to understand the challenges communities face, you have a clear insight into what needs to be done.
You’re accessible and responsive. You’re creative and innovative and adaptive – in ways that can be harder for larger governments.
So many of your responsibilities – whether it’s roads, waste collection, parks, libraries or swim centres – are the building blocks of society.
They’re about how communities can work best. They’re about building communities that people are proud to be part of. 
That is why local government should be close to everyone’s heart.
I can tell you that the Australian Council of Local Government is very close to mine.
Last year we reinstated the ACLG after a decade– but the first one ever was back in 2008, when I was Minister for Local Government.
I remain very proud of the role I was able to play – in the original story, and in the sequel. Both times I was driven by my profound appreciation of just how essential local government is in the health and strength of our nation.
I felt strongly that we wouldn’t get far with our national priorities unless we worked with local governments, who are delivering for people every day.
Among those priorities are being better prepared for natural disasters, delivering essential services, driving the transformation to clean energy, and delivering more secure and affordable housing.
These are all challenges that the different levels of government are dealing with.
And it's much better if we deal with these things together in a spirit of consultation and co-operation.
The Government I am proud to lead is one that is always ready to walk the talk. That’s why in May we announced a doubling of the Roads to Recovery program.
That makes $4.4 billion available to councils across this continent to maintain, repair and upgrade local roads.
It gets potholes filled and drainage improved, all the while supporting local road construction and local jobs.
And as it enables councils to make roads safer, it frees them up to spend their money on their other priorities.
Crucially, the Government has worked closely with councils to ensure that funding is distributed where it is needed and able to be spent more quickly.
That represents the nature of the relationship that should exist between local and national government.
Tonight, we’ll be celebrating the National Awards for Local Government. I’m pleased to say my connection with them goes way back.
As a matter of fact, all the way back to my time as a young adviser in the office of my dear friend and mentor, Tom Uren.
In 1986, when Tom was Minister for Local Government, he came up with these awards as a way to shine an overdue light on the role that councils play in improving the lives of his fellow Australians.
Tom was guided by an innate humanitarianism, coupled with a great sense of practicality.
And it was those two instincts that allowed him to recognise local government as the great vehicle for improving the communities that make up our nation.
I couldn’t be more pleased that nearly 40 years later, I have the privilege of presenting these Awards.
I’m pleased to say that so many of my colleagues also have a full appreciation of what they are and what they represent.
For quite a number of my team, being a councillor was their entry into public life, the crucial first step they took when they put up their hand and got involved, knowing that if you want to make a difference, that’s what you have to do.
Kristy McBain, our current Minister for Local Government, was a councillor and then Mayor of Bega Shire.
Chris Bowen, Minister for Climate Change and Energy, was the Mayor of Fairfield.
Michelle Rowland, our Communications Minister, was Deputy Mayor of Blacktown.
Clare O’Neill, our Home Affairs Minister, was Mayor of Greater Dandenong.
Libby Coker, the member for Corangamite, was Mayor of Surf Coast Shire.
Tracey Roberts, the member for Pearce, was Mayor of Wanneroo.
And Emma McBride, our Assistant Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention, served on the Wyong Shire Council.
They’ll all be part of our discussions tomorrow.
My team understands just how important your work is.
And why it’s important to bring you together –to get to grips with the challenges facing us, and to celebrate the work you do every day.
I know you’re not out there doing the hard yards for the recognition. Nevertheless, recognition is what tonight is about.
Recognition of the impact of your work.
Recognition of the huge spectrum of your responsibilities and achievements.
And recognition that what you do adds to local government’s role as one of the pillars of our democracy. So much of our progress towards a better future depends on what you do at the local level.
On the energy transition, for instance, it’s fantastic to see the way local governments are leading.
Electric vehicles, carbon accounting, increasing tree canopy cover and biodiversity, making council-owned buildings more energy efficient, and investing in low-emissions transport.
You’re doing so much to reduce your communities’ carbon footprints. And we’re backing you.
This time last year I announced the $100 million Community Energy Upgrades Fund. We’ve already had one round of grant applications; the next one is expected to open in early 2025.
We know you can continue to lead.  You are the ones who know where the needs and the opportunities are. The strengths, the advantages, the weak points.
You are right there on the ground, making life better for people where you live.
Caring about the people and the places around you.
Local parks and playgrounds where young children might take their first steps, or make their first friend.
Pools, courts, cricket grounds and footy fields where kids first discover the joys of sport, and the inclusive power of team spirit.
Local libraries that open doors into worlds we might never have known.
All these things are irreplaceable, and they exist because of you.
I believe that as a nation, we're only as strong as our communities.
So I thank you for what you do every day to keep your communities safe, healthy, connected, and growing.
And I thank you for coming to Canberra this week.
I know it’s been quite a trek for some of you. I appreciate your commitment to being here and being part of what is a very important conversation.
You've brought constructive ideas, and you've come together in a spirit of goodwill. And it’s together that we’re always at our best.
Congratulations to all of tonight’s award nominees.
Enjoy your evening, and I look forward to a constructive and collaborative day tomorrow.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It’s great to be with you again this morning.
Last night’s awards were a fantastic celebration of the work that all of you do in every community in Australia.
And another reminder of the power and value of this forum - the opportunity it gives all of us in the Federal Government to demonstrate our respect and appreciation for local government.
Recognising the extraordinary contribution you and your colleagues make to the lives of Australians.
The essential services you provide, the critical infrastructure and housing you plan and deliver.
And the care and investment you put into the things that make such a positive and meaningful difference to our quality of life.
The parks and pools and sporting facilities, the libraries, community theatres and halls.
The festivals and cultural events that enrich the character of communities, celebrate our diversity and strengthen the great national asset of our social cohesion.
You are the level of government closest to the Australian people – and so often your work brings Australians closer together.
When you look around the world, that’s never mattered more.
This forum is also an opportunity for leaders in local government to deal directly with the Commonwealth, across the broad range of issues you manage on a daily basis.  
And our Government understands that everything local government does depends on the foundation of financial certainty.
That’s why, when I was here with you last year, I announced we were bringing forward funding under the Financial Assistance Grants program.
And as of last month, nearly $2.8 billion had already been paid to the states and territories, so it can be distributed to your councils. 
Ensuring that as employers of 200,000 people with responsibility for 75 per cent of our nation’s roads and a place on the frontline of essential services, disaster recovery and emergency management.
You have the ongoing certainty and security you need and deserve.
I’m very pleased that there has been such constructive engagement in your agenda from Minister Catherine King, Minister Kristy McBain and so many other Government Ministers and Members.
That’s a sign of respect - and it’s also proof that my colleagues and I recognise the opportunity this forum provides us, to hear from you.
To learn more about what’s working, to identify areas for improvement and build stronger partnerships, based on deeper trust.
Of course, this week is not the start of those conversations – or the last word.
For our Government, for me as Prime Minister, meeting with mayors and councillors is a year-round process. 
But one of the benefits of making this forum an annual fixture is that it creates structure and accountability for these discussions.
It generates deadlines for action and creates an incentive for progress.
And there is indeed a great deal of progress for us to celebrate.
The doubling of funding for Roads to Recovery: $4.4 billion to fix roads damaged by floods and other disasters. 
The first round of the Community Energy Upgrades Fund well underway. 
And, earlier this morning, we announced the 80 projects in 73 councils who will share in $50 million of funding from stream 1 of our Housing Support Program.
Substantial new investment in the planning capability to build more homes.
Every project speaks to the positive and practical difference this funding will make.
$1.5 million for Blacktown City Council for housing capacity studies and planning strategies around train station precincts - with the potential to deliver 50,000 new homes.
$150,000 for Bundaberg Regional Council to undertake precinct planning for 1300 homes, including medium-density, affordable housing around the Bundaberg Hospital, primarily for hospital workers.
And $160,000 for Kowanyama Aboriginal Shire Council for a Future Housing Supply Strategy, for more than 60 homes in remote Queensland.
Of course, there is more for us to do - and there is more we want to work with local government to achieve.
Today, I am pleased to announce that the enabling infrastructure stream of the Housing Support Program is now open.
This means $450 million of funding is available, including for local councils.
New investment to build the roads and connect the power, water and sewerage to support residential construction.
It will also provide funding for community infrastructure like the parks and public spaces that create thriving communities.
Our Government has set an ambitious goal of building 1.2 million new homes before the end of the decade.
Because new housing in our cities and suburbs is vital to our growth and prosperity as a nation.
It’s fundamental to security and opportunity for our people.
And building new homes is about building communities too.
The infrastructure that supports quality of life, allows ease of access from new developments into major hubs, and fosters connection with others through open spaces and shared facilities.
This is a key priority for us. It’s an area where there has been a lack of investment by the federal government for too long - and we are fixing it.
And there is no more logical partner in this endeavour than local councils.
This week in Parliament pointed to another national priority where local government has a critical role.
On Wednesday morning, the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, introduced our Future Made in Australia Act.
A framework to drive the public and private investment in clean energy and critical minerals that will power a new generation of Australian manufacturing and build a more resilient and more diversified economy.
Making Australia a renewable energy superpower.
Making more things here.
And making sure workers and communities share in the benefits.
This is about attracting and enabling the flow of private capital into transmission and generation, refining and processing and manufacturing and backing this up with the infrastructure and skills and services that workers and communities need to grow and thrive.
Our vision for a future made in Australia is an investment strategy – and a growth strategy.
It’s a plan in keeping with the principle that drives each and every member of our Government: No-one held back, no-one left behind.
No community held back from the opportunities of this transformation, no-one left behind by economic change.
This is a moment of global change.
It represents a transformative national opportunity and we want to see local government, front and centre, whether that is in our cities or our regions.
We’ve brought this same focus on growth and investment and regional development to our infrastructure agenda.
The understanding that you don’t make decisions about a project in isolation: you measure it by what it does to shape the economic development of communities.
Connecting farmers and producers and small businesses to broader markets.
Driving productivity in our cities, boosting liveability in our suburbs.
And bringing essential services and the life-changing opportunity of education to every part of our country.
That connection between infrastructure and regional development links directly to local government.
That’s the principle I adopted as a Minister - and that’s what drives me as Prime Minister.
Making sure it all fits together.
The determination to draw on the potential of every suburb and region. 
The ambition for all our people to be part of our nation’s success.
And the optimism that if we work together, we can shape the future.
Thank you all for coming to Canberra - and thank you for everything you do in the service of your community and our country.
I wish you all the best for a great end to the week and a safe journey home.


I’m delighted to be here today to help launch Michael Easson’s thoughtful and important book.
Among all these distinguished guests, can I give a special acknowledgement to the members of the Watson family who are here with us.
It is strange to think that the first Federal Leader of Australia’s oldest political party and the Prime Minister in the world’s first Labor Government remains something of a mystery.
This book shows us John Christian Watson is a mystery well worth investigating.
A person and a leader with a life and legacy deserving of further study.
We are fortunate Michael Easson has taken us with him in this search for answers.
He gives us the full sweep of Watson’s life, his humble beginnings, his rapid rise, his whirlwind time as Federal Labor’s founding Leader and Prime Minister.
And all that followed: the months on the backbench when he was paired for every vote in the House of Representatives because he was in South Africa, looking for gold.
The brutal split on conscription and his expulsion from the Party.
Of course, there are some mysteries beyond even the most talented researcher.
Michael writes with understated clarity - but you can feel the pain when he tells the story of an over-enthusiastic gardener at the Watson house accidentally taking a whole trunk of the former Prime Minister’s personal papers to the local tip.
Yet the absence of the kind of ‘private’ material most biographers seek out actually serves to sharpen this book’s focus on Watson the public figure - and the place he deserves in Australian political history.
For me, one of the most striking things about this book is to be reminded that for virtually every decision Watson faced, he was working without a map.
Think about our movement today: the reverence we have for our history, the inspiration we draw from those who’ve gone before us.
And the lessons that all of us have learned, from our engagement as volunteers and branch members and candidates, our participation in the process over many years.
For Watson and his colleagues, there were no party elders, there was no collective Caucus memory, there was no well-worn way that things had always been done.
There were precious few campaigns, victories or defeats to look back and learn from.
In everything they did, that Labor generation were breaking new ground – and not just in Australia but around the world.
At the same time, the institutional hostility they faced was fierce.
Watson and his contemporaries took their places in the Chamber at a time when many in the political and media establishment considered the very notion of Labor in government both offensive and frightening.
The quote Ross McMullin chose for his book on Watson, from The Maitland Daily Mercury described the new Labor Government as:
“So monstrous a travesty”.
It was typical of the fair and balanced coverage of the time.
Parliament offered its own challenges.
Alfred Deakin had famously complained that the House of Representatives in those early years was like a game of cricket with three elevens on the field and each player free to change who they were playing for.
When Watson became PM, Opposition Leader George Reid described it as the equivalent of one side ‘courageously’ deciding to take on the other two.
And yet what shines through in this book is a picture of calm, competence, resolve and determination.
A new Labor Government intent on passing the toughest and most important democratic test: earning people’s trust and proving worthy of it.
A Prime Minister who demonstrated not just the legitimacy of a Labor Government – but also the value of one, the capacity to drive change within the democratic framework.
In the end, Watson’s Government did not last long, not quite three months.
Yet what they proved to themselves, to the movement, to Australia, endures even 120 years later.
And so much of that is down to Chris Watson, as Michael puts it:
More than anyone else in its early years at the national level, Watson exemplified what Labor stood for.
That’s the place in history he deserves: someone who grasped the essence of labourism and acted to define it.
We see that in his advocacy for the rights of workers to organise and negotiate.
Or arguing the age pension should be a universal right, not a matter of charity.
Of course, the Labor Party of the Federation era also held views we find appalling today – particularly in their fervid support of the White Australia Policy.
The contemporary relevance of Watson’s leadership is not the individual measures, it is the overall approach.
The willingness to engage in the big debates about our nation’s future, to make a case for social and economic change, to build a consensus for reform and bring people with us in our work.
The bedrock understanding that delivering real, lasting, meaningful improvement in people’s lives depends on Labor being a party of government, as well as a movement for change.
That’s the urgency and determination that still drives us.
Indeed it’s something I spoke about at New South Wales Conference on Saturday, the fact that the job of progress is never done.
We must always be striving for more, aiming higher, working to do better.
Opening the doors of opportunity – and widening them for those who come after us.
There’s a great quote in here from a speech Watson gave in Melbourne in 1902:
“Every hill scaled in the march of human progress only disclosed fresh views and vistas.
Every labour movement, under its own name or another, would be animated by the spirit of humanity, and agitation would cease only with the end of time itself.”
That’s the story we are still part of, the tradition we still belong to.
And it’s why, for all the acrimony of the split over conscription and the years of distance between Watson and Labor that followed his expulsion, when he passed away in 1944, it was Prime Minister John Curtin who led the warm tributes in the Parliament.
When you think about it, that is itself a Watson legacy.
Forty years after the first Labor Government, it was another Labor Government steering Australia through our nation’s darkest hour.
This book adds to every Labor person’s understanding of the tradition we belong to – and where it began.
And it reminds all of us that from the very earliest days of our history, our mission has always been the future.
We still have ‘hills to scale’ and mountains to climb.
We still have fresh views to discover.
We still have work to do – and we always will
It is my great pleasure to congratulate Michael Easson and launch: In Search of John Christian Watson.


I acknowledge the people of the Yolngu nation, their elders, leaders and families who have contributed so much to Australia.
In particular, I acknowledge the Gumatj clan whose lands we are meeting on today.
I acknowledge all my colleagues here with me at Garma, I want to make special mention of two.
Linda Burney was born into an Australia that viewed her as second-class - yet she has led a life of profound firsts.
A proud Wiradjuri woman who became the first Indigenous member of Australia’s oldest Parliament in New South Wales.
The first Indigenous woman elected to the Australian House of Representatives - and the first to serve as a Minister in Cabinet.
On the day she announced her retirement, Linda said: “I was the first, I won’t be the last”. 
How right she was.
Malarndirri McCarthy is our new Minister for Indigenous Australians.
A strong Yanyuwa woman, a daughter of the Gulf and a fiercely proud Territorian.
Her life and her values drive her to make a difference, to match words with action.That’s the priority for her – and for our entire Government.
Every year, in this extraordinary place, we have opportunity to share in the power of culture and country, to learn from the wisdom of history and tradition.   
Garma offers us the chance to stand on the shoulders of giants.
And Garma asks us to be ambitious for what we see ahead, for the future we can build together.
It was in that spirit, that two years ago, when I stood here for the first time as Prime Minister, I renewed a commitment I had given here as Labor Leader.
I promised my Government would give every Australian the opportunity to answer the gracious and generous invitation contained in the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
We would do this by holding a referendum on constitutional recognition through a Voice, in our first term.
Like all of you, I understood the high bar we had to clear, the historical record we were up against.
I knew success could not be guaranteed.
But as I said here at Garma on that day: “We recognise the risk of failure - we also recognise the risk of failing to try.”   
Afterwards, when I stepped from this stage, Yunupingu shook my hand, looked me in the eye and asked me: ‘Are you serious?’
I said: ‘Yes, we’re going to do it.’
That was the only guarantee I could offer: that my colleagues and I would not waver, we would keep going when the going got tough, we would give our all.
We gave that undertaking – and we held to it.
Because we were determined to fulfil the request Indigenous Australians had made of us.
And because we believed it was the right thing to do, in the best interests of the nation.
We campaigned on the basis of conviction, not out of convenience.
We did that alongside so many of you, and so many inspirational Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders from all over our country.
Leaders who were already known and respected – and a new generation who brought their passion and vision to the campaign.
They were joined by tens of thousands of Australians from all walks of life, people drawn from every faith and background and tradition.
Together, we gave our all. And we fell short.
I understand, particularly for those who had dedicated years of their life to this cause, the pain is still raw.
As Prime Minister - I made it clear from the outset I accepted the result, respected the decision and took responsibility.
And I have not returned to Garma today to talk about what might have been.
I have not come back to this place of fire, to rake through the ashes.
I am here because my optimism for a better future still burns.
My trust in the resilience and wisdom of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people remains undiminished.
And because the destination we seek, the Australia we imagine: more united, more reconciled, more confident and more equal - this nation remains within our reach.
We can be a country where Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have power over their destiny.
Where your children can flourish, as they walk in two worlds.
We can confront the legacy of dispossession and tackle the realities of disadvantage.
We can close the gap.
These aspirations for a better future did not end last October.
And nor did the respect, understanding and co-operation that will take us there.
The point and the purpose of seeking advice from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people has always derived its strength from the simple truth that no Government, no Prime Minister, no Parliament has all the answers.
My colleagues and I do not pretend to have discovered them now.
Instead, we want to work with you – with new ambition, energy and determination – to find a new way forward.
As Djawa says: ‘To look up to the future’.
We do this understanding that the change so many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have been seeking and advocating for years, decades, even lifetimes was not defined or determined by one day.
It has always been about positive, practical and lasting change in people’s lives and in the life of our nation.
From remote communities to our cities and regional centres, where the challenges can be very different - but the consequences and human cost are too often the same.
At its core, this is about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people having an equal right to make a good life for yourselves and your children.
A healthy family, a safe home, a great education that opens the way to a rewarding job.No more than any Australian asks for - no less than every Australian deserves.
And yet so far removed from reality, for so many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
That truth cuts hard in a country that has always seen itself as the home of the fair go.
It’s one of the reasons these challenges are often pushed to the margins of the national conversation.
Last year they were brought to the centre, put in the spotlight.
And for all the divergence of views, no-one can make a case for the economic and social status quo.
No-one can credibly argue that recognising the great privilege of sharing this continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture, should not be reflected in our nation’s founding document.
No-one can defend the gaps in life expectancy, health, opportunity, education or justice as inevitable or acceptable.
They are not.
No-one can argue that more of the same is good enough for Australia.
It is not.
No-one can pretend that holding to the same approach will deliver the progress our nation needs.
It will not.
To make meaningful change in the lives of First Nations people, governments must be prepared to make meaningful change in the way we do things.
The ‘how’, as well as the ‘what’.
This is where the value of listening is more important than ever.
The practical need for a better approach is more urgent than ever.
The moral necessity of better results is clearer than ever.
And my Government’s determination to work with you is as strong as ever.
In this, we welcome the work State and Territory governments are doing to advance treaties, agreement-making and truth-telling processes.
Every approach is different, that is a good thing.
It reflects the fact that the process is being shaped by First Nations people in each jurisdiction.
Our Government supports these efforts, we want to see them succeed – and we will give them the time and space to do so. 
We remain committed to Makarrata, that powerful Yolngu word gifted to the nation, for coming together after a struggle.
And we will continue to engage in good faith with leaders and communities to decide what the next steps should be at a national level.  
Just as we will continue to work with local leaders and traditional owners, as we are with the Mirrar people.
Answering their calls to bring Jabiluka into Kakadu National Park and keep their lands safe from uranium mining, once and for all.
We continue to work with the Coalition of Peaks, led by Pat Turner to invest in closing the gap - in jobs, housing, health, justice and education.
Indeed, since I came to Garma last year, The CDP is being abolished and replaced with a new Remote Jobs and Economic Development Program.
Real jobs, decent conditions and proper wages for workers in remote communities, including hundreds of tradies to help build 2,700 new homes in remote communities across the NT and upgrade many more.
The result of a 10 year, $4 billion housing partnership with the Territory Government.
A plan to employ and train more local workers and apprentices, grow local Indigenous businesses and halve the rate of overcrowding.
And housing construction in those communities is ahead of schedule.
In Maningrida, Milingimbi, Yirrkala and elsewhere new projects are bringing safe, reliable drinking water to communities at long last.
We are investing $109 million of new money in First Nations justice programs across Australia.
Working with elders and leaders to prevent crime, boost community safety – and rescue young people from the life-limiting consequences of incarceration.
In June, we opened a new dialysis clinic in Coober Pedy. We will open more in Yalata, Balgo, Harts Range, Ti-Tree and Borroloola.
We know chronic kidney disease is twice as prevalent among Indigenous communities – and four times more likely to be fatal.
The treatment itself is an ordeal and we don’t want people to have to leave family and home behind to go through it.
That’s why we are investing in three more new clinics – on Badu Island in the Torres Strait, in the Pilbara and the Western Desert. 
And we are connecting remote communities around the nation to free and reliable Wi-Fi.
We can sometimes take this for granted in our cities – but for communities in the NT, South Australia, Queensland and WA – this is life-changing.
It makes tele-health consultations possible, it gives young people a window onto the world – for study, sport, art and science - and it connects workers and businesses with new opportunities too.  
This week, we signed an historic agreement with the NT Government to ensure – for the first time - every single student in every single Territory school will get the fair funding and resources to help them thrive.
I know North East Arnhem Land is home to a great school – where the community is engaged, attendance rates are high and students are taught to strive for the very best. 
Today, I am proud to announce that – through a new partnership agreement with the Northern Territory Government and the Yothu Yindi foundation – we will be investing $20 million from the Aboriginal Benefits Account to build The Garma Institute.
A new tertiary and vocational education centre, owned and run by the Yolngu people.And a new pathway to higher education, right here on country.
All of this is important, all of it seeks to reinforce great work being done by so many of you and so many of the organisations represented here at Garma.
Yet we understand that in too many ways, ongoing progress remains at the mercy of political uncertainty.
Changing this, building true and lasting self-determination, requires economic security.Security that exists outside of government decisions – and endures beyond them.
And, right now, changes in the global economy are opening up these possibilities.  Growing global demand for renewable energy, critical minerals and rare earths represents an unprecedented opportunity for our nation and for Northern Australia.
Because the North is home to so many of the resources the world needs to make the transformation to clean energy, and so much of the space and sunlight Australia needs to become a renewable energy superpower.  
This is the biggest change in the global economy since the industrial revolution.
And it also represents the best chance Australia has ever had to bring genuine self-determination and lasting economic empowerment to remote communities.
New clean energy projects, new defence and security projects, new processing and refining facilities can all unlock new jobs and prosperity for Indigenous communities. 
By partnering with locals from the beginning, we can avoid the exploitation and injustices of the past.
And we can tackle the poverty and lack of opportunity that has seen disadvantage entrenched in these parts of our country over generations.
Together, we can seize this moment to build a better future on a simple principle.
The principle that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people deserve a real say in the economic development of the land you call home. And you deserve your fair share of the benefits that flow from it.
This is about so much more than consulting communities in the service of cultural or heritage considerations, as important as that remains.
Because you deserve more than the right to protect what you already have.
You are more than curators or custodians, you are the traditional owners, who have cared for land and waters for 60,000 years and more.
And we want you to have ownership of your future – built on a foundation of economic empowerment.
This is about good jobs that change lives and strengthen communities - that provide a sense of pride and purpose, hope and aspiration.
New careers in clean energy, construction, the care economy, technology, infrastructure and resources.
These are creators of inter-generational opportunity. And our Government wants to put the building blocks in place so that the success of a local industry lifts up the whole community.
Roads and power and water.
Bridges and ports, airstrips and communications infrastructure.
The housing and schools and health services.
This is about unlocking the potential of the land but more importantly liberating the potential of the people who call it home.
Of course, this spans the whole of government.
So to sharpen the focus on delivery and strengthen accountability, we are creating a new First Nations Economic Partnership with the Coalition of Peaks.
A new partnership for a new direction – with greater independence, real empowerment and lasting economic security for communities.
We know important work is being done already by the Coalition of Peaks and the First Nations Economic Empowerment Alliance.  
And I have made it clear to both my Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and Treasury to get right behind these efforts.
Because our Government shares your belief in the opportunities this time of economic transformation has to offer.
And we share your determination for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to seize them.
To maximise the benefits for communities, right from the outset.
Not an add-on, not an afterthought – part of it from the start, in on the ground floor.
The same purpose underwrites the community benefit principles in our landmark Future Made in Australia Act.
We want Government investment to drive engagement between businesses and communities, maximising local jobs and long-term benefit.
And we want to see the same commitment in the First Nations Clean Energy Strategy we are developing with the states and territories.
We want projects generating renewable energy on country, to bring new economic power to communities.
Some of the changes we need to make are not political, they are practical. For example, many of the more than 270 native title bodies don’t have the resources to engage in commercial negotiations.
Equally, there are many companies that wouldn’t know where to start, who to talk to or how to make a worthwhile agreement.
Too often, the result is a stalemate.
Where communities miss out on a say over their future and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people miss out on good jobs close to home.
Our Government is determined to change this.
Part of our Future Made in Australia agenda is clearing away red tape and create a new ‘front door’ to accelerate and co-ordinate transformational investment.
If we can do this for industry and companies, we must do it for Indigenous communities.
That’s why we are partnering with the First Nations Heritage Protection Alliance to create a central point of contact in communities to connect traditional owners and investors.
This is being led by First Nations peoples, joined-up with all the land councils, the National Native Title Council and other relevant Indigenous organisations.
Meaning investors and developers, companies and job-creators can directly contact communities.
And ensuring that investment in northern Australia delivers practical benefits that make a positive difference.
To bring this same spirit of empowerment to our cities and regional centres, we will also be boosting the investment, borrowing and lending power of Indigenous Business Australia.
This is about driving higher rates of First Nations home ownership.
And lifting investment in Indigenous businesses and employers, all over the nation.
Rewarding and incentivising wealth creation.
Professor Peter Yu, who is here today, has spoken about the fact that Australia has never attempted this before.
Never pursued what he calls a ‘comprehensive economic policy for Indigenous peoples’. Let me make it clear: our Government will take up that challenge.
We know this has not been tried before on a national scale. We understand this is a new approach.
That should not be cause for concern - it is a reason for optimism.
We are living with what’s been tried before.
We know where the old models take us, we know where the old road leads.
We have to make a new path – and walk it together.
Since 1999, Garma has offered us an opportunity to celebrate the contribution Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people make to our nation.
A chance for Australians of all backgrounds and beliefs to share in the living brilliance of the world’s oldest continuous culture.
Art, song and dance shaped by a profound love of this country.
And success stories taking in every field of national endeavour.
Each one the product of hard work, creativity and great determination.
And each one a story of resilience.
A reminder that so much of what Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have achieved for our country and given to our country, has been in the face of overwhelming odds.
You know that, you have lived it. 
You have endured setbacks and disappointment, yet you have met every challenge with courage and perseverance, optimism and grace.
You have kept the fire burning.  
You have kept the faith.
And my Government will keep faith with you.
My colleagues and I came to Garma to renew our commitment to a better future for First Nations People.
We will leave here more determined than ever to bring it into being.  
So with new urgency, new purpose and new co-operation.
Let us work together, to achieve new success.


Well thank you for those generous comments.
I welcome, as well, the Mayor of Penrith here and other distinguished guests who are here.
My old mate Sally Fielke, and Gerard Dwyer is here somewhere – there he is.
He’s always a bit shy, Gerard. I notice that about the Union Movement, they’re always shy about putting themselves forward. But it is good to have the representative of the workers here and their trade union.
But this is an example of government working with the private sector, as James said.
We want to encourage and facilitate private sector action in the interests of our community.
And this facility here is good for jobs.
It’s good for productivity and economic growth.
It's good for the environment.
And it is good for Western Sydney.
This is a development that you can be really proud of.
People spoke, Lea and James, spoke about the Redbank facility that I got to open last year.
And as I came in here, I've got to say as an example of productivity, that has been replicated here.
It's always a mirror image, so some efficiency gains in the design has clearly happened here.
But this is an example of confidence in our national economy.
And I congratulate Coles.
I'm not someone who says that we should be out there getting stuck in to big business.
You know what big businesses do?
They create lots of jobs and they create economic growth.
And that's why my Government is very proud to be partnering with the private sector in so many areas of endeavour.
Because we recognise that our role is to create an economic environment to facilitate – the drivers of jobs will always be the private sector, and that's why it's so important.
From people who will make their lifetime careers working for Coles, be it in distribution, or working around the counter of our supermarkets.
Or working stacking shelves, driving the trucks that will take the goods to individual supermarkets.
Or whether it be our youngest Australians who, so many of whom, will get their start in life working part time – or they’re still at school – at Coles.
That's a great thing.
It teaches them how to move into the world of work, and is so important, as well, for the training that occurs.
This facility here is quite an extraordinary commitment.
It's a commitment to sustainability from top to bottom.
Starting on the roof, 3.5 megawatts of solar.
It’s good for the environment, but guess what, too? It’ll save money.
It’ll save money over a period of time.
That's the thing about the transition to renewables.
There's an upfront capital cost, but once your investment is made, it reduces costs over a period of time.
And what that does is enable cheaper costs to the customer.
Which is what my Government's very interested in doing given the need to address some of the cost of living pressure that we acknowledge is out there as well.
100 per cent powered by renewables from next year, but also recycling 100 per cent of cardboard and plastic waste.
You can only do that if you move to scale.
That's the only way that you'll achieve that sort of outcome.
Every bit as important, as well, is the work that you do – there's a Foodbank facility pretty close to here run by my old mate, John Robertson, and the relationship that Coles have in Western Sydney or in my electorate at Addi' Road – that contributes to make sure that we don't throw out a banana because it's the wrong bend, which I was astonished to find out, did happen.
Now, what we're making sure is that – bread that's 24 hours old, that a banana that's a different shape, a potato that looks a bit weird – is used.
Is used by people who need it, making an enormous difference as well.
But its Foodbank, or SecondBite as well.
It’s the organisations that have that important relationship with Coles.
What we see around us here is the benefit of new technology driving productivity.
Now, there's a bit of a debate, and a legitimate one, in our society about artificial intelligence, about robotics, about technology and what it will do.
And done right – we need to be vigilant about it – but done right what it can do is to liberate some of the – I think James or Lea gave the figures about how much and they did it more technically – basically, it stops people lifting up a whole bunch of really heavy stuff, which protects backs.
This is a good heath facility as well, and that is one of the things that automation can do.
Not just here, but I know because I've had the sneak preview at Redbank.
By using automation to make sure that the delivery occurs in the same order that the aisles are in at the supermarket at Blacktown or at Penrith or at Marrickville, you're also taking pressure off the workforce at those locations as well.
And one of the things we know is that people who are in manual jobs, by the time they get to my age their backs are really struggling, and it has an impact.
And so this is good for health and safety as well.
But it also is fantastic for customers, because it does provide that certainty of knowing that the goods that you want will be available where you want them and when you want them as well.
And will also lead – of course efficiency and productivity – lead to lower prices.
And we want that as well.
We want successful businesses, but we want to make sure as well that customers get those goods in to their trolley and in to their kitchen for as cheap a price as possible.
And efficient businesses mean that becomes more and more possible as well.
So congratulations to Coles.
This is an enormous investment by you.
And so I congratulate the leadership, both into terms of the day to day leadership and the CEO, but also the Board as well for having the courage to invest.
We’re talking about a one billion dollar investment in a couple of facilities.
That's a big call.
But it's a vote of confidence in our great nation.
Our great nation that – I do want to acknowledge as well the wonderful dancers who gave us a celebration of Arab culture here, which is so good.
As well, I want to congratulate Coles on the role that they continue to play in reconciliation.
That is important for our nation and for our sense of confidence as well, as we go forward.
So this is a great day.
Thank you very much for the honour of inviting me here today, as well.
As Prime Minister, I get to do some difficult things.
This is a fun thing, I’ve got to say.
This is a fun thing because it is an insight into where the world's going.
An insight into positive economic, social, environmental outcomes.
If we have the courage to not be frightened of the future, but to seize it.
Seize the opportunities which are there, which is what I want my Government to do, and what I want to do in partnership with the private sector.
So, congratulations to everyone involved.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure to be with you here at Macquarie University today for the opening of the NextSense Centre for Innovation.
To come to an opening like this is absolutely one of the highlights of my job because it is the concrete result of commitment and dedication.
Crucially, it represents the possibility of a better future for so many Australians with hearing or vision loss.
This facility is as impressive as it important, one that will soon become an incubator for world-leading innovation and best practice.
The centre will provide the platform for training and service programs to be delivered globally with increased innovation and collaboration with the Australian Hearing Hub with Cochlear, and Hearing Australia and a cluster of research, education and healthcare providers all co-located within the Macquarie Park Innovation District.
The numbers alone are worth contemplating.
The Centre will benefit more than 10,000 Australians each year, with the majority seen physically at the centre.
Consider those 10,000 for a moment – then think about all the families that will benefit as well. The friends, the loved ones, and ultimately the communities.
It truly is the greatest ripple effect, and one more reminder that nothing lifts us as a nation more than our efforts to ensure we rise together.
This Centre is also the result of co-operation and partnership.
The Federal and State governments have together provided a third of the funding. NextSense provided another third, with the remaining third covered by the generosity of philanthropists.
I thank everyone who gave. You have made a difference.
I want to express my gratitude to everyone who has been a part of it – including the 350 workers who took part in the construction.
I also want to express my excitement for everyone who will become part of it.
We can all take pride that our country has a great track record on so many levels.
We have long been at the forefront of medical and scientific innovation.
We have a universal health system built on fairness, a system that is the envy of the world.
And, driven by the great ethos of the fair go, we share an instinct for opening the doors of opportunity and possibility for all Australians.
All of that is so important to who we are as Australians.
All of that comes together here.
It is my great honour to declare the Centre for Innovation open.


Thanks Mr Speaker.
Well in spite of that contribution by the Member of for Flynn, we are maintaining our support for this legislation and for Australia's future.
And I say to the Member for Flynn that he should go to the high purity alumina factory in his electorate that is employing hundreds of workers that will benefit from Production Tax Credits.
He should go and tell the workers there that it's a waste of money that they should just be shut down.
Because at the heart of this bill are objectives that are at the very heart of the government that I'm proud to lead.
Making more things here in Australia.
Making our nation a renewable energy superpower.
Making our economy more resilient and more secure.
Making it easier for companies to invest in new projects and create new jobs, particularly in regional Australia.
Making the most of our natural resources and making the most of our people's potential.
And making sure that we seize those opportunities and share them with people and communities in every part of our nation.
Mr Speaker
Today and every day our government is working to help Australians who are under financial pressure.
Everything we're doing on cost of living:
We're boosting wages at the same time as we're delivering tax cuts - making sure that Australians can earn more and keep more of what they earn.
We're making sure that they benefit from energy bill relief.
We're making sure they benefit from cheaper childcare, from cheaper medicines, from fee free TAFE.
What we've been about is delivering economic security for people in the here and now.
But because we are a Labor government, in the finest of Labor traditions, we always have our eye on the medium and long term as well.
How do we secure our future economic development?
How do we anticipate the big changes ahead and shape them in the interests of Australians?
Building economic security for the long term by investing in the next generation of jobs and opportunities.
Delivering reform that holds no one back, and driving progress that leaves no one behind.
And that’s what our vision for a Future Made in Australia is all about.
And of course this Bill doesn’t stand alone.
It builds on the work we’ve already done.
Our National Reconstruction Fund, investing in manufacturing across our economy.
Our 500,000 fee free TAFE places - Building up the skills of our workforce.
Our investments in universities and science and cyber capability.
The new jobs and expertise in our defence manufacturing program which will particularly benefit South Australia and Western Australia.
And our comprehensive plan for cleaner, cheaper energy for all Australians, driving advanced manufacturing and opening up opportunities.
Making our future here in Australia depends on our workers and skills and education and research and infrastructure.
Government has a vital role, but we also have an important responsibility in all of this.
Private investment is absolutely essential too.
What we're about is how do we facilitate to maximise private investment in job creation in industries of the future in order to benefit our economy.
And that's where our new investment framework in this legislation is so important.
Something that those opposite don't seem to understand.
Production Tax Credits pay on success. If you don't succeed, there is no cost in a reduction of revenue.
That is why it has the support of everyone in Western Australia, it would appear, except for the LNP members - the Liberal members over there in the federal parliament.
Certainly the state WA Liberal Party support it.
I know the Nats as well, and I know that the Member for Hinkler in his heart of hearts will support Production Tax Credits as well, because he understands more than the nongs who sit on their frontbench who say no, Mr Speaker, about industry.
And that is probably why he sits up the back, because he has some knowledge of industry.
But this is quite extraordinary that the Leader of the Opposition went to Western Australia a short time ago and sort of hinted that maybe there might be a bit of movement there.
At the same time as the Shadow Treasurer was saying no – this is billions for billionaires as far as they are concerned as well.
Having no understanding of the benefit that this could give.
This is about government not replacing private investment, this is about government being a catalyst for investment.
Unlocking the private capital to build new projects, create new jobs and drive growth and prosperity.
And doing so in a way that better aligns our national security with our economic security.
Just as the US, UK, Republic of Korea, Japan, Canada and so many nations around the world are doing safeguarding themselves against the next global shock – whether its conflict, a pandemic, a cyber-attack or another international energy crisis.
Mr Speaker
This bill recognises the global economic reality.
The investments other advanced economies are making in their industrial base.
The commitment that 92 per cent of the world economy has made to net zero, including 97 per cent of Australia's trading partners.
In order to reach their goal, these countries will need more clean energy, more solar power, more wind power, more batteries and storage, and more of the resources, critical minerals and rare earths that all this technology depends on.
In other words, the world needs what Australia has.
That presents our nation with a choice that will define the future of our economy.
We can choose to carry on as we are, to stay in our lane and be satisfied with our lot and watch the world move past us.
Or we can actually move forward.
We of course can continue to extract our resources. We'll continue to export them.
But where possible, why wouldn't we want to add the value and create the jobs and make the products before they sell them back to us at a premium price?
How is that controversial in this Parliament in 2024?
We can remain the last link in the global supply chain with all the risks that carries in a more uncertain world.
Or we can aim for something better.
We can make things here.
We can add value here.
We can turn the resources the world needs into the products that the world wants.
We can build an economy where manufacturing is every bit as strong as mining.
Where Australian researchers and innovators can commercialise their ideas here and turn discovery into industry.
And in doing so, we can bring a new generation of secure, well paid jobs to our regions and to our suburbs alike.
Because if you look back to the creation of the car manufacturing industry under John Curtin and Ben Chifley and their vision for national reconstruction after the Second World War, there is an economic multiplier effect.
But importantly, Curtin appointed Chifley as the Minister for Reconstruction at the height of World War Two - That's vision.
That's making sure that you look forward and plan for it and invest in it.
Because the truth is that there is an economic multiplier effect with all of this.
It's always more than the sum of the parts.
It's an ecosystem of jobs and skills and innovation in small businesses.
This is where we want a more diversified economy and a more decentralised economy, where workers and communities in every part of the country share in this opportunity.
And that's the purpose of the community benefit principles in this Bill.
Making sure that new investment in new projects flows into local jobs and apprenticeships and supply chains.
Strengthening regional centres and, as I said at Garma earlier this month, bringing new economic empowerment to remote Indigenous communities.
So that new energy projects and new defence and security projects across Northern and Central Australia bring new careers in construction, renewable energy, the care economy, technology, infrastructure and resources to First Nations people.
Overcoming entrenched disadvantage, delivering new self-determination and creating intergenerational opportunity.
Mr Speaker
Our vision for a Future Made in Australia is about every part of Australia.
Securing Gladstone's future as a global hub for clean energy and green industry.
Expanding medical manufacturing in Victoria.
Revitalising the Upper Spencer Gulf in South Australia as a producer of green iron, steel and cement.
Reenergising the Hunter Valley with new jobs in technology and manufacturing.
Workers across WA extracting critical minerals, but also processing and refining them and turning them into products.
Because that's what Australia can do that other countries can't.
We had that combination of resources, skills, workers, space and sunlight to co-locate those links across the value chain.
Cutting transport costs, cutting energy costs, cutting emissions both here and abroad.
Creating a new comparative advantage that gives Australian manufacturing and Australian workers the capacity not just to compete, but to succeed.
We are in that position.
Those opposite want to just talk Australia down.
I want to build Australia up to seize the opportunities which are there.
And this bill is at the heart of our government's vision for a stronger, more prosperous, more resilient and more diversified Australian economy.
It reflects our confidence in Australian workers, our respect for Australian scientists and innovators, our belief in the boundless potential of our regions and our resources.
Our support for the Australian private sector, our determination to work with business and industry to bring jobs and opportunity to every part of our country.
To make the most of this moment and to make more things here.
Above all, this Bill speaks for our unwavering determination to shape the future, not wait for the future to shape us.
That is where the choice for those opposite is crystal clear.
Because you can't build a future with negativity.
You can't shape change if you're afraid of it.
You can't create good jobs if you're opposed to fair pay and conditions.
And you can't pretend to be for Queensland or Western Australia or growth or investment if you're against the jobs and investment this legislation will deliver.
Mr Speaker
Over the past two years it's become clear that the biggest threat to Australian jobs and investment is not international uncertainty, it is not changes in the global economy.
The biggest threat and the greatest risk to Australia’s future are the Liberal and National Parties.
They voted against the National Reconstruction Fund.
They voted against Energy Bill Relief.
They say fee free TAFE was a waste of money.
They attacked the CSIRO.
They call Australian manufacturing a graveyard.
They bagged Production Tax Credits as corporate welfare.
And a decade after the then Liberal Treasurer stood at this dispatch box and dared Holden to pack up and leave, they still brag about driving the car industry out of Australia.
And now they want to sacrifice a new generation of manufacturing jobs all in the name of their obsession with nuclear power.
Consider the contrast.
This legislation is about unlocking private investment in jobs and industry and energy around our nation.
On that side, the Liberals can't find one single investor for even one of their nuclear reactors.
They talk about picking winners – they are going to pick the winners to have nuclear reactors.
This is about driving the private sector.
They are going to charge the whole lot to the taxpayer even while refusing to tell people how much it will cost to build these reactors or how long it will take - at least twenty years.
And if all that is done, it will deliver a measly 4 per cent of the energy that Australia needs - costing at least three times over.
The cost of construction, the cost of higher energy bills, but importantly as well the opportunity cost.
The jobs, investment, energy and certainty Australia would miss out on right now.
The price our nation would pay for turning away from our unbeatable natural advantages, to instead go chasing after something that takes longer, costs more, and delivers less.
Mr Speaker
Let there be no doubt about it, this is the decisive decade for our nation's future.
We are in our moment right now and we must seize it.
We have everything that the world wants.
There is nowhere you'd rather be than us with the space that we have, the best solar resources in the world amongst the best wind resources in the world, amongst the best scientists in the world, and the best resources under the ground that the world needs.
The resources that will drive the economy, the global economy in the 21st century.
The only thing that Australia does not have is time to waste.
So with optimism, with determination and with purpose, I commend this Bill for a Future Made in Australia to this House.


Well, thanks very much Giaan.
And I also begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my respect to elders, past, present and emerging.
To Her Excellency, Sam Mostyn, the Governor-General of Australia, to Peter Dutton, the Leader of the Opposition, Chris Minns, the Premier of New South Wales, Matty Thistlethwaite, a very proud local member here for Kingsford-Smith, Catherine King, the Minister for Transport, other distinguished guests, particularly, of course, our Olympians. It is my great honour to welcome the Olympians home, here officially.
Of course we know, that before the plane took off yesterday, you had already etched your names into Australian sporting history.
I do want to take a moment to thank Vanessa and Qantas for once again reminding us of why every serious country in the world understands the importance of having a national airline. Bringing Australians home, and once again, looking after Australians, as you always do.
Congratulations to the Chef de Mission, with her wonderful children here, enjoying the welcome home. She’s wrangled all those athletes, for the last couple of weeks, but now she’s got a real challenge on her hands, because they are very excited children, as they should be.
Every single one of these athletes has done us proud.
As the athletes went down the stairs there, not everyone had a medal around their neck but every single one of them was worth their weight in gold. Every single one of them has done our country proud.
For those of us who were back here, staying up late, getting up early, we want you to know, that what you have done, is inspire us, give us joy, give us excitement, and lifted up our whole nation due to your performance. Whether it was winning gold, winning silver, or winning bronze.
A record number of gold medals, our best overseas number of medals ever, our most successful Olympic team ever.
But it was a success that wasn't just counted in medals. A success is counted in how you carried yourselves as athletes and as representatives of Australia.
I was talking before about some of the great moments.
Jess, you had a couple of good moments in the kayak, but you also had a great moment jumping in when your sister won a gold medal. The families, and that just said a lot about the spirit.
Just as Lauren Jackson did at the Opals game, where she wasn't on the court, but, boy, she was making a contribution to the team.
It was that spirit, that was embodied in this team.
Anna, I know that you are so proud, because that spirit does come from the top.
It's a spirit that's embodied by the fact that it wasn't just the athletes.
It's the coaches, it's the parents, it's the volunteers, it's the siblings, it's all those people at the local sport because every Olympian begins at Little Athletics or begins on the local community sporting field, in the local club.
You have certainly done us proud.
I make this point, as well, that at a time when every single Australian parent on the sideline this weekend will be having discussions with other parents about how they get their kids off their devices, out of their lounge rooms and onto the netball courts, into the swimming pools, onto the track, onto the sporting fields, what you have done is inspire a generation.
A generation who were watching there in Paris and will be thinking to themselves, I can make it in Brisbane 2032.
That will once again be Australia, hosting a fantastic Olympic Games, that I'm very confident we will get done.
I want to thank you for what you've done for Australia in the last fortnight.
I particularly want to acknowledge the legacy that you will leave.
Long after you stop getting up in the morning to do those laps up and down the pool, long after you stop riding around the velodrome in training, there will be young ones who watched you, who have been inspired by you, and who’ll replicate your deeds in coming Olympic Games.
What's more, whether they do that or not, what's important is that they participated.
We know that sport gives us a lesson.
It helps with our health, it teaches us how to relate to each other, teaches us how to win, teaches us how to not win, and to deal with adversity, which everyone has to deal with.
At a time where there's so much turmoil in the world, it also teaches us that when we come together in peace and celebration of our common humanity, the whole world benefits.
That's what the Olympic spirit is all about.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well, Prime Minister, welcome to you and your delegation. This is your third visit to Australia since your election as Prime Minister, but you and I have known each other for a very long time, and as we commented walking here to this room, we are probably the two leaders of nations around the world who are most ably to be called aviation nerds, and I look forward to a positive discussion today. Our relationship, our economic relationship, has never been firmer. There are real opportunities that are coming as well for Australia, with our Future Made in Australia plan that is about the transition to net-zero and for cooperation in that area. Importantly as well, our national security relationship is so strong, further cooperation, interoperability. The exchange that we're having between senior defence personnel working in each other's Defence Forces, is really important so that we get that people-to-people understanding of the way that our Defence Forces can further cooperate in the region, particularly given the international climate that we're in with strategic competition in the region. You and I have spoken before about the Pacific Island Forum and the important role that we can play in providing leadership in the region. We have the Pacific Island Forum coming up in just a couple of weeks, and that will be an important opportunity for us to engage with our neighbours about climate change, about economic development, about security and the need for the Pacific family to look after security in the region. We're great friends. As partners, we have now seen some 60,000 Kiwis take advantage of the changes that my Government have made to have the path to Australian citizenship. More than 30,000 have concluded that process and that's a very good thing as well, as a result of the reform that my Government introduced just a short time ago. And lastly, could I congratulate you. I mean, we think we've done pretty well at the Olympics, and we did. Our most successful ever with 18 gold medals. For a country of New Zealand’s population to win ten gold medals is quite an extraordinary performance. You're a great sporting nation, and our relationship is so strong on the sporting fields. That rivalry that's there. Our rivalry in rugby usually goes one particular way. But our rivalry in other ways as well, cements our friendships, really, and the Wahs aren't quite having the season that they had last year, but neither have my Rabbitohs so I’m not in the position to try rub anything in there. But I think that relationship that we have is just going from strength to strength, and I really look forward to today's discussion being another advance of that. And can I thank you as well from, apart from these formal gatherings that we have, you and I speak regularly. We engage regularly through our devices, and we work together to send common messages on issues including what is happening in the Middle East and calling for peace and security, which is so important for the world. So thank you, and you are so welcome here.
RT HON CHRISTOPHER LUXON MP, PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND: Well, Prime Minister, can I just say thank you so much for the hospitality and for the welcome. What we've just experienced out there on the Forecourt was absolutely amazing, and it’s incredibly special when you look down that long road to the War Memorial, it's pretty special. And can I just say thank you to you personally for a very warm welcome. Thank you for the personal friendship as well. There is no more important relationship to New Zealand than Australia. And that's why, under my Government, I want to continue to deepen our relationship even further. It's in great heart. It's in a great position, great standing, and there's even more that we want to do together as a result. It's been good to see – I think I've had 12, over half my Cabinet here in the last six months. We've got another four ministers coming in the next two months. We've had our Two by Two meetings with Finance Ministers and Climate Change Ministers but also our Foreign Ministers and our Defence Ministers as well, and so that joining together and that alignment I think in a world that we see out there together with our vital friendships and vital partnerships. Looking forward to our conversation today. It is my third time formally here. Obviously, I’ve appreciated our constant dialogue since I've become Prime Minister, but to be here at our first formal Leaders’ Meeting is very special, and we've got a lot to talk about. We obviously want to talk about security and defence and continuing the work of interoperability and alignment on the New Zealand side as we do our Defence Capability Review. As you have highlighted, we've got a lot of work to do together in the Pacific with our Pacific Island colleagues and friends and leaders. And as we go to PIF we want to reinforce the centrality of Pacific Island Forum where we actually have Pacific solutions to Pacific challenges, and reinforce that centrality. And of course, on the economic front, we've made tremendous progress, and so we’re working hard on scraping the barnacles off the bottom of the boat and making sure that there can more harmonisation through our close working together economically so it's just much more frictionless and more seamless for our businesses to do Trans-Tasman trade with each other. Of course, on the people-to-people front I again, just personally want to thank you, because I know personally having drove that citizenship for Kiwis that have been here, there's about 60,000 applicants now, which is absolutely fantastic. And we really appreciate you personally investing and making sure that pathway and that route is available to people. So I appreciate that and I also appreciate the acknowledgement that New Zealand won the Olympics. I thought you had some outstanding performances from Australian athletes, they were phenomenal. But it's good to know that New Zealand outperformed Australia. Thank you very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Good evening, everyone — namaskar.
It’s such a pleasure to be here with you all.
I’d like to thank the India Australia Business &amp; Community Alliance for hosting tonight’s awards, and doing so much to strengthen Australia’s relationship with India over the past decade.
I also acknowledge the High Commissioner of India to Australia, His Excellency Mr Gopal Baglay.
Australia’s Minister for Trade and Tourism, Senator Don Farrell and ACT Chief Minister, Andrew Barr. 
Tonight is an opportunity to celebrate the enduring friendship between Australia and India and to honour some of the outstanding people who make our relationship even stronger.
Indian-Australians are creating their own success in so many fields of endeavour.
From business and enterprise to science, culture, sport and the arts, Australia’s large and growing Indian communities add so much dynamism and talent to our country.
You enrich who and what were as a nation, in all of our promise and all of our possibility, continuing a wonderful and proud story that has been written by generations of Indian-Australians.
And it is a story that continues.
It is a story that will be an integral part of our future. The better future that you show us is possible through the sheer power of your example.
Over the past ten years, these Awards have recognised the best of the best, showcasing some 1,700 success stories promoting exchange and collaboration between our two countries and building a large alumni network that includes many business and community leaders.
I’m pleased to say that this year’s awards come at a time when the potential for growth in the all-important Australia-India relationship has never been greater.
We’re comprehensive strategic partners.
We’re creating new opportunities for businesses through our Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement — something we hope to build on with a Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement.
India is Australia’s fifth-largest trading partner, with two-way trade totalling almost $50 billion last year.
But I know we’re capable of even more.
There’s so much untapped potential.
In fact, our India Economic Strategy says India has more growth opportunities for Australian businesses than any other market to 2035.
It’s not hard to see why.
India is already the world’s largest nation by population — and it’s on track to be the world’s third-largest economy by the end of this decade.
Australia welcomes this.
India’s emergence as an economic giant is something we can contribute to, and benefit from.
That’s why we’re delivering a new roadmap for our economic engagement with India, focusing and accelerating our efforts in the most promising sectors and exploring innovative ways to grow our relationship in a way that brings benefit to both our nations.
Just as importantly, we want to invest in our greatest resource of all: our people.
It’s people like you who will move the relationship forward in the years ahead.
You’re the ones with the drive, expertise, language skills, networks and entrepreneurial mindset to open doors for businesses and governments alike.
You know how to navigate the cultures of our two countries.
And you create the personal connections that truly bind us.
In the words of Andrew Charlton, the Member for Parramatta and Chair of the Parliamentary Friends of India -
"The Indian diaspora has animated Australia’s relationship with India and built a human bridge between our two nations."

I couldn’t agree more.
Last year, Andrew and I visited Harris Park, otherwise known as Sydney’s Little India.
We were joined by Communications Minister Michelle Rowland, who represents the neighbouring seat of Greenway.
The welcome we received was one of great warmth and hospitality.
The energy and generosity of our Australian-Indian community is truly second to none.
And over the years, you’ve blossomed into an extraordinary and diverse community, now numbering more than one million Australians.
You’re our fastest-growing large migrant community — and the second-largest overseas-born migrant group.
India is also our second-largest source of international students.
International education is an important asset to our country.
But international education is not a one-way street.  
Not everyone can afford to come to Australia to study.
But Australian universities can go to them.  
And that’s exactly what is happening.
Last year it was announced that Deakin University and the University of Wollongong would establish campuses in India’s GIFT City in Gujarat.
Both universities are the first foreign universities to set up campuses in India, representing a significant milestone in the Australia-India relationship.
It’s good for Indian students and good for Australian universities, and great for our relationship.
People of Indian heritage are contributing their energy, enterprise and values to Australia, strengthening the great tapestry of our multicultural society thread by thread.
And deepening the relationship between our nations, through those direct business to business connections.
Building these networks is a key focus of the Centre for Australia India Relations and I’m very pleased that they are partnering with Cricket Australia to host a significant business delegation from India during this summer’s Border-Gavaskar series.
Canberra will be part of this with Manuka Oval hosting the first match between India and the PM’s XI for 20 years.
On the field, Australia and India compete to be the best in the world.
Off the field, we work together to build a better world.
Today, our relationship is stronger, deeper, and more consequential than ever before.
And our people aren’t just at the heart of it – they are the heart of it.
Tonight’s finalists are magnificent representatives of our Indian-Australian communities.
Through your energy and innovation, you’re helping advance the Australia–India relationship.
And through your drive and entrepreneurialism, you’re bringing the benefits and riches of a beautiful and diverse culture to our country.
You’re making Australia better.
Stronger.
And more inclusive.
And you’re following in the footsteps of alumni who are making an incredible impact across our society — in fields as diverse as health, hospitality, education, cybersecurity, and more.
So to all of you here tonight, I want to say thank you — and keep doing what you’re doing.
Friends, yesterday, India celebrated its 78th Independence Day. And it is so deeply worth celebrating.
More than three quarters of century on from that most extraordinary of days, India is the world’s largest democracy, the fastest-growing major economy, and a nation delivering on its vast social and economic promise.
With this opportunity, Australia and India have a lot to offer each other.
That is why I have already visited India twice as Prime Minister.
That’s why I’m determined — just as Prime Minister Modi is — to make sure our friendship goes from strength to strength.
To keep turning the deep affection between us into tangible benefits for our people and economies.
So I commend the IABCA on a decade devoted to strengthening the ties between our nations.
I wish you all an enjoyable evening, and many years of business and personal success to come.
Dhanyavaad.
Thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It such a great pleasure to join you all here in Five Dock for the joy of Ferragosto, and I thank your wonderful local member Sally Sitou for inviting me along today.
It is especially a pleasure to be here with you as Australia’s first Prime Minister with an Italian surname – and as a very proud son of the Inner West.
The story of Italian Australians is deeply and proudly woven into the fabric of our nation.
Over so many generations, Italian families have made their lives here and enriched this country beyond measure.
A big part of Australia’s beating heart is Italian, and where we are gathered together today has long been such a key part of it.
What we celebrate today is a beautiful and rich part of the Australian identity, a part of our nation that has its roots both here and in that remarkable country on the other side of the world.
An Australia without Italians is unimaginable.
If anything, an Australia without nonnas is even harder to imagine.
Australian multiculturalism has been a great achievement.
Our breadth as a society has long been a strength.
We celebrate our wonderful differences – just as we are today.
And, like an orchestra, we bring our diverse qualities together in the unifying harmony of our national identity.
Today we also celebrate all that this festival has become.
A bit like all those success stories that had their humble beginnings in the family garage, Ferragosto began in 1998 in a carpark in Garfield Street.
Twenty-six years on, you’d be hard-pressed to find a carpark anywhere that could contain this.
Ferragosto has grown into one of Sydney’s most popular Italian festivals, its big and welcoming atmosphere drawing in 120,000 people every year.
So much of the credit for what we all get to enjoy today goes to so many people over more than a quarter of a century.
Five Dock’s Main Street Committee, which kicked this off in the first place.
The local community that got right behind it.
The Council that has been an ever-growing source of support.
All the local businesses, entertainers, community organisations and residents.
And every Sydneysider from outside the area who has come to take part, and to enjoy everything that’s on offer.
What infuses it all, of course, is the great Australian-Italian spirit in all the richness of its heritage, its culture and its faith.
Ferragosto is something to be proud of.
And it’s something for all of us to take heart from.
Because in it, we see so much of what is best about our country.
Thank you for having me. Have a wonderful day.


It’s an honour to be here among so many incredible leaders, and so many incredible women.
Tonight we honour the extraordinary achievements of rural Australia's women leaders.
This is a night to recognise excellence — and to celebrate resilience.
A lot is asked of rural and regional communities like yours.  
We ask you to grapple with geography in a way most Australians will never have to.
But in facing these challenges — the volatility of the weather, the tyranny of distance — you show us what you’re made of.
You show us how you work together.
How you look out for those around you.
And how you push for a better future for the places you live in and love.
One of the many privileges of this job is that it takes you to every part of our great country.
On many occasions, I’ve visited regional communities dealing with natural disasters and their aftermath.
In those, very worst of times you see the best of the Australian character.
The kindness and the courage that binds rural communities together.  
And the same bravery and determination that reveals itself in adversity – can be seen in the success stories we celebrate tonight.
Tonight we honour your extraordinary achievements.
As producers, leaders, entrepreneurs, creators.
Your stories are as rich and diverse as the land you work on.
Whether you’re embracing sustainability and contributing to our drive towards net zero or seizing the possibilities of the digital economy or nurturing people and places to be healthy and strong.
Your courage and determination drives you to make your ideas a reality.
But it’s your creativity which sets you apart.
If you’re Belle Binder, you’re inspired by working on Australia’s farms and making sure a steady flow of workers get to experience it. 
For Tanya Egerton, it’s about seeing the “opportunity” in op-shops, and helping First Nations communities participate in the circular economy. 
For Kate Lamason, who on discovering 99% of tuna consumed in Australia came from overseas, co-founded a company using sustainable, Australian-caught seafood.
Rebecca Keeley’s driving force is ensuring rural Australians have easier access to healthcare.
Nikki Atkinson is turning our beautiful Merino wool into wedding dresses and formal wear.
Grace Larson is helping kids in the bush get better health outcomes and helping their parents learn CPR and first aid.
Mandy Walker with her work in engineering and heavy duty diesel repairs, is helping boost the economic resilience of her community.
Australia’s regions are full of stories like yours.
Of women rolling up their sleeves and getting stuck in.
Investing in the future of their communities.
And strengthening the future of our nation.
As for that future, I want Australia to be more self-reliant — to stand on our own two feet.
And I want to make sure every part of our country shares in the opportunities ahead.
That’s what my Government’s plan for A Future Made in Australia is all about.
Driving new investment in making things here.
Seizing the opportunities that come from the move to renewable energy.
Creating an economy that is more diversified and resilient.
And bringing a new wave of industry and opportunity to our regions and suburbs alike.
And I’m pleased there are so many here tonight who share that ambition.
We want every Australian – in every part of our country - to share in the opportunities ahead.
That means drawing on the talents of our whole population.
 This is why we’ve put women at the centre of our economic plans.
That’s no accident - we’re the first government in Australian history to have a majority of female members.
Everywhere across our agenda — from lifting wages, to closing the gender pay gap, to paying super on paid parental leave — we're looking to create a better deal for women and girls.
This work is being done right across government — not just by me or the Minister for Women, Katy Gallagher, or our new Assistant Minister for Women, Kate Thwaites but every minister, every day.
And it’s also why I’m here tonight.
To our finalists and winners — congratulations!
You remind us how important rural and regional areas are to our economy and our identity and our Australian story.
Backing the people and places you live in and love takes hard work and determination. But the benefits are beyond measure.
Thank you for everything you do — and have a wonderful evening.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It gives me great pleasure to be back in Townsville for this significant event.
I’ve been to every single Bush Summit since the first one in Dubbo in 2019.
It is a catalyst for an important conversation, and I thank News Corp for its commitment to keeping it going. 
It’s a conversation about the challenges of the present.
It’s also a conversation about the possibilities of the future – a better future that we can make right here in Australia.
A future in which the mighty state of Queensland is pivotal.
At the heart of what we so loosely call the bush is a powerful truth.
And that is that the communities beyond the capitals, in all their variety, do so much to take the beautiful, audacious idea of Australia – and turn it into a reality that is even more extraordinary.
Regional Australians deal with challenges not known in the capitals – and the strength with which you emerge from them ultimately strengthens all of us.
With so much of the nation’s prosperity generated in our regions, we understand how important regions are in building a stronger Australia.
We also understand how critical it is for people and families across regional Australia to have the support they need, whether it’s access to quality services or relief from cost-of-living pressures.
Similarly, we know how critical it is that we get it right when it comes to the unique inheritance that is our natural environment.
Here in Townsville, our minds inevitably turn to what is one of the world’s greatest wonders: the Great Barrier Reef.
The Reef is a source of national pride and amazement. It is also a significant source of employment, generating 60,000 jobs.
There are few places more fitting to talk about it than Townsville, which is the national headquarters of Australia’s marine management and science.
The Reef belongs to all of us – now and future generations. That’s why the Government I lead is investing in it.
I am proud that as part of that investment, we are putting nearly $200 million into seven programs to boost efforts to protect and manage the Reef.
They will be about improving water quality and protecting the Reef, with flow-on benefits for biodiversity, ecosystem resilience and land management in Reef catchments.
The programs will:

deliver projects in priority catchments to increase efforts to reduce nutrient runoff
support healthy wetland habitats, protect Reef biodiversity and build ecosystem resilience
support on-ground, community-led activities to improve water quality
support job creation and economic recovery for Reef-dependent industries and regional communities.

For many who come to Townsville, their introduction to the Great Barrier Reef is right here.
Since it was opened by Bob Hawke in 1987, Reef HQ – the Great Barrier Reef Aquarium – has seen 4.5 million visitors pass through its doors.
Unfortunately, those doors have been closed since 2019. Funds allocated by the previous government weren’t enough for the full rebuild that was necessary.
That changes now.
A Labor Prime Minister opened it. I am pleased to announce that a Labor Government is helping save it.
We will rebuild the Great Barrier Reef Aquarium with an extra $100 million investment.
Bringing total funding to $180 million, work can now begin on rebuilding Australia’s most cherished living coral reef exhibit to educate visitors about the realities of the reef, and the responsibility we all share to look after it.
The additional investment will enable the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to deliver a new purpose-built facility that will deliver global excellence in tropical reef education and provide immersive experiences.
It’s only right that Townsville, which plays such an integral role in the defence of our nation, should also play a part in teaching us to protect it.
And it’ll be great for the economy, too. The project is expected to create over 1000 jobs and give Townsville’s economy an enormous boost.
We look to the future with clear eyes, and a firm grasp of the present.
Today – and every day – my Government is working to help Australians who are under financial pressure.
We're boosting wages and delivering tax cuts, making sure that Australians can earn more and keep more of what they earn.
We're making sure Australians benefit from energy bill relief.
From cheaper childcare and cheaper medicines.
We’re partnering with states and territories to deliver 500,000 Fee-Free TAFE and VET places over 2023 to 2026, with around a third of enrolments located in inner and outer regional locations.
And we’re continuing to open Regional University Study Hubs – including across Queensland – to bring university closer to students in the regions. Because opportunity must be available to every Australian.
We’ve established the Housing Australia Future Fund to help deliver tens of thousands of new homes – including in regional, rural and remote areas.
The Regional First Home Buyer Guarantee supports eligible home buyers to purchase a home in a regional area with a deposit of as little as 5 per cent.
The Government is also committed to improving the health outcomes of Australians living in regional, rural and remote areas.
In the last budget, we allocated funding for a further 29 additional Medicare Urgent Care Clinics.
This will bring the total number of Medicare UCCs across Australia to 87. You can walk in any day of the week and all you need is your Medicare card, not your credit card.
Twenty-four are already open to patients in regional, rural and remote areas.
That includes one here in Townsville, which opened just before Christmas.
In that time, it’s already had 10,500 visits. Imagine the difference that’s made to the hardworking staff at Townsville University Hospital emergency department.
Imagine the difference that’s making for the people of Townsville.
Then replicate that across the country. That’s what we’re doing – and we’re not stopping.
My Government is making record investments in regional Australia, including $1 billion for regional grant programs over three years, to invest in much-needed community and economic infrastructure in the regions and $1.1 billion towards upgrading regional communications infrastructure across Australia.
We’re working to defeat the tyranny of distance and close the digital divide. To make it easier for those who already live in the regions, and to make the regions even more enticing – for individuals, for families and for business.
This is just one area where our pay rises for workers in essential services makes so much sense.
Whether it’s for early childhood educators or aged care workers, higher wages make it easier to recruit staff and keep them – and the services they provide make it easier for residents to stay.
It’s about building communities and strengthening them, making our regions as viable as they are beautiful.
That includes ensuring our regional communities are safe.
The Federal Government supports our state and territory counterparts and their law enforcement agencies through the provision of resources, technical assistance, and co-ordination functions.
Crucially, we’re boosting investment in our Northern Bases to ensure Townsville strengthens even further its vital role in the defence of our nation
Part of ensuring the health and strength of communities is acknowledging that just as each community is unique, each community contains a diversity of views.
A core job of government is to listen to those views – all of them.
Nor are communities static. As people move to our regions, we have to understand the shifting pressures – and invest in services accordingly.
And we keep building.
We’re committed to a 10-year infrastructure investment pipeline to deliver a sustainable program of nationally significant transport infrastructure projects across Australia.
We’re helping farmers and their communities prepare for the next drought and build climate resilience with the Future Drought Fund program.
We’re also building resilience into Australia’s future as a renewable energy superpower.
As we work to harness more and more of the sunshine Australia has in such abundance, farmers and solar farmers alike are finding mutual benefits.
Of course, there’s always room for improvement. Community consultation has to get better. Developers need to do better. This is all within reach.
Meanwhile, many of our farmers, producers and miners are already feeling the benefits from the resumption of Australia’s trade with China.
This is the result of a lot of careful, patient and deliberate work to return to a more mature relationship between our two countries.
It’s not without challenges, but we agree where we can, disagree where we must, and engaging in the national interest.
The numbers speak for themselves.
From April 2023 to April 2024, Australia exported around $15 billion of previously affected products to China – including coal, cotton, barley and wine – compared to $1.5 billion during the same period the year before.
Keeping the focus more local, China was Queensland’s biggest export market in 2023-24, with over $5 billion of previously affected products sent to China.
The ripple from every ship heading from our shores towards a Chinese port helps lift a community. A region. And ultimately our nation.
And as we work to get more exports heading out, we’re keeping a close eye on what imports are coming in.
The Government has invested record new biosecurity funding of more than $1 billion over four years.
This will ensure that, for the first time in Australia’s history, we have a sustainable biosecurity funding model to protect our agricultural industry, our natural environment and our way of life.
As we work to get things right in the present, my Government is investing in a Future Made in Australia to bring new jobs and opportunities to communities across the country.
Making our future here in Australia is about making the most of our nation’s potential and making sure everyone shares in the benefits.
The National Reconstruction Fund will help support, diversify and transform Australian industry and the economy across priority areas.
As just one example, my Government is investing $70 million right here in the Townsville Hydrogen Hub. This will create over 200 jobs including roles in construction, trades and engineering.
There’s no reason for us to remain the last link in the global supply chain with all the risks that carries in a more uncertain world.
With a confidence underwritten by Australia’s track record of achievement and innovation, we know we have what it takes to make things here.
Regional Australia is home to the resources the world needs. We know we can turn them into the products that the world wants.
We can continue the great story regional Australia has long been writing by building an economy where manufacturing is every bit as strong as mining.
An economy built with confidence on the skills, talent and hard work of our people.
An economy where Australian researchers and innovators can commercialise their ideas here and turn discovery into industry.
And in doing so, we can bring a new generation of secure, well-paid jobs.
The bright lights have never been the preserve of the big capitals – our vision for a Future Made in Australia is about every part of Australia.
Making the most of our natural resources, protecting our natural assets, making the most of our people's potential.
And making sure that as we seize those opportunities, we share them with people and communities right across our nation, right across our regions.
A better future for the bush is a better future for all Australians.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's great to be back in WA. This is the fourth time that we've had the full Ministry meet here in WA. Three times in Perth, and, of course, up in Port Hedland as well. This is, in fact, my twenty-third visit to WA as Prime Minister, and so I’m on track to fulfil the commitment that I made. And Roger and I got together last night, and we will be continuing to run into each other over the next couple of days, where we've got some important work to do. Today, of course, we were down at HMAS Stirling in the fine electorate of Brand hosted by Minister King and the AUKUS arrangements that we announced, 200 apprenticeships for Western Australia. Good jobs, high wage, high value jobs, making a contribution to serving our nation, but also making a contribution to serving the families of those workers who will have that secure work into the future. And as we went along the line, we met many of the people working for ASC or studying through TAFE at the local TAFE there, so many of them were local, you’ll be pleased to know, Premier, from your electorate down there. So that was a very good thing that we did, and over the next couple of days, we'll be talking education, talking infrastructure, talking the economy, talking resources. Yesterday, we were down at Collie. The first Prime Minister to visit in 40 years, I’m told. So we were at the site of Peter Dutton’s nuclear fantasy, and what we saw there was actual construction. 500 workers on site building what is an extraordinary battery facility that will have enough storage to power 860,000 homes. Just five kilometres away another battery storage facility is being built by the private sector, again, will be able to power 800,000 homes and provide that storage. The transmission lines are there because of the coal fired power station that will close in 2027. So, a real example of the contrast that we have here in WA. Your Government and my Government with real plans, real jobs, real energy transformation and making an enormous difference here, with, of course, gas being important for the firming capacity as well. So we, in the past few weeks – you’ll be pleased as well – last time I was in WA just a few weeks ago, on the back of our early educators announcement, a 15 per cent wage increase following our pay increase for aged care workers, that service delivery being so important. The work that we're doing on housing. Later this week, I'll host you Premier again at National Cabinet, where we'll be dealing with family and domestic violence and the need to stop the scourge of violence against women that has occurred and has escalated over a period of time, and we'll be working constructively on that. And can I just thank you, Premier, for the warm welcome that you always give us in WA. For the cooperation where we're working through on so many issues, on housing, education, health, energy, on the economy, that is really working. And of course, transport infrastructure here as well, with the roll-out of Metronet, is a subject dear to my heart, as you know, and it's terrific that there's so much happening here. So thank you, Premier. And could I ask you to make some comments?
ROGER COOK, PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Well first of all, welcome back to Western Australia. It's the fourth visit for the Federal Cabinet. It's an enviable record in terms of commitment to work with the people of Western Australia and understand the issues on this side of the country. And I’m almost tempted to say welcome home to you, because you've come here so often, Prime Minister. But it's great to have you all here again. Western Australia is the economic engine room of the nation, and we intend to keep it that way. We have plans to make sure that we continue to diversify our economy, make sure that we continue to leverage our strengths and resources, oil and gas and broad acre farming to really diversify our economy to go forward. But we know that even though Western Australia has the lowest unemployment rate, the fastest economic growth in the country, there are people who are doing it tough. So, the measures that we're being able to work with you on around cost of living relief, first your tax reform agenda, but also providing $700 electricity credit to every Western Australian household. A partnership between your Government and the West Australian Government is a really important part of contributing towards those who are doing it tough at the moment. Housing, of course, continues to be a key focus I know, of your Government, and we continue to face challenges in that area, and building capability and capacity of our housing construction industry is an important part of the increase of the housing stock, not just here in  the metropolitan area, but right throughout the regions of WA who will be an important part of that economic diversity piece. It's great to partner with you, Prime Minister, on the diversification of the Western Australian economy. The renewable energy that we have the potential to generate in WA as part of the energy transition means that we'll not only be able to decarbonise our economy, but be part of important trade relationships to decarbonise our friends in Southeast Asia. And I was able to spend some time with the Minister for Trade this morning at the Korea-Australia Business Council here in Perth, taking place here because they understand the important role that we will play as part of this energy transition process. And of course, Western Australia wants to play its part as part of the AUKUS partnership. And we are very excited about the opportunities around frigate construction, optional crude vessel construction, and other parts of the maintenance and sustainment of the nuclear vessel fleets that will be visiting Western Australia, in fact as they did today. So once again, thank you very much for your partnership. Thank you very much for your understanding of the important issues for Western Australians, and we continue to look forward to working with you on these important projects.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a privilege to be here with you today.
The arrival of Street Side Medics in Melbourne represents a fresh chapter in a great Australian story – a story that begins with a great Australian and former Young Australian of the Year, Dr Daniel Nour.
I know Dr Nour is keen to emphasise what a team effort it’s been. To quote him:
There’s nothing special about me ... but with a number of other people we’ve built something amazing.
While the second part of that statement is rock solid, I’ll very gently disagree with the first.
This all began with Dr Nour and his vision of how to ensure that people who are experiencing homelessness don’t fall through the cracks and miss out on the healthcare they need.
Homelessness is the tough reality for too many Australians. My Government is making meaningful progress in tackling it. Among our measures is the $9.3 billion, 5-year National Agreement on Social Housing and Homelessness.
This provides funding to the states to help those who are either experiencing or at risk of homelessness, and supports the effective functioning of Australia’s social housing and homelessness services sectors.
We’ll keep working, but we know lasting solutions will take time.
Among the many challenges homeless people face, health looms large.
So much stems from the barriers that stand between homeless people and access to medical care. Barriers that span the spectrum from cost to lack of awareness to mistrust of the medical system.
Street Side Medics erase those barriers. In Dr Nour’s words:
Lots of people refuse help but no one refuses kindness and what we show to them is we don’t need to provide just medical care, we can have a conversation and a friendly face and that makes a world of difference.
That world of difference is made possible by the energy, compassion and selflessness of the army of Street Side Medics volunteers.
Nurses, GPs, neurologists, physiotherapists – you name it, they’re out there treating everything from wounds to cancer, doing blood tests, administering vaccinations and performing ultrasounds
We all look forward to the day when Street Side Medics are no longer required.
Until that day comes, you are a source of light in the darkness, working through the night and changing lives for the better.
And in the process, you are making our country better.
You deserve the gratitude – and support – of all Australians.


Friends, this is an anniversary truly worth celebrating. Thirty years since delegates to the 1994 Australian Labor Party National Conference took the decision to adopt Affirmative Action with the aim of equal representation.
I am proud I was one of the delegates to that Conference.
Ten years after the great Susan Ryan gave us the Sex Discrimination Act, we took the crucial step of adopting quotas for women to be pre-selected in winnable seats.
Every day we come into this place we see the wonderful, history-making consequence: Australia’s first ever female majority government.
And Australia’s first ever female majority government keeps delivering result after result.
We have cut the gender pay gap to a record low of 11.5 per cent.
The number of women employed is up and we now have a record number of women in the workforce.
We have established paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave because no woman should ever have to choose between her financial security and her physical and mental safety.
We have expanded Paid Parental Leave – and we’ll soon be adding super to it.
We have lifted wages in aged care and child care, two industries dominated by women.
We’ve made child care cheaper – because we know that when we make it easier for families and give them more choice, it makes things better for women.
And on Friday I announced our latest step in our work against family and domestic violence, a package that includes an investment of $3.9 billion in a new National Access to Justice Partnership.
This is the biggest single Commonwealth investment in legal assistance ever.
This – all of this – is what happens with women at the table. More women at the table means getting more done for women.
Thanks to Affirmative Action, we have come to better reflect the society we are elected to represent.
We have become more diverse. We have become more whole.
And with women doing so much to drive the steady broadening of our caucus and our perspective, we have become more representative. More truly Australian.
With every Labor woman who has entered Parliament, we have better served our great nation.
And Labor governments have been better because we embraced Affirmative Action three decades ago.
You can pick any moment in history and be reminded of the one lesson that has been repeated with great clarity through the ages: Men don’t have all the answers. I don’t believe anyone’s going to ask me to prove that statement.  Labor women have been responsible for so many firsts – and they will always have an honoured place in the Labor pantheon.
For everything they are, and everything they have been.
For everything they achieved.
For every door they pushed open. 
For every election where it got that bit easier for the women who wanted to follow.
As we look to the future, we concentrate on ensuring that we don’t just have firsts, but that we continue to have equal and diverse representation in our party.
True to character, the Liberals mocked Affirmative Action when we introduced it and they mock it now. They did not see a case for intervening to accelerate a process that had been so painfully incremental.
With no commitment to advancing women in their ranks, they took no action at all, assuming things would somehow work out.
Their faith in that was as misguided as their belief in trickle-down economics.
The result has been similarly woeful – an embarrassingly lopsided party room where women make up just 29 per cent.
As their NSW branch has so stunningly reminded us in recent weeks, it’s important to recognise when there is a case for intervention.
Thirty years on, the result of Labor’s audacious step is clear, as is the contrast.
The Liberals yearn to wind back historic gains. Labor makes history.
We keep doing the work. As much as today is a celebration of a turning point in the past, and where it has made it possible for us to be in the present it is also a collective commitment to the future – and a Parliament as great and broad as this country.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Every year, Minerals Week gives us the opportunity to celebrate the contribution the resources industry makes to our nation.
Tonight, this great hall is home to some of our nation’s biggest exporters and employers.
Some of the oldest firms in Australian business - and some of the most exciting new growth stories in the Australian economy.  
All of you belong to an industry that has been creating good jobs and driving national prosperity for more than a century.
And the measure of your success has always run deeper than longevity.
As an industry, your story is much more than a tale of endurance through times of change, or resilience in the face of uncertainty.
You have endured because you have evolved.
Big firms and small, old and new, you have put yourselves at the cutting edge of exploration and evolution. 
Together you have built a rich history, by looking to the future.
Time and time again, you have prospered by anticipating change, embracing it and working to shape it.
Your industry has had the courage and foresight to seek new markets in our region and build new trade connections with the world.
Not just benefitting from the growth and transformation in Asia but helping to power it and secure it.
You’ve led the way in adopting new technologies to unlock productivity gains.
You’ve set new global standards in sustainability and workplace safety.
And you have built new infrastructure and brought secure, well-paid jobs to regional communities across Australia.
This is a record of a profound achievement.                                                                                                        Together, we can make it the foundation for even greater success. 
Because the biggest global economic shift since the industrial revolution is underway.
And the resources industry is front and centre in our Government’s plan for Australia to make the most of this transformative opportunity.
Already, 92 per cent of the global economy is signed up to net zero, including 97 per cent of our trading partners.
The global imperative to cut emissions is Australia’s opportunity to grow our economy – and diversify it.  
That’s what I mean when I talk about a future made in Australia.
Making more things here.
Adding value here.
Turning the resources the world needs into products the world wants.
And making our economy more resilient and more secure in the process.
Because a strong, growing, productive economy benefits us all.
Our Future Made in Australia strategy is an economic plan focused on creating good jobs, driving new investment and delivering stronger growth.
And the resources industry is at the core of it.
Because every nation committed to net zero will need more of the resources and technology that go into producing clean energy and green steel and cement.
Including the metals, rare earths and other critical minerals that Australia has in abundance.
That’s why Madeleine King always says:
“The road to net zero runs through the Australian resources industry.”
And that road is no goat track - it’s a global superhighway.
The International Energy Agency projects that – without any change to current policies - mineral demand for clean energy technologies will double between now and 2030.
But if – as you would expect - countries continue to ramp up their efforts to meet net zero, demand will triple by 2030 and quadruple by 2040.
This points to the scale of the opportunity before us.
And it speaks to the need for urgency that drives us.
Because while the world wants what Australia has – it won’t wait around for us.
If we hesitate, or hang back.
If we let points of disagreement delay us.
If we abandon co-operation for conflict.
If we listen to those who spend all their time talking Australia down and saying our companies can’t compete and our workers shouldn’t try. 
Then the world will go right past us.
You understand that.
You didn’t build your businesses with negativity, you don’t look to the future as something to fear.
You face it with optimism and determination.
And that’s the spirit of our Government’s investment in your industry.
Including the landmark new funding that this year’s Budget delivered for GeoScience Australia.
Launching a new era in minerals exploration and enabling the first comprehensive map of Australia’s critical minerals and strategic materials
We know that when the Minerals Council talks about ‘unearthing the future’ – that also means unearthing the next generation of skilled workers.
That’s why we have delivered 500,000 fee-free TAFE places and are expanding access to university in the regions and suburbs.
We’re creating clean energy apprenticeships and driving new investment in innovation, robotics and automation.
And we are investing in our international relationships as well.  
The patient, deliberate and calibrated approach our Government has taken to stabilising our ties with China has removed more than $20 billion in trade impediments.
Delivering significant benefits for Australian coal and copper, as well as our farmers, growers and producers.
We are opening and expanding markets in India and South East Asia.
And we have created a new critical minerals framework with the United States of America.
Those of you who were with us in Washington DC last year, know that American interest in Australian resources goes all the way to the highest levels of government and business.
Of course, the most significant new investment our Government is making in your industry are our Future Made in Australia Production Tax Credits
In the Parliament, I’ve heard some call this: ‘corporate welfare’ and ‘billions for billionaires’.
That tough talk tends to drop off as they get closer to workplaces, mines, processing plants and ports.
My colleagues and I are clear about where we stand – whichever part of the country we are in.
We are proud to be investing in jobs in the regions.
We are proud to be backing the expansion of a world-leading Australian industry.
And we know tax credits built on rewarding success, in areas crucial to our comparative advantage and economic resilience, serve the national interest.
This is about attracting private capital, not replacing it.
Aligning our national security and our economic security.
And making Government a catalyst for new investment in critical minerals – at every stage.
Creating new mining jobs, processing and refining jobs, technology and manufacturing jobs.
Forging these new links in the resources value chain, right here in Australia.
Making the most of our unique combination of national strengths – our sunlight, our skilled workers and our space – to build new industrial centres powered by clean energy.  
And in doing so, creating a new and lasting comparative advantage for Australia.
The other essential role Government has to play is in streamlining investment – and speeding-up the approval process for projects.
We know that for far too many years, there have been far too many barriers between regional and remote communities and good job-creating projects.
We’ve made major investments in accelerating approvals for renewable energy and critical minerals, in particular.
And we are focused on building a stronger and better framework – that delivers long-term clarity, certainty and confidence to industry, investors and locals alike.
Getting this right will deliver better and faster decision-making.
And one of the key priorities we have is ensuring that remote communities are empowered by the dignity, security and intergenerational opportunity of good jobs.
In one forum or another, I’ve been talking about building these links between mining, renewable energy, skills and manufacturing since practically my first day as Labor Leader.
What’s changed the most in those five years is that we are no longer dealing in the language of ‘possible’ and ‘potential’.
We’re no longer seeing companies and communities acting in the absence of Government leadership – or in spite of Government policy.
Instead, business, workers and every level of government are working together to lead the way.
Bringing together resources, energy and manufacturing to secure the economic future of their communities.
I saw that in Collie last week, during my 23rd visit to Western Australia as Prime Minister.Collie is concrete proof of two essential facts.
One, the shift to clean energy is not a theory, or a distant future prospect.
It’s happening, right now.
And two, the resources industry is helping drive it.
In Collie, the catalyst for change has been the staged closure of the coal-fired power stations.
That’s a big thing for a small town, where – for decades - mining jobs and power station jobs have been built on coal.
But the community together with business and the WA government – is rising to the challenge.
The new big battery – just up the road from the power station - will employ 500 people in construction and store enough power for up to 860,000 homes.
And that’s just the beginning.
International Graphite are developing a new plant to process Australian graphite mined in the south west, a vital component in making batteries.
Magnium Australia are using CSIRO-developed technology in a net-zero magnesium refinery
And new electric arc furnace technology can bring hundreds more jobs in green steel.
Together, the people of Collie are building a new generation of prosperity and security.
Not in 2040 or 2050. Right now.
That’s what happens when we work to shape the future, rather than waiting for the future to shape us.
And this same story is being written in regional communities in every part of our country.
I’ve seen it myself in Gladstone and the Hunter, Tassie and the Illawarra, the Pilbara and the Upper Spencer gulf.
Every time I see Australians engaged in this work of transformation, I come away more optimistic than ever about the future of our nation.
And more determined than ever for Australia to seize the opportunities of this decisive decade.
That brings me back to the story of your industry and its enduring success.
Because there have always been other countries that have some of the same resources we do, in similar quantities.
More often than not they have larger populations, and people willing to work for less money in more dangerous conditions.
But at every turn your companies have shown that Australia doesn’t compete and succeed by copying that model, by cutting wages or cutting corners.
We make our own way.
We succeed by setting standards in quality and safety, productivity and sustainability.
We prosper by drawing on all our nation’s resources – not just what’s under the soil and the seabed - but the skills and smarts of our workers and researchers and innovators.
And we grow and thrive by playing to our strengths as a great trading nation, engaged with our region.
As a great investment destination, a stable democracy, a multicultural society with diaspora communities that give us a family connection to every nation on earth.
And a dynamic, outward-looking economy where wages and productivity grow together.
This is how we can compete and succeed in the years ahead.
This is how Australia can make this decisive decade our own.
This is how we will unearth the future and shape it together.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is so important that we’re all here today.
I’d like to acknowledge my colleagues from across the Parliament – not least Emma McBride, the Assistant Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention.
I’d particularly like to acknowledge Nieves Murray, the CEO of Suicide Prevention Australia, and Michael Gardner, the head of the National Suicide Prevention Office.
I thank you for all that you do, and for all the experience, wisdom and compassion that you bring to your roles.
I also pay tribute to your member organisations, practitioners, researchers and community leaders.
This is one realm where political differences melt away.
The work to prevent suicide unites us all.
Every death by suicide is its own universe of devastation.
It is tragic for those who are gone.
Those who saw no other way out.
And it is tragic for those left behind, the shape of their world forever changed.
So many lives have been touched by suicide.
Many right here today know it only too well.
And it is through the experience of those who have lived through this that we seek out the slivers of light among the shadows.
Sadly there is no way of undoing what you have been through, but if there’s one small positive, it is that your experience – and the action that it helps inform – could save a life.
Of course, there are no simple options before us.
The drivers of suicide are complex.
It may result from serious mental illness, but more often it can be a response to distress.
And the roots of distress are endlessly varied, and often tangled.
Family breakdown, sexual abuse, unemployment, financial loss or insecurity, homelessness, domestic and family violence, social isolation, drug or alcohol dependency – these are all possible contributors.
That is why we are taking a whole-of-government approach aimed at reducing drivers of distress in their structural and systemic forms.
We’re having a debate in this country, my Government’s committed to introducing age restriction legislation for social media by the end of this year.
That is a response to the impact that social media is having as well.
These social media companies tend to think they don’t have a social responsibility.
Well, they do.
And we as a Parliament, as a Government and a nation should hold them to account.
Our Government is investing in a range of programs and initiatives to support people at risk of suicide and those affected by suicide.
Critically, our actions are not restricted to the health portfolio.
So much is interlinked, which is why we’re taking measures to decrease financial pressures and increase job security.
Introducing paid Domestic Violence Leave so that no one has to choose between their financial security and their physical and mental safety.
And working to find solutions to the slow epidemic of military suicides, a challenge so starkly laid bare yesterday in the report of the Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran Suicide.
A seven volume Report.
Seven volumes.
122 recommendations.
And my Government will respond as soon as possible to that Report and I am confident that this is an area where the Parliament will work across the political divide to make sure that we address this.
That we give respect to those men and women who wear our uniform or who retire from the Defence Force.
Clearly we just need to do better.
Another critical ingredient is our housing reforms.
Secure housing is one of the largest preventable drivers of distress.
Increased investment to rental assistance and our commitment to the Housing Australia Future Fund – which will deliver 20,000 new social and 10,000 new affordable homes over five years – can change lives for the better.
Some of the changes are little more under the radar.
In May last year, the Therapeutic Goods Administration made the decision to reduce the maximum size of packs for various paracetamol products.
This decision was made to reduce the harm from intentional overdose, these changes will come into effect in February next year.
We are also working to tackle the ever more insidious distress drivers that are proliferating online.
One action we have taken is our recent legislation criminalising the sharing of non-consensual AI-generated sexually explicit deepfakes.
I want to congratulate the National Suicide Prevention Office for today releasing their draft National Suicide Prevention Strategy.
This will now be out for consultation for the sector and, critically, people with lived experience to provide crucial feedback.
The draft Strategy outlines a comprehensive, long-term national approach to suicide prevention in Australia and proposes a fundamental change to the way we think and act on suicide prevention.
And through the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement, our Government is working with states and territories as well as in partnership with the sector and people with lived experience to implement services to respond to suicidal distress.
This includes universal aftercare services for people discharged from hospital following a suicide attempt, trial expanded referral pathways for those who don’t go to hospital, and postvention services to support those affected by suicide.
Co-design with people with living and lived experience has been a cornerstone in informing the design, planning, delivery and evaluation of services.
Our Government is also committed to addressing the disproportionate and devastating impact of suicide on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander individuals, families and communities.
We are working in partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander experts through the Social and Emotional Wellbeing Policy Partnership as part of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap.
Through the National Suicide Prevention Leadership and Support Program, the Government is also funding a range of activities aimed at reducing suicide deaths and suicidal behaviour across Australia.
This includes supporting mental, emotional and social wellbeing in men through Men’s Tables and MATES in Construction, building suicide prevention skills and providing specific suicide prevention resources and support for veterans and their families, such as Black Dog Institute’s Veteran’s Toolkit and Buddy Up’s community groups and events.
Just as our veterans stepped up for us, we must step up for them.
And ultimately, we must all step up for each other.
No one should feel like they’re alone.
No one should feel that life’s burdens – whatever form they take – are theirs to shoulder on their own.
We come together this morning because we will find the answers together – with our hearts open and our hands extended.


On behalf of all Australians, it is my great honour to welcome you home.
I know that plane behind us had some very special carry-on baggage.
18 gold medals, 17 silver and 28 bronze.
That adds-up to another outstanding Paralympics for Australia – and a credit to all of you who were part of the squad.
Working together as teammates, coaches and support staff – looking out for each other and pushing each other to higher standards and new success.
Over the past two weeks, whenever we turned on the coverage – in the pool, the track, cycling, field events, table tennis, wheelchair rugby – there were Australians to cheer for.
And as we tuned in, we learned something of your stories, the adversity you had overcome, the challenges you had faced, the determination and commitment that brought you to the pinnacle of world sport. 
It was a privilege to get a glimpse of that.
And another great thing about watching the Games has been the powerful and visible pride that all of you take in representing Australia.
Pride that carried right through to the closing ceremony, with some of the most enthusiastic flag waving I’ve ever seen.
I want you to know that back home, Australians are every bit as proud to have you representing our nation. 
In the most intense moments, in the glare of the brightest spotlight in sport - your strength of character shone through.
I hope you could feel all 27 million of us with you, willing you on.
Now as you return to your families, friends and communities, you can relive your time on the world stage with the people who have always believed in you and are so proud to have been on the journey with you.
For each of you, there would have been a moment in your lives when you set yourself the goal of representing Australia.
When you decided to dedicate your time and energy and focus to competing against the very best in the world.
Perhaps it was a junior coach who recognised your potential.
A parent or loved one who urged you to chase your dream and made sacrifices to see you realise it.
Or you might have found inspiration in the deeds of athletes in Sydney or Athens, Beijing, London or Rio.
That is the tradition all of you are now a part of.
That is the inspiration all of you have given to the next generation of Australians.
Today, there are girls and boys around our nation dreaming of wearing the green and gold at Brisbane 2032 - because of you.
Because your achievements have given them a new sense of what they can achieve.
You have given them a new goal to strive for.
And all of you have given the next generation of Australian new heroes to follow.
You have done your country proud.
Congratulations and thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respect to their elders past, present and emerging.
When I spoke at this dinner last year, the Business Council of Australia had just published the “Seize the Moment” report.
Characteristic of the BCA, the report was broad in its scope and bold in its ambition.
It took stock of the decade past and identified six big changes required to make our economy more productive, competitive, dynamic and prosperous. 
Moving from a narrow industrial base – to a diversified and resilient one.
From a disjointed approach to education and training – to a modern system that gives people the skills they need to thrive in the future.
From a dependence on a few key export markets – to a broader range of products and destinations. 
From low investment and productivity – to an environment with incentives for investment, where it’s easier to do business.
From too much red tape – to an economy creating jobs and driving growth.
And moving from an unsustainable budget trajectory – to more disciplined spending, delivering better services.
I said at the time it was heartening to see such significant overlap between the goals of the business community and the agenda of our government.
A year later, in all six of these areas, we can – and we should – take pride in the progress we have achieved together.
The National Reconstruction Fund and our Future Made in Australia agenda will diversify and broaden our industrial base – putting our resources, researchers, exporters and manufacturers at the centre of the biggest economic transformation since the industrial revolution.
We’re seeing new opportunities created and new productivity unlocked through half a million fee-free TAFE places, with Jobs and Skills Australia working with business to link those courses to careers.
We’re opening the doors of opportunity by expanding access to Higher Education and delivering on the Universities Accord.
We’ve made child care cheaper for 1.2 million families, an economic reform that boosts productivity and participation for parents.
We are expanding Paid Parental Leave, making it more flexible and adding superannuation - backed by leaders in this room and built on our commitment to economic equality.
In trade, Australian businesses have been both key ambassadors – and significant beneficiaries.
Stabilising the relationship with China has cleared away nearly $20 billion in impediments for our farmers, growers, producers and miners. 
And acting on the blueprint we commissioned from Nicholas Moore, we’re putting business at the centre of our engagement in South East Asia.
Together, those nations will represent the 4th largest economy in the world by 2040.
Yet less than 4 per cent of Australia’s international investment goes to that region, our region, the fastest-growing region of the world in human history.
We’re investing in the skills, technology and financing facilities that will open these markets to Australian business.
And earlier today we finalised negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement with the United Arab Emirates - the gateway to a market of 58 million consumers.
This deal will bring significant new opportunities for our farmers, producers and exporters - and drive investment.
On the question of spending discipline, in the last two years, we’ve delivered the first back to back budget surpluses for nearly two decades.
Less than a month ago, we secured agreement on vital changes to put the National Disability Insurance Scheme on a sustainable footing.
And less than a week ago, we brokered a generational agreement to deliver greater quality, choice, dignity and security in aged care.
Two of the biggest long-term pressures on the budget – and two services absolutely fundamental to Australians’ quality of life. 
Proof that economic reform is not confined to a vanished golden age - it remains our challenge to meet and our opportunity to seize.
I am optimistic that government and business can do this together.
By recognising each other’s strengths, respecting each other’s views and valuing each other’s contribution.
We have different responsibilities that demand different approaches, so it is inevitable we will have occasional differences of opinion.
But – for me – those points of disagreement have never defined or diminished our engagement.
Because our government serves all Australians.
We are proudly pro-business and pro-worker.
And we don’t see this as a point of tension, we see it as a matter of logic.
We understand secure jobs and fair wages depend on thriving businesses, just as we know productivity gains depend on skilled workers and safe workplaces and, for that matter, the skills and education, infrastructure, health care and energy that Government funds and builds.
Throughout the past two years, we’ve stood against some pretty extreme anti-business policies put forward by members of the crossbench, and perhaps more surprisingly, by the Opposition.
We’ve stood up for some of Australia’s biggest employers, when others have attacked you for holding a view different to their own.
We don’t do any of this because it’s politically convenient.
We do it out of respect for what you do – and because we value what you say.
One of the many healthy things about our democracy is that there’s room for everyone’s views.
Equally, in a democracy, those ideas have to stand on their merits and withstand public scrutiny.
You have to be prepared to make the case, answer for your priorities and demonstrate how the propositions you are advancing will benefit the lives of people whose support you are seeking.
Because economic and social change is not delivered via ultimatum, it’s built by consensus and strengthened by the mandate of the people.
Earlier, Bran spoke about looking back at what his predecessors had said at these dinners.
Over the years I know many of my predecessors have come to your events to demand you advocate more forcefully for their agenda.
Tonight, I encourage you: keep advancing yours.
I welcome the fact that the Business Council of Australia wants to be part of the policy debate on:
Cost of living.
Affordable housing.
Cleaner and cheaper energy.
Stronger Medicare, better aged care, an NDIS that fulfils its purpose.
And the skills and education our nation needs for the future.
Those are the five questions you’re asking – and they are five areas where our Government is taking action.
We’re helping with the cost of living through fairer prices, lower taxes and stronger wages.
Building more homes for Australians.
Rolling out more renewables and storage around the country.
Strengthening Medicare, reforming aged care, securing the future of the NDIS.
And training people for new opportunities in a transforming economy.
In all this, as we act on the immediate challenges in front of us, we are also building for the opportunities ahead of us.
The world is changing.
Our vision for a Future Made in Australia is about anticipating that change and shaping it.
Making it work for our regions and suburbs.
Making the most of our natural advantages.
And making more things here.
In this, we have every cause for optimism.
As Jim Chalmers says: if you started with a blank of piece of paper and wrote down everything a country needs to prosper from the global shift to net zero at the end of it you would hold in your hand a list of Australia’s strengths. 
Truly, we have a combination no other nation can claim as its own: critical minerals, skills, science, space and sunlight.
Our status as a trusted trading partner and stable democracy.
Our proximity to the fastest-growing markets in the world - and diaspora communities that give us a family connection to every nation on earth.
Our Government is investing in all these strengths - skills, communities, infrastructure and energy.
Creating new Production Tax Credits for critical minerals and green hydrogen.
Putting more staff and resources into the approvals process, for better and faster decisions.
And empowering businesses to create the new jobs and deliver the new projects that will secure the next generation of growth and prosperity.
This is about Government acting as a catalyst for private capital, not a replacement.
Mobilising investment, not crowding it out or ploughing ahead in its absence.
Identifying those new sources of comparative advantage and those core areas of national interest, to better align our economic and national security.
And providing the certainty and clarity to drive investment and job creation.
We’ve brought this vital certainty to energy policy, after the chaos of the climate wars.
The Business Council stood with us, as we upgraded Australia’s 2030 emissions reduction target.
And business leaders backed us in legislating it, along with our commitment to Net Zero.
Setting those targets sends an important signal to the market and the world - but the real test is whether you have a plan to get there.
That’s what our Safeguards Mechanism is about.
This is a practical framework which has been accepted - which is why you don’t need the gesture-based climate amendments advanced by the Greens political party to our Nature Positive legislation.
We’ve created New Vehicle Emissions Standards.
We are upgrading the national energy grid with our Rewiring the Nation plan.
And investors are queuing around the block to participate in our Capacity Investment Scheme.
The level of demand, the investor competition to be part of large-scale generation and storage projects tells the same story as the hundreds of thousands of households and small businesses that are embracing rooftop solar each year.
It shows that investors understand renewable energy, backed by storage and firmed by gas is the way to go.
Not a distant future prospect – but the choice of the market and households, here and now.
Many of you will know how much I enjoyed the six years I spent as Minister for Infrastructure.
Infrastructure teaches you a lot about the economy – boosting productivity, the multiplier effect that significant projects can have on economic growth, creating public-private partnerships. 
It teaches you about communities and people – our cities, suburbs and the regions.
It reminds you of the difference good government can make by investing in the housing, services and shared spaces that create opportunity, nourish aspiration and add to quality of life everywhere.
And as we’ve seen here in Sydney recently with the opening of the Metro, the Moorebank Intermodal and the accelerating progress on Western Sydney International Airport, infrastructure teaches you a good deal about patience and perspective as well.
Making the right decisions means you have to do much more than ask: what’s the cheapest option, or the easiest course, or the one that carries the lowest political risk.
You face a lot of urgent challenges – but you can’t deal in quick fixes.
You have to strike the balance between taking immediate action to relieve the pressure – and delivering solutions for the long term.
You can’t base your decision on whether or not you will be around to get the credit for it.
Nor can you hold off until success is certain.
All of you understand this, you live it.
You navigate uncertainty, you wear risk, you work to find the balance between your employees, shareholders and the future of your company.
For all of us, there will be times when the pace of progress tests our patience.
But then there are days like last Thursday - when we secured generational, bipartisan reform to something as important to Australian life as aged care.
And you can only earn moments like that through months and years of work: consulting, negotiating, seeking common ground.
That’s we’re doing through National Cabinet to secure the future of the NDIS, build more homes for Australians and address the scourge of domestic and family violence.
This is the work we are engaged in on reforms to higher education – and competition.
All of these are big changes that demand genuine engagement and ownership from all levels of government and all parts of society.
Education and skills, health care and the social safety net require a leadership only Government can provide – but they deliver a benefit in which our entire nation shares.
Inevitably, it is more complicated and more time-consuming to fit those different elements together, to get everyone on the same page.
It requires a willingness to listen – and a preparedness to compromise.
We undertake this because we know that holding stubbornly to the wrong course is not strength and co-operation to achieve an outcome is not weakness.
Co-operation is essential to creating a broader and stronger foundation for progress, for change that makes a lasting difference to people’s lives.
That’s the objective we share and the goal we strive for.
A stronger economy for business and for workers – and a better future for all Australians.


I’m delighted to be here today alongside my good friends President Biden, Prime Minister Modi and Prime Minister Kishida.
The unifying principle of the Quad is that we can achieve more together than on our own.
Our work on health is a powerful example of that.
At the very first Quad Leaders’ Summit, chaired by President Biden, the Quad agreed to work together to improve access to COVID vaccines.
As a result, more than 400 million vaccine doses made their way into communities in the Indo-Pacific.
That changed lives. It saved lives.
That’s what the Quad Cancer Moonshot Initiative is all about.
This program builds on one of President Biden’s signature policy initiatives – not just in his term as President but throughout his time in public life.
It’s a reflection of the ambition and empathy, the vision and compassion that has defined his leadership.
It’s about understanding people’s pain – and doing something to help.
This is personal for the President and for Dr Biden. It is personal for all of us.
Because in our nations, as in every part of the world – cancer casts its shadow on the lives of our citizens and our loved ones.
Australia is proud of the leading role we’ve played preventing cervical cancer worldwide.
The HPV vaccine was developed at the University of Queensland by Australian of the Year, Professor Ian Frazer.
That vaccine, together with improvements in screening and treatment means Australia is on track to be the first country in the world to eliminate cervical cancer.
Yet beyond our shores, the story is very different. 1 in 4 global cervical cancer cases occur in the Indo-Pacific.
And, tragically, women in the Pacific die of the disease at up to 13 times the rate of women in Australia.
These people are not numbers – they are our neighbours, members of our Pacific family.
And we are stepping forward to help.
Today I can announce that the Australia is expanding our funding commitment to the Elimination Partnership in the Indo-Pacific for Cervical Cancer — known as EPICC.
Alongside a generous contribution from the Minderoo Foundation, the expansion will use Australian cervical cancer expertise to help more partner governments get HPV vaccine programs up and running across the region.
This will also increase screening and treatment, and provide support for health workers.
It will build on what we’ve learned in the Western Highlands of Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu and make it available to Malaysia, Timor-Leste, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Fiji and Nauru as well.
It is fitting that this cancer moonshot takes its name from a famous American achievement that inspired the world.
A choice America made to mobilise its collective talent and go to the moon.
Not because it was easy – but because it was hard.
That’s the spirit of this endeavour.
All of us know that curing cancer, defeating it once and for all, will be hard.
But not as hard as the lonely, exhausting, physical and emotional ordeal of diagnosis and treatment.
And never as hard as losing the people we love.
In 1969, seven years after President Kennedy called on his fellow Americans to organise and measure the best of their abilities to meet an unprecedented challenge the world watched as two Americans walked on the moon.
The images of that defining moment in human history were carried to Tokyo and Osaka, New Delhi and Chennai, Wilmington and Washington DC, by the Australian radio telescope in Parkes.
Australians will always be proud of the part we played in sharing that triumph of science and human courage with the world.
We are proud to stand with the United States, India and Japan in this shared effort to change lives for the better.


Good afternoon everyone.
I’m delighted to be here among friends, and to continue our important work as Quad partners.
Thank you, President Biden, for hosting and welcoming us - it’s an honour to be here with you in your beautiful home state of Delaware.
I’m also so pleased to see you, Prime Minister Modi, and you, Prime Minister Kishida.
Coming together today demonstrates that the Quad is building its momentum.
For Australia, the Quad is a key instrument to promote stability in our region. 
A stronger Quad means a stronger Australia.
Together, our four nations are committed to an open, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific, and we have a shared vision for a region that is governed by accepted rules and norms where all countries can cooperate, trade, and thrive.
Through the Quad, our four countries collaborate and coordinate on the issues facing our communities and the region as a whole.
Through the Quad we leverage our significant resources and expertise to contribute in meaningful ways to dealing with the challenges facing countries in the region.
And we ensure that in our region, all nations – big and small – have their sovereignty respected and can secure their own future.
That means delivering a transparent, positive, and practical agenda that addresses regional economic and development challenges.
It means driving opportunity for our people and shared prosperity for our region.
The Quad is about practical, meaningful outcomes in strategic areas ranging from clean energy and health security to critical and emerging technologies, cyber resilience, infrastructure, space, maritime security, and counter-terrorism.
Since I chaired our meeting in Hiroshima last year, we’ve continued to deepen our collaboration and we have continued to deliver concrete results.
Our collective actions through the Quad continue to respond to the Indo-Pacific’s priorities and needs, and align with our shared vision for the region.
In all of this, in everything the Quad does, respect for the centrality of regional institutions — including ASEAN, the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Indian Ocean Rim Association — will continue to be integral to our efforts.
Australia, and the Quad, will always be better off when we work together with our close friends and partners.
And there’s more to do.
We are fortunate to live in a region that is the fastest growing in human history, full of dynamism and promise.
But all of this promise depends on continued peace and stability, and the wise management of strategic competition and of disputes.
Dialogue is central to this.
And dialogue is central to Australia’s approach. Because regardless of the issue, it is always best when we deal direct.
That’s how we will manage the challenges we face today, and build for greater prosperity in the future.
Partnerships like Quad are crucial, providing us with an avenue to discuss shared responsibilities and goals, and strengthening the enduring relationships necessary for lasting stability.
Which is why we recommit today to continue to work with our Indo-Pacific neighbours, our friends and partners.
May I take this opportunity to thank you, President Biden, Prime Minister Modi, and you, Prime Minister Kishida, for your commitment to this Quad partnership over many years.
Can I also say how much I’m looking forward to my good friend Prime Minister Modi hosting next year’s Quad Leaders’ Summit in India.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m delighted to join you in officially welcoming His All-Holiness to Australia.
This is a historic occasion — and a great honour for our nation.
His All-Holiness’s last visit to Australia 28 years ago is remembered by Australia’s Greek Orthodox community with great warmth and appreciation.
It was the first-ever visit by an Ecumenical Patriarch to Australia.
An uplifting moment for Orthodox Christians across the nation.
A profound demonstration of the connection between the birthplace and home of your faith - and the new home and life so many had built in Australia.
This visit by His All-Holiness carries its own special significance.
Because it coincides with the 100th anniversary of the establishment of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia.
Over those hundred years, the Archdiocese has done so much to bring people together and share the spirit of love and compassion that is at the heart of the Christian faith.
Your church has nurtured a sense of belonging, helped people in need, and supported the flourishing of your community.
I was honoured to join my dear friend Archbishop Makarios and the congregation at the Greek Orthodox Church in Kogarah for the Easter Resurrection Service earlier this year.
To witness a living and very beautiful tradition and to celebrate a faith that draws together millions of people around the world, including the extraordinary Greek-Australian community.
As someone who has had the honour of representing Marrickville for nearly 30 years and called the inner west home for even longer, I have witnessed firsthand the remarkable contribution generations of Greek Australians have made to our nation.
People whose aspiration, hard work, good humour and warm hearts are an irreplaceable part of modern Australia’s success story.
People driven by the determination to pass on a better life and greater opportunity to the next generation.
Today, in that same spirit, as we celebrate this historic visit and the centenary it honours – we look to the future.
Today, I am proud to announce that our Government will contribute up to $25 million to fund much-needed restoration works here at Cleveland Street in Redfern.
An investment that will benefit and serve the whole community.
Helping restore this historic Cathedral.
Upgrading St Andrews Theological College.
And helping to build a new Great Hall, Library and Museum.
This is about honouring and preserving centuries of tradition.
Sharing knowledge with the whole nation and passing it down to future generations.
And nourishing aspiration for the next 100 years of community and faith.
Your All-Holiness, the values of respect, kindness, understanding and compassion are as old as the Christian faith itself.
And yet when we look around the world today, these values have never been more relevant or more vital.
Your work over many years has fostered interfaith dialogue, and has built bridges between communities.
Your commitment to the environment has inspired so many to show greater care for the world we will pass on to future generations.
And your spiritual leadership has given hope and solace to millions of people around the globe.
Looking back on your last visit to Australia, you spoke of it as a “blessed experience”.
May this visit be similarly blessed, and filled with the same sense of community and love.
Your All-Holiness, you are most welcome, once again, to Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to their Elders past, present and emerging.
It’s great to be here with you all this evening.
To celebrate the future of Australian science and to look back on a proud history of these awards.
Back in 2000, one of the very first prize winners was Dr Jim Peacock.
A molecular biologist, he would later go on to be Australia’s Chief Scientist.
Jim has a great way of explaining what it feels like to do science; to delve into the unknown and come up with new ways to understand the world.
In his words, it’s:
“… like feeling your way into a dark room, when suddenly the light goes on because you’ve found the switch.”
Here tonight are some of our most remarkable scientists, researchers, innovators and educators.
And we’re celebrating everything you’ve done to light the way.
The story of Australian science and innovation goes back 65,000 years.
And today, it’s everywhere you look.
Especially here in our nation’s capital.
Almost 80 years after winning a Nobel Prize for his work with penicillin, we remember Howard Florey by the Canberra suburb named in his honour.
The city’s street signs feature a rollcall of greats like Bragg, Kenny and Unaipon.
There’s so much to celebrate in Australia’s scientific history – in all that it has brought us here at home, and all that it has made possible across the world.
Take the HPV vaccine. First developed at the University of Queensland by Australian of the Year Dr Ian Frazer, it is making huge inroads in the fight against cervical cancer.
Together with improvements in screening and treatment, the HPV vaccine has put us on track to be the first country in the world to eliminate cervical cancer.
Yet cervical cancer casts a terrible shadow across our region. One in four global cervical cancer cases occur in the Indo-Pacific. And, tragically, women in the Pacific die of the disease at up to 13 times the rate of women in Australia.
These are our neighbours, our friends, our family.
That is why at the Quad Leaders’ Summit in the United States last month, I joined President Biden and Prime Ministers Modi and Kishida to announce the Quad Cancer Moonshot Initiative.
Australia is expanding our funding commitment to the Elimination Partnership in the Indo-Pacific for Cervical Cancer.
Assisted by a generous contribution from the Minderoo Foundation, it will use Australian cervical cancer expertise to help more partner governments get HPV vaccine programs up and running across the region.
This is an international effort. By working together, we are making a difference in the world. And it is all because of Australian science.
It is exciting to contemplate what’s still to come.
Together, we have a chance to create a better Australia – and a better world – powered by science.
And to do that, we need only look to the core ingredients we’ve relied on before.
Imagination and curiosity. Respect for scientific expertise. And investment.
Ultimately, investing in science is investing in our future.
That’s why we’ve recently launched our new National Science Statement and new National Science and Research Priorities.
It’s the first update to the priorities in nearly a decade.
And together, both documents form a science framework that will help us draw on our greatest minds to solve some of the most pressing challenges of our time.
That includes preparing for future pandemics, tackling the challenges and seizing the opportunities of climate change, and responding to the rapid advance of artificial intelligence and automation.
We’re also elevating the knowledge and science of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Whether as community leaders, traditional knowledge holders or researchers, it is important that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have a seat at the table in advancing research that affects them.
And we’re focusing our efforts across government, academia and the private sector as we build A Future Made in Australia.
Our scientific community is at the forefront of Australia’s industrial transformation.
Paving the way for new jobs and opportunities here at home in Australia.
And turning Australian ingenuity into economic success.
It’s something I saw for myself when I visited Geoscience Australia last month.
While I was there, I got to hold a piece of the moon – an extraordinary thing to be able to say.
Just as compelling were the conversations we had about the sun, namely, how we can use our abundance of sunshine — as well as wind — to become a world leader in renewable energy.
With the Future Made in Australia agenda, we’re investing $566 million to help our geoscientists map something else we have in abundance — critical minerals.
Minerals that will be the building blocks for the solar panels and batteries we plan to build, right here, in Australia. Minerals that will help us write the next exciting chapter in our long, proud energy story.
As a nation, we’ve always been good at celebrating our sporting achievements. The medal haul by our athletes at the Paris Olympics was one more example of Australia punching well above our weight.
It’s a wonderful tradition, but not one that’s restricted to the track and the pool.
We should all take pride in what a scientific powerhouse our country is.
In 2022, 3.4 per cent of the world’s published research came out of Australia.
In other words, roughly ten times our share of the world’s population.
And, like our athletes, our scientists are in demand all over the world.
To make sure we’re maximising the impact of our expertise, we’ve commissioned a strategic review of our research and development system.
Helping us maintain our competitive edge, and making sure our ingenuity is able to benefit all Australians.
Australia is blessed with such an abundance of resources, but our greatest resource is our people. That is why we’re investing in the people of our scientific community.
We’ve committed $38 million to enhance diversity and broaden pathways for all Australians in STEM.
From 2025, we’ll introduce a $250,000 Prime Minister’s Prize for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Knowledge Systems.
This new prize will be a mark of Australia’s respect for, and commitment to advancing, the scientific contributions of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Of course, we can’t have an outstanding STEM workforce without outstanding teachers.
There are few jobs in the world more important than being a teacher. Teachers don’t just unlock the doors of opportunity, they hold them open.
Teachers – in all that they do and all they make possible – are our greatest weapon against disadvantage.
And there are more than a few of you in the audience this evening.
When it comes to shaping our scientific future, the role that teachers play is vital.
Which is why I’m pleased to announce that, starting from tonight, we are increasing the value of our secondary and primary school teacher awards to $250,000 each.
There’s so much to look forward to — for the prizes, and for the future of Australian science and innovation.
I started tonight by speaking about one of Australia’s Chief Scientists. I’d like to take a moment to acknowledge another.
Dr Cathy Foley, whose term draws to a close in December.
Dr Foley has been a passionate advocate for Australia’s science and technology over her tenure.
Dr Foley, you have done so much to advance science in Australia, and while your term has an end date, the effects of your contribution do not. On behalf of the nation, I want to say thank you.
I want to finish by acknowledging the truly outstanding people gathered here.  
Whether you’re being recognised for your research, for your contribution to our society and our economy and for the spark of curiosity you’ve ignited in the next generation – thank you for the light you bring to Australia.
Congratulations to every one of you.


Yesterday, on the first anniversary of the October 7 attacks in Israel, we paused to reflect on the horrific terrorist atrocities that reverberated across the world.
As we did last October, this Parliament comes together again to unequivocally condemn Hamas’s actions on that day.
On October 7, Hamas sought only to kill and to terrify.
They perpetrated their crimes without mercy, and without discrimination.
Men, women and children were subjected to acts of degradation and humiliation that – a year on – remain beyond comprehension.
Yet Hamas made this waking nightmare a reality.
They chose a holy day on the Jewish calendar to target young Israelis at a music festival.
To hunt down men, women and children in their homes.
To prey on families, on children and on parents trying to protect their children in what often proved to be their desperate final act.
A year on from that day when death emerged out of the sunshine, we reflect on all that happened and all the devastation that has followed.
We think of the brutality and the cruelty that was inflicted on so many with such cold calculation.
We think of all whose lives and futures were stolen from them that day as they tried to save themselves and their loved ones, and all who have had them stolen since.
We think of those whose lives remain suspended in the fear and isolation of captivity. And we think of those whose own lives – and hearts – are so intimately connected with the hostages who were kidnapped that day.
Either through the bonds of blood or the embrace of friendship and community, this has been a year of pain, of loss, and grief.
Last night, I attended the vigil in Moorabbin, Melbourne, where I had the sombre privilege of meeting with a relative of Galit Carbone, the Australian woman among those killed on that fateful day.
I expressed my condolences, and that of our nation.
Mr Speaker,
For so many, this past year must have felt like a cruel eternity. The torment of not knowing the fate of a loved one taken hostage – or having the terrible truth confirmed.
October 7 will always be a day of pain.
As we mourn and reflect, we also re-affirm a fundamental principle of our shared humanity: every innocent life matters.
Every Israeli. Every Palestinian. Every Lebanese.
Every single innocent life. It is the terrorists who close their eyes to that powerful, simple truth.
The number of civilians who have lost their lives over the past year is a tragedy of horrific proportions.
An estimated 40,000 Palestinians have been killed. The humanitarian situation in Gaza is devastating.
Our Government has consistently and repeatedly called for a ceasefire, for the release of all hostages, and for the protection of all civilians.
We remain committed to a two state solution as the path to an enduring peace. Two states – Israel and Palestine – living peacefully side by side, with prosperity and security for their people.
There can be no possibility of a just future without that.
Australia’s position is consistent with other democratic countries.
I have issued multiple statements with the prime ministers of Canada and New Zealand.
We know that it is only through diplomatic efforts that this cycle of conflict and bloodshed can be broken. Escalation denies diplomacy any chance of working.
On September 26, Australia joined with 11 other nations – including the US, Canada, France, Germany and the UK – to call for de-escalation.
We agree with every word in the G7 statement of this week. And I quote:
A dangerous cycle of attacks and retaliation risks fuelling uncontrollable escalation in the Middle East, which is in no one’s interest. Therefore, we call on all regional players to act responsibly and with restraint. We encourage all parties to engage constructively to de-escalate the current tensions. International humanitarian law must be respected.
We also reiterate our call for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, the unconditional release of all hostages, a significant and sustained increase in the flow of humanitarian assistance, and an end to the conflict.
We fully endorse the efforts by the US, Qatar and Egypt to reach such a comprehensive deal, in line with United Nations Security Council Resolution 2735.
The situation in Gaza is catastrophic, and tens of thousands of innocent lives have been lost. We reiterate the absolute need for the civilian population to be protected and that there must be full, rapid, safe, and unhindered humanitarian access, as a matter of absolute priority.
In his statement marking the first anniversary of October 7, President Biden said:
We will not stop working to achieve a ceasefire deal in Gaza that brings the hostages home, allows for a surge in humanitarian aid to ease the suffering on the ground, assures Israel’s security, and ends this war.
Israelis and Palestinians alike deserve to live in security, dignity, and peace.
We also continue to believe that a diplomatic solution across the Israel-Lebanon border region is the only path to restore lasting calm and allow residents on both sides to return safely to their homes.
Mr Speaker,
A year on from October 7, Israelis and people across the world are mourning those who were robbed of their lives and futures, and waiting anxiously for news of the hostages who remain in captivity.
Palestinian people are mourning the lives taken from them in the continuing aftermath. So much has been lost, so many loved ones buried.
We join all of them in their grief.
We will continue to call for de-escalation in the violence and conflict in the region.
We repeat our call for a ceasefire in Gaza.
We repeat our call for the release of all hostages.
We repeat our calls for aid being allowed to flow.
Tragically, we are seeing the situation worsening.
Since late last year, we and others have been expressing concern about the real risk of the conflict spreading and escalating and how dangerous that escalation would be.
We are now seeing that come to pass.
We unequivocally condemn the actions of Iran and Hezbollah.
Iran must cease its destabilising actions, including through terrorist proxies the Houthis, Hezbollah, and Hamas.
Amid their attacks on Israel, Australia steadfastly maintains support for Israel’s right to defend itself. We always have and always will.
We repeat our call for all sides to observe international law.
It is important to recognise that the loss and grief of this past year have been deeply felt here in Australia.
Sorrow knows no boundaries. It recognises no differences. 
Since the atrocities of October 7, Jewish Australians have felt the shadows of the past creeping into the present.
We condemn the poison of antisemitism, whatever form it takes.
This is a pain the Jewish people should never have had to endure again. Nor should the Jewish people feel exposed once more to the hatreds that had their most pitiless culmination in the Holocaust.
The Holocaust is not softened by the passing of time. It does not recede into history. It does not offer the one, slender comfort of distance.
Our Jewish Australian community is made up of Holocaust survivors, their children and grandchildren. The branches of their family trees are heavy with loss and suffering, with acts of survival in the face of overwhelming odds.
It is nearly 80 years since that darkest of chapters closed, nearly eight decades of the world saying: never again.
It is shocking and wrong that in 2024 Jewish people are having to draw on their courage and resilience again, enduring such loss, enduring the weight of not knowing and, for those with relatives who are missing, enduring the weight of hope.
I want to repeat the message that I've given to all Jewish Australians since the outset: you are not alone; your fellow Australians stand with you.
Our social cohesion has been built over the course of generations by people of all backgrounds and from every faith and tradition.
All of us take pride in it, all of us must work together to protect it.
Mr Speaker,
This Parliament gives all of us a national platform and a national duty to send a message to every Australian: You have the right to be proud of who you are.
The right to feel safe in your community, whether you wear a yarmulke or hijab.
The right to feel free to live the truth of your faith.
And that the mere act of your children walking freely to school should just be a regular part of daily life, unremarkable in its happiness.
Every time Parliament rises and we return to our electorates across this great continent of ours, we can travel along the streets and see synagogues. We can see mosques. We can see churches and temples.
As a country and as a people, we are big enough to contain them all.
That is who we are. That is what we have so painstakingly built and so carefully nurtured, generation after generation.
Each and every one of us have a responsibility to prevent conflict in the Middle East from be used as a platform for prejudice at home.
I want to be clear to anyone who thinks about taking a Hamas or Hezbollah flag to a protest.
Hamas and Hezbollah march under different banners but - like every terrorist organisation – in the end, they are bound only by hatred.
They aim only to inflict death and destruction, to make the world a more divided and more dangerous place.
They cannot be reasoned with, they cannot be accommodated – and they have no part in the future of the Middle East.
Hamas and Hezbollah are terrorist organisations who have no interest in peace in the Middle East. They serve no cause but terror.
They have shown themselves to be the enemy of the very people they purport to represent.
We unequivocally condemn any indication of support for such organisations.
Mr Speaker,
Today, as we remember those who were lost, we stand with all those who wait. We stand with all those who endure loss. We stand with all those who endure hope.
Let us stand together as a nation and as a Parliament in our shared determination to preserve the harmony that makes this the greatest country in the world and in our shared commitment to a just and lasting peace, knowing that the truest act of strength is to protect the innocent.
That is the truth we must hold on to.
The truth of a shared humanity, of the hope that peace is possible, and the belief that it belongs to all people.
To quote Dr Martin Luther King: “Darkness cannot drive out darkness, only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate, only love can do that.”


LI QIANG, PREMIER OF CHINA: Prime Minister Albanese, it gives me great pleasure to meet you again. As I also say, I feel very warm to meet an old friend, and I want to thank Mr Prime Minister, and the Australian side for the warm hospitality and thoughtful arrangement during my visit to Australia in June. That visit was a great success, and also attracted a lot of attention in both China and Australia.  And I can feel clearly, that people of both countries are generally supportive of the improvement of China-Australia relations, and it also gives me greater confidence in sustaining our cooperation and achieving winning outcomes at a higher level. It is gratifying to know that over the past weeks and months, China-Australia relations are on the whole, continue to move forward in a positive direction. Our institutional dialogues are being held, and our practical cooperation is advancing across the board. Our sub national and people to people exchanges are getting more vibrant. This shows that, as long as two sides can work toward the same goal, China-Australia relations will embrace a brighter future, to understand we need to work with Australia, to foster a more mature, stable and productive Comprehensive Strategic Partnership to deliver greater benefits to either peoples and make a greater contribution to peace and stability and development of the region and the world as a whole. I look forward to having an exchange of ideas with you, Mr Prime Minister on issues of mutual interest. Thank you.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well, thank you very much, Premier Li, and it's a pleasure to meet you here in Vientiane after hosting you for our Annual Leaders' Dialogue in Australia in June. I look forward to returning to China next year to continue our Annual Leaders DiaIogue. I valued our productive discussions during your visit, and you were very welcome. As we meet today, this is our fifth engagement now, our Australian men's team, the Socceroos, will play China's national team in a World Cup qualifying game in Adelaide later today, and we certainly wish both teams the best of luck. Since our constructive meetings in June, our governments have continued to progress the outcomes we agreed, including restarting regular exchanges between our ministers. And I'm pleased that our ministers responsible for climate change and the environment met in Sydney in August for an annual Australia-China ministerial dialogue of climate change and our foreign ministers recently met in New York. It's also very good that the Australian Treasurer Jim Chalmers visited Beijing, the first visit in seven years for the Strategic Economic Dialogue, restoring a key pillar of our bilateral relationship. And as we discuss our parliamentary delegation from the Australian Parliament, led by the President of the Senate, will visit China next week, a bipartisan delegation that is very good. As I've said many times, dialogue is crucial, and peace and stability take work. We recognise a more stable economic relationship between Australia and China is a good thing for workers, for businesses, for investors on both sides and for our countries more broadly. Premier Li, Australia has a vision of a peaceful, stable and prosperous world where sovereignty is respected and countries abide by international law. It's important that we have these frank exchanges of views on the issues that matter to us, to build deeper awareness of our respective interests. Premier, I look forward to another direct and productive discussion with you today, and I thank you for hosting us.


JUSTIN TRUDEAU, PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA: Morning everyone, what a pleasure it is to sit down with, amongst friends here in Laos for the ASEAN meeting, Prime Minister of Australia and Prime Minister of New Zealand, an opportunity, obviously, to talk about, first of all, all the work that we've been doing together in the region and around the world, on growing our economies, on strengthening trade ties throughout the Indo-Pacific, but around the world as well. We're working on some excellent critical minerals initiatives. We've been working on making sure that with the CPTPP, the trade rules remain high standard and is pushing inclusive growth for everyone at the same time. We've also been strong security partners as parts of the Five Eyes, we've been leaning in on so many of the challenges, whether it's cyber or in various geopolitical conflicts that we've been working as strong allies on and will continue to. We've also been, the three of us, working together very closely on the situation in the Middle East. We are like minded and pushing for de-escalation of the violence, protection of civilians, and humanitarian aid flowing in, and also all of us committed to a path to a two state solution, which requires a lot of work that we're continuing to do. So we have a lot to talk about here today, amongst friends, but also things that matter deeply to the world.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Thanks very much, Justin. And our three nations have common interests and we have shared values, and that's reflected in the way that we cooperate across major issues, whether it's the economy and trade, the support for the international rule of law, or whether it be dealing with the challenge, but also the opportunities, that come from dealing with the transition to net zero. Our economies will benefit from critical minerals, and as much that we're cooperating on those areas and cooperating in international forums. As three of the Five Eyes partners, we also have an important role to play in national security, and we, there again, share our support for democratic values, our support for human rights, our opposition to violence and some of the conflicts that we see in the world. We together have issued statements reflecting those common values which are there, calling for de-escalation, calling for the return of hostages, expressing our abhorrence at the terrorist acts of October 7, also talking about the need to move towards a two state solution, and to have a region which represents the opportunity for peace and security and prosperity for all citizens in the Middle East, whether they be Israeli, Palestinian, Lebanese, and so we'll continue to engage on forums like this, where we're gathering with other nations, it's important that we're able to get together and cooperate and have those informal discussions. I look forward to the discussion with Justin and Christopher today.
CHRISTOPHER LUXON, PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND: Well, thank you, Justin, and good to see you too Anthony. Kia ora, good morning, everybody. This is a really important opportunity for us to come together as like minded countries. We have a set of values that we believe very strongly in, whether it's nation state sovereignty, freedom of navigation, protection of the international rules based system. We see a world that I think is moving from rules to power, and I think the way that we have been able to work together and find areas of common interest and amplify our positions, and positions like the Middle East have been really important. And I also join both of you in looking forward to our conversations today. We feel very strongly that our future is in the Indo-Pacific. We see increasingly the issues of security being very linked to economic prosperity and vice versa, [INAUDIBLE]. Good to be with you.


Thank you Prime Minister Sonexay for co-chairing this fourth annual ASEAN-Australia Summit.
I congratulate Laos for its leadership of ASEAN this year and for building an agenda focused on strengthening the region’s connectivity and resilience.
I also thank Laos for its guidance and support as our ASEAN Country Coordinator over the past three years.
And I thank Indonesia for being Australia’s new ASEAN Country Coordinator.
The special summit we held in Melbourne earlier this year celebrated 50 years of Australia’s dialogue partnership with ASEAN.
That’s a proud milestone for our nation – but the focus of that gathering was the future.
The future of this region we call home – and the future role and responsibility of ASEAN and of Australia in shaping a stable and prosperous region for decades to come.
Australia is committed to working with all of you to ensure ASEAN remains at the centre of a dynamic region where stability is secured through collective responsibility and prosperity is built by shared opportunity.
Where the sovereignty of every nation is respected and where all of us work together to meet the challenges and seize the opportunities of the decades ahead.
For Australia, deeper economic engagement with Southeast Asia is critical to this.
My Government is working to turn potential and possibility into partnership and prosperity.
In Jakarta last year, I launched Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040.
A blueprint developed by our Special Envoy to Southeast Asia, Nicholas Moore.
A plan we are putting into action – and we’ll be focusing on specific milestones at the event I am hosting for Australian and ASEAN businesses tomorrow.
This is about Australian businesses making new partnerships in Southeast Asia to drive a new generation of jobs, trade and investment.
Getting this right will benefit the businesses and citizens of every nation represented here.
Because a fundamental principle of the ASEAN-Australia partnership is mutual benefit and we all gain from a regional economy that is more resilient and more connected.
Just as we all prosper from the peace, stability and security that enables the free exchange of ideas, culture, technology and the strengthening of bonds in business, education and tourism.
And we all benefit from a region where we have the confidence and trust in each other, to tackle the challenges that confront us – from climate change and maritime security, to transnational crime and the digital transformation.
Australia holds ASEAN in high regard – as do I.
I thank you for your commitment to our partnership.
I look forward to the progress we will make in our discussions.


Good morning.
It’s great to be here in Vientiane to mark just over 12 months since I launched Invested: Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040.
To reflect on the progress we have made – and to renew our ambition for the future.
I’m pleased to welcome the Australian investment mission which is here in conjunction with the ASEAN Business and Investment Summit.
Since the launch, Australia has supported more than 220 businesses to visit seven Southeast Asian countries with a focus on green energy transition, transnational education and digital transformation.
I want to acknowledge Prime Minister Chinh as well as representatives from the Australian business community and from businesses across Southeast Asia. 
Vietnam is one of the fastest growing economies in Asia. It is a focus for Australia’s trade and investment plans.
I’m also pleased to be joined this morning by the author and architect of our investment strategy and the Australian Government’s Special Envoy for Southeast Asia, Nicholas Moore.
Also joining us is Chick Olsson, our Business Champion for Laos.
The blueprint we launched in Jakarta last year recognised a fundamental truth: Southeast Asia is where Australia’s economic destiny lies.
Nearly half a million jobs in Australia are currently linked to trade with ASEAN. Taken together, Southeast Asia is Australia’s second largest two-way trading partner.
In the next five years, the economies of this region will account for 10 per cent of global growth.
By 2040 this will be the world’s fourth largest economy.
Yet up until now, less than 4 per cent of Australia’s international investment has gone to Southeast Asia.
Invested is about changing that.
It presented us with 75 different recommendations but they all drove to a common goal: elevating our ambition to match the scale of opportunity before us.
Rising to meet the moment – with optimism, determination and co-operation.
That’s the work we are engaged in now – government, business, civil society.
Investing in the relationships, skills, services and business connections that will turn shared potential into shared prosperity.
We see it right here in Laos, where Australian businesses are breaking new ground.
Chick’s company AgCoTech led the introduction of technology which has increased cattle productivity while reducing methane emissions.
And last month Linfox announced it would expand logistics in Laos with a further investment.
Australia is competitive in key sectors that are driving regional growth – agriculture and food, resources, green energy transition, infrastructure, education and skills and digital economy.
Our strategy was much more than a survey of opportunities – it was an action plan to seize them.
This is the encouraging story of the past year.
Mobilising our people, maximising our opportunities and making good on new initiatives.
Our Trade and Investment Commission has achieved their best ever client results in Southeast Asia – with over $1 billion of commercial outcomes since the beginning of 2024. 
The new Southeast Asia Investment Financing Facility we announced in Melbourne in March is already developing a pipeline of new projects.
We’ve deployed Deal Teams across the region to facilitate Australian investment in commercial projects, and we’ve opened Landing Pads in Singapore, Jakarta and Ho Chi Minh City to help our tech companies scale up. 
We’re also making it easier for our partners in Southeast Asia to do business in Australia.
We have extended the validity of the Business Visitor Visa from up to three to five years, as well as rolling out the new 10-year Frequent Traveller Scheme.
All these new initiatives are driven by an enduring principle of ASEAN and of Australia’s relationships with the countries of Southeast Asia – and that is mutual benefit.
Because when Australian businesses go out into the region, the benefits come home.
New jobs, new ideas, new technology and new markets for our products.
And when Australia invests in Southeast Asia, Southeast Asia grows and gains too.
Like this forum itself, these partnerships and people to people links add up to more than the sum of their parts.
And all this fits together with our Government’s Future Made in Australia Agenda, an economic plan to broaden our industrial base and maximise the economic benefits of the global shift to net zero.
Because diversifying our economy at home is about deepening and diversifying our trade in the region too.
And making it easier for our neighbours and trusted partners to back job-creating projects in Australia.
That’s why we are working to establish a new front door for international investment, a streamlined, single point of entry that will support firms looking to invest in Australia.
The publication you can read today – Advancing Implementation – is an exercise in accountability.
It shows what we have achieved in the last 12 months. And it proves we are in this for the long term.
Not just the low-hanging fruit, not just the quick wins – we are building the foundations of our future prosperity.
For the next generation of economic opportunity – that will benefit our businesses, our citizens, our nations and our region as a whole.


Good afternoon, everyone.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It also gives me great pleasure to acknowledge:

Your All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew
Your Eminence Archbishop Makarios
Graces and Reverend Fathers
Ambassador of Greece to Australia, and Consul General of Greece in Melbourne
Members of federal and state parliament and local government who are here today
Other distinguished guests
Friends

It is an honour to be here with you for this joyous occasion.
This visit by His All-Holiness coincides with the 100th anniversary of the establishment of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia.
A very special milestone, and a testament to the energy, the strength and the stamina of a community – generation after generation.
It is powerful as an expression of faith, and also as an enduring act that honours both the heritage of the old country and the haven of the new. What a powerful bond to have between two nations.
From humble beginnings as a small Holy Metropolis, the Greek Orthodox Church has flourished over the past century.
The Church has helped preserve the culture, language and traditions of Australia’s Greek community, connecting more than 400,000 people to their heritage.
It has brought people together in the spirit of love and compassion that is the great, beating heart of the Christian faith.
And it has nurtured a sense of belonging, helped people in need, and nourished the Greek community and our nation.
For that, we are so grateful.
And, as we reflect with thanks on the past 100 years, we have so much reason to be hopeful for the next 100.
This National Parade is a magnificent tribute to His All-Holiness, and a jubilant celebration of Australia’s Greek Orthodox community.
From the first Orthodox arrivals in the 19th century to the waves of migrants escaping war-ravaged Europe, hundreds of thousands of Greek people have made their home in Australia.
For generations, you have helped build Australia. You are a central part of the story of modern Australia, and the great, vibrant multicultural society that we have built.
A society that we have built together. A society we take such pride in together.
Your All-Holiness,
I was honoured to attend the historic service at the Holy Cathedral of the Annunciation in Sydney last week, and to welcome you to Kirribilli House.
Today, it is my great honour to welcome you back to Melbourne.
It is a city to which you are connected on many levels.
Saint Paisios the Athonite — Patron Saint of Australia and someone you knew well — visited this city in 1977.
And we have the fortune of being able to count your brother as a Melburnian.
Melbourne, of course, is one of the great Greek-speaking cities of the world.
And being here today, I’m taken back to the vibrant Antipodes Festival in the historic Greek quarter on Lonsdale Street I attended earlier this year.
The festival is a celebration of Hellenic culture, and brings together people from so many other backgrounds and faiths, as well.
Your All-Holiness,
As spiritual leader to Orthodox Christians around the world, you have become one of the most revered religious figures of our time.
You have provided comfort to millions of people.
You were one of the first global spiritual leaders to raise awareness about climate change and environmental issues.
You have worked for the peaceful coexistence of all people.
And at this deeply challenging time in the world, the values of respect, kindness, understanding and compassion that you embody are more important than ever.
We are deeply honoured by your presence.
Kalosorisate.
Welcome.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is such a pleasure to be with you all tonight – with the membership of a union that has made such a real difference in the life and health of our nation.
A union whose ranks are made strong by heroes of the pandemic.
I would particularly like to acknowledge National Secretary Lloyd Williams and National President Gerard Hayes.
Leadership is challenging enough when things are relatively easy.
We’ve seen your leadership put to the test when things have been anything but easy.
During that unprecedented crisis, we saw you and this entire movement continue to serve the Australian people with dedication and compassion.
A core part of our agenda is building the stronger economy that makes possible everything else that we need to do – for the benefit of your members, and for all Australians.
We’ve turned the Coalition’s decade long chain of deficits into back-to-back Labor surpluses.
We’ve dragged inflation down from the 6.1 per cent we inherited from the Liberal and National parties to less than half of that today.
We’ve made medicines cheaper and boosted bulk-billing at the doctors.
We’ve opened 76 free Medicare Urgent Care Clinics around the country.
We’ve made childcare cheaper.
We’ve given tax cuts to every worker.
We’ve introduced energy bill relief for every household.
We’ve made TAFE free for hundreds of thousands of Australians.
And, importantly, we’ve got wages moving again.
During the campaign I was asked if I supported a wage rise for our lowest-paid workers.
My answer was unequivocal: “Absolutely.”
And I held up a dollar coin.
A dollar coin might not be much on its own, but it told you a whole lot about the Coalition when they went into rage over it.
My Government has supported a pay rise for our lowest paid workers three years running.
I was deeply touched a couple of years back when aged care and retail worker Grace presented me with a dollar coin, mounted next to a plaque bearing the word “Absolutely”. I keep it on my desk as a reminder.
That one-word election promise has been translated into a reality for millions of workers.
Real wages have grown more in the past year alone than they did for the decade the Coalition was in power.
Never forget that keeping wages low was a central part of their economic plan – just as it will be if they ever get back into power.
Their ideology blinds them to reality. And the reality is that since our election, we have demonstrated that wages growth and job creation can go together.
Since the Australian people put their trust in Labor on election day in 2022, 1 million new jobs have been created. A record for any first-term government.
The participation rate is up.
The gender pay gap is down – to a record low of 11.5 per cent.
The number of women employed is up. The number of women in jobs and working full time is also a record.
Since 1 July, every Australian taxpayer has enjoyed a tax cut – not just the Liberals’ chosen handful of high-income earners.
Under the Liberals, so many of your members wouldn’t have seen a cent.
Under Labor, they can earn more and keep more of what they earn.
Workers have the Right to Disconnect, because no matter how much you love your job, no employer has the right to pressure you to work for free.
We know there is more work to do and we’re staying focused on delivering meaningful relief.
Your union has been at the forefront of one of our proudest changes of all.
A payrise for our aged care workers.
A payrise for the very people we depend on for the wellbeing and dignified comfort of so many of our oldest Australians.
A payrise for the people who are helping to shape the system that will ultimately touch so many of us.
I am proud to lead the Labor Government that worked alongside you.
I am proud to lead the Labor Government that has the back of your members.
And I am proud to lead the Labor Government that made it a priority to walk the talk and fund the aged care work value case that helped deliver this outcome.
Stage one of this case delivered a 15 per cent pay rise to direct care workers in aged care in July last year – just over a year after we were elected.
And a further series of increases delivered pay rises of up to another 13 per cent, meaning that some workers will have received increases of 28 per cent
This would never have occurred if we hadn’t committed to fund it.
If you want an example of what happens when the labour movement comes together with united purpose, the HSU and the Federal Labor Government have provided a leading example.
There is also an award review process underway examining whether classifications in 5 awards – including the Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services Award – have been undervalued on the basis of gender.
This process is directly the result of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay legislation that we introduced during our first year in office.
Like Same Job, Same Pay, the Right to Disconnect, new minimum standards for gig workers and rights for casuals our focus on fairness in sectors where women make up the majority of workers will change lives for the better.
The truth is that we can never be all we can be as a nation until we have gender equality.
And as the proud leader of the first Australian government in which women make up the majority, I can tell you that is a truth that drives us forward every single day.
Friends, take a moment to consider everything we have fought for together.
Everything we have achieved.
And, because we never pause to rest on our laurels, all the things we are working to achieve in the future.
All of it will be under threat if the Coalition gets back into power.
To Peter Dutton, the fair go is just one more thing to cut.
Peter Dutton’s overpowering instinct is to push for Australians work longer for less – so nothing is more baffling to him than a union.
Except perhaps improving Medicare.
So a union that fights so hard to improve our health system threatens his entire world view.
After a decade of Liberal cuts and neglect, we are getting bulk billing back on track.
Here’s a quick quiz for you. Guess who was in charge when the last Liberal Government launched its attack on Medicare?
I’ll give you the big tip. The doctors of Australia voted him the worst Health Minister ever.
Peter Dutton.
Through his whole time as Minister for Health he had one idea – making sick people pay more.
A GP tax. A hospital tax. A medicine tax.
And a six-year freeze on Medicare rebates.
The ultimate measure of how bad Peter Dutton was at his job is that he was sacked … by Tony Abbott. That takes some doing.
If the Liberals’ history on Medicare is terrible, the risk they pose in the future is even worse. We already know they’re planning cuts.
Peter Dutton has gone on the record before about wanting to slash the number of free Medicare services.
Medicare is one place Peter Dutton is actually guaranteed to go nuclear.
There’s only one sure way to keep Medicare strong – keep Labor strong in Government.
One of the real positives that emerged out of the last few years has been a newfound appreciation for the workers who make up the health and care sector.
Your members are a core part of a successful society at the best of times. And you made all the difference during our most challenging times. 
 We owe a debt of gratitude to your membership. But gratitude is not enough.
To get the big things done and deliver the change your extraordinary, hardworking members deserve, what’s needed is more than thank you.
You need a Labor Government.
And you need the HSU.
Both of us, working hard, every day, to build a better future for all Australians.
Together we’ve achieved so much – and there’s so much more we can deliver for Australia in the years to come.
I wish you a great conference.


I’m delighted to be back in Perth and back at Telethon.
This event is a wonderful tradition – and an extraordinary phenomenon.
For almost 60 years now, Telethon has reflected the very best of the West.
The kindness and compassion of the people of WA.
And also that famous West Australian determination: the willingness to get involved, dig deep and make a positive difference to the lives of children and families most in need of support. 
One way of measuring of Telethon’s remarkable success is the fact that you’ve raised more than $600 million for people in need — meaning this is the highest-donating telethon, per capita, in the world.
An even more meaningful measure is to think of the lives those funds have changed.
Courageous, cheerful children like Emily, Sophia, Harrison and Connor, who I had the privilege of meeting with last year.
And Ari who, the year before, talked me into wearing pyjamas for the broadcast.
The pyjamas were fine, it was the bloke who appeared on set wearing the mankini that worried me.
The stars of Telethon are facing some of the toughest circumstances imaginable.
Challenges that no child, no family, should have to face.
But you wouldn’t know it from speaking with them.
Their joy, humour and optimism shine through.
It’s always an honour to meet with people who Telethon supports.
And it’s an honour to support Telethon.
Tonight I am proud to announce that our Government is committing $6 million in funding to Telethon, on behalf of all Australians.
I want to thank the organisers and volunteers, the WA Government and business community, and all the people who have donated and contributed.
I want to also give a shout out to the doctors, nurses and staff who look after these wonderful young Australians.
When I visited the Perth Children’s Hospital with Kerry Stokes last year I was inspired by them as well as the families I was privileged to meet.
This is a big state with an even bigger heart – and I’m sure this year’s Telethon will be the best yet.
Congratulations, have a great evening.
Thank you.


Your Majesty,
For decades, you have been warmly welcomed to our country by generations of Australians as the Prince of Wales.
Here, in the heart of our democracy, it now gives us the greatest pleasure to welcome you for the first time as sovereign – and to welcome alongside you Her Majesty, Queen Camilla.
Since your first visit in 1966, you have been taken into Australian hearts – just as you have taken us into yours.
You have known the great natural beauty of this continent in all its challenge and all its reward.
You have known the warmth, strength and humour of our people.
And what has grown out of your appreciation of all of this is an affection that flows both ways. 
You have stood with us proudly in our good times.
You have stood with us just as emphatically in our difficult times.
In that same spirit, I know how greatly many Australian charities value the quiet yet deeply personal interest Queen Camilla has taken in their work over the years.
Your Majesty,
We also like to believe that, along the way, this country has managed to make something of a mark on you.
Not least through some of your uniquely Australian educational experiences, ranging from your time at Timbertop to your time in the Countdown studio being interviewed by Molly Meldrum.
Both, in their own ways, deeply formative experiences.
As King, you have an extraordinary duty to the traditions so carefully upheld, protected and nurtured by generations of your forebears.
Not least your mother, Queen Elizabeth II, herself such a shining thread through the story of modern Australia.
As she served her people unflaggingly, she was respected, she was cherished, and she was much loved.
At the end of her extraordinary life, Australia mourned with you and your family.
Your abiding duty to all that has been built on the foundations of tradition is balanced by a great responsibility to the future – its serious challenges, and its exciting possibilities.
You have long apprehended the grave reality of climate change.
You take seriously the threat that it represents, as well as the necessity – and, crucially, the capability – of humanity to take meaningful and effective action against it. 
For a considerable time, you have also been a valued contributor to discussions on the urban environment and sustainability.
You have also shown a deep and abiding interest in reconciliation and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
And you have shown great respect for Australians, even during times when we have debated the future of our own constitutional arrangements and the nature of our relationship with the crown.
Nothing stands still.
The Australia you first knew has grown and evolved in so many ways.
Our communities have been strengthened and enriched by people drawn from every culture, background and tradition.
As a modern, outward-looking economy, we’ve found our place in the world - and made our home in the region.
We’ve gained a deeper and truer understanding of our national story.
Yet through these decades of change, our bonds of respect and affection have matured - and endured.
Your Majesty,
It was an honour to lead the Australian delegation attending your coronation, as it was to be granted a private audience with you.
Australians have long felt that the warmth your mother felt for this country is a warmth that thrives in your own heart.
In the coming days, we will be together again in Samoa, carrying the warmth of the Australian people to the extraordinary community of nations that is our great Commonwealth.
For Australia, the Commonwealth is family.
And as with any family, we appreciate our differences, we have regard for each other’s achievements, and we revel in the closeness of what is a remarkable and enduring bond.
Indeed, it is a family in which you have been immersed nearly as long as your own.
In 1966, you came to us a fresh-faced student, ready for an education that was never going to be contained within the walls of a classroom.
Nearly six decades on, you have come to us in your new role, bearing the weight of the crown and all that it entails.
We know the institution is secure in your hands, and we know your commitment to peace and stability will act as your guide during the challenging times in which we find ourselves.
The regard and the respect we feel for you has been decades in the making.
It’s a story that has seen so much change over so many years.
What never changes is the truth stamped on every page of that story, which is that your majesties are very welcome here – and on behalf of all Australians, we wish you a splendid stay.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, Prime Minister, it was great to catch up informally last night, and good to have our first formal meeting this morning. We know each other quite well, through both meetings and the phone hook-ups etc, that we've had over the years. But I congratulate you very much on behalf of Australia for your election. I look forward to very much working with you. We share common values. And the work that we can do together in the international rule of law, in upholding international human rights, the work that we've done with common interests. Our Australian defence personnel helping to train Ukrainians in the UK with the struggle against Russia's illegal invasion. The work we're doing at AUKUS. And importantly, here in the Pacific as well, there, of course, will be a focus on climate change, where both of us recognise that it is a challenge, but also an enormous opportunity. And today, the work that we'll do on the clean energy transition, working with the private sector, seeing this as an opportunity as well for industrial transformation and making sure that people aren't left behind as we transition to net zero is something that we can work very closely on.
KEIR STARMER, PRIME MINISTER OF THE UNITED KINGDOM: Well, it's really good to have this bilateral here. We obviously caught up yesterday in any event. And look, we've got a good, strong, shared history together. Our nations have always been close. Close ties economically, which has been fantastic, and increasingly when it comes to issues like defence. But our values are aligned as well, particularly as you see when it comes to the challenges out there, the environmental challenge, the climate challenge, which is a challenge and an opportunity, as you rightly say. We share an approach when it comes to conflicts like Ukraine and the Middle East. And we’ve got great people-to-people contact, which has been going on for a very long time, and long may that continue. So, lots in our intro to talk through. But really good to sit down with you again and have those discussions. So thank you.


Talofa.
Thank you Prime Minister Fiame for hosting this event today.
In August in Tonga, as Pacific Leaders we agreed to a major new chapter in our region’s collective security – the Pacific Policing Initiative.
Today, it is privilege to join my fellow Pacific leaders in welcoming officers from 11 nations, representing the first ever Pacific Police Support Group deployment.
Putting the words of our agreement into action - and demonstrating the spirit of regional co-operation.
Security of the Pacific, designed for the Pacific, led and delivered by the Pacific.
The work of the Pacific Police Support Group will be backed by a training and coordination hub based in Brisbane and four new Centres of Excellence for police training across the region.
Each participating state will make its own sovereign decisions about its participation.
I think we can all agree this is an outstanding start – and I congratulate the Government of Samoa for drawing on the PPSG to provide security for hosting a significant global event like CHOGM.
This initiative builds on a proven track record of co-operation, it gives the region access to a trained pool of officers, ready to deploy in response to sovereign requests.
And it speaks for a fundamental truth: in the Pacific, the security of any one of us, matters to all of us.
That’s what family means. That’s the Pacific way - and it’s the right way forward.
As I announced at this year’s PIF, Australia is proud to be providing substantial, long-term support to ensure the PPI succeeds, and delivers on the aspirations of our region.
To those joining us on deployment, thank you for the contribution you are making to the security and safety of our region.
And thank you for being the first to step forward and serve.
You are setting a standard others will follow: as we strive to ensure the stability, security and prosperity of our region for all of us – and for future generations.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
Two and a half years ago, my colleagues and I asked the people of Australia to trust us with the honour of serving as their Government and to join us in the task of building a better future.
We came to office knowing this was a time of serious and urgent challenges.
Global economic uncertainty.
A worldwide surge in inflation and energy prices.
And Australia’s relationships with our region under strain.
At home: aged care was in crisis, Medicare under threat, bulk-billing in free-fall.
Real wages were going backwards – not by accident but by deliberate design.
Our energy grid had been run-down by years of ideology and neglect.
And skills and manufacturing hollowed-out to the point that in the midst of a global pandemic we nearly ran out of masks and couldn’t make any more.
These are the challenges we’ve had to face. This is the mess we’ve worked to clean up.
And – always – our focus has been on helping people who are doing it tough.
Making medicines cheaper, opening 75 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics around the nation.
Boosting bulk-billing, so millions of people can see a doctor for free.
Rebuilding the health system so it’s your Medicare card that matters – not your credit card.
We’ve delivered energy bill relief for every household and small business.
We’re cracking down on dodgy pricing and unfair charges – be it online or at the supermarket.
We’re delivering new rights and better bargaining for workers across the country.
Boosting wages for millions of Australians in aged care, child care and low paid industries.
Expanding Paid Parental Leave to six months – and adding superannuation to it.
And – importantly – we are delivering a tax cut for every single Australian taxpayer.
All 13.6 million of them. Not just some.
Our economic plan has prioritised helping people under pressure while also fighting inflation.
When we came to Government annual inflation had a six in front of it and was rising.
Now it has a two in front of it, and it’s falling.
Our responsible economic management has brought inflation down to its lowest level in almost four years.
And while inflation is falling, real wages are rising.
One million new jobs have been created.
The gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
Two great South Australians – Penny Wong and Don Farrell – have worked to stabilise our relationship with China and restored trade for our farmers, growers and winemakers.
And we’ve delivered back to back budget surpluses for the first time in nearly two decades.
This is an economic record we are proud of – and more than that, it’s the foundation for building Australia’s future.
I understand that the past few years have been difficult. I know workers, families and small businesses have all done it hard.
But while there are still challenges to meet, still problems to solve, still people under pressure who need our help, when we look at the economy today, we can see new reasons for optimism and new proof the worst is behind us.
Together, we have faced a global storm – and we have navigated it the Australian way, the Labor way.
Not by cutting the services Australians count on, not by denying families the help they need in hard times.
But by looking after people – and looking to the future.
Because for all the challenges we have faced, this remains a time of profound opportunity for Australia.
And if we act with purpose and urgency, if we invest in our people and trust in their aspirations – we can secure a new wave of jobs and prosperity for every part of our country.
Just as South Australia has led the nation in rooftop solar and large-scale renewables, our nation can lead the world on clean energy.
We can power a new generation of manufacturing. We can make things here in Australia.
We can build Australia’s future – stronger and fairer than ever before.
And we can make sure that the people who have carried the weight of today’s challenges, share the rewards of tomorrow’s opportunities.
Reform that holds no-one back, progress that leaves no-one behind.
That’s what drives and defines our Government.
The responsibility we have to help people here and now.
And the duty we owe to the next generation of Australians – to build an economy that liberates their talents and rewards their efforts.
Part of this is about embracing new technology, investing in new industries, creating new jobs, opening new markets and unlocking new energy.
But at its heart is the oldest and deepest Australian aspiration: the aspiration for a better life and greater opportunity for the next generation.
The very best education for your child – from the early years all the way through to their choice of university or TAFE.
Medicare you can count on when your loved ones are sick.
Wages that mean you can save, not just survive.
An Australia where a home you want in a community you love is not a far-off fantasy, or a financial nightmare – it’s a goal you can strive for and achieve.
A country where you know that if you put in and work hard, it adds up to something.
You earn the security to plan for your future – and build a good life for your family.
And where you know that if things go wrong, if luck goes against you or times are hard, you’re never on your own.
No-one held back and no-one left behind.
That principle has guided me my whole life.
I’ve never lost sight of that, I’ve never forgotten the people we are here to serve.
That’s why my colleagues and I work every day to make a positive difference to people’s lives.
And it’s why we’re so determined to win the next election.
To help people through these cost of living pressures, to get more homes built, to get energy prices down, to get more Australians into good jobs, to get Medicare back to its best.
The next election is about all of that – but it’s also about the next generation.
It’s about fulfilling the ambition that all of us share for our nation’s future.
Building an economy and society worthy of the people whose resilience and hard work has brought us through these hard times.
Building a country that’s smarter and stronger, fairer and more prosperous, with the confidence to shape the future, rather than wait for the future to shape us.
For our Labor Government this mission always begins with education.
Education is the most powerful weapon we have against disadvantage – and it is the best investment we can make in building Australia’s future.
Because every challenge we have to meet, every opportunity which is there to be seized, depends on investing in the skills and capacity of the Australian people.
The tradies and architects who will build and plan the homes we need.
The engineers and electricians who will deliver the clean energy to take us to net zero.
The scientists discovering new cures and driving new breakthroughs.
The nurses and doctors keeping our families healthy.
The aged care workers and disability carers bringing security and dignity into the lives of our loved ones.
The programmers and technicians to help Australia succeed in a new era of digital transformation.
So many of the jobs we require to shape and secure our future, will require either a TAFE qualification or a university degree.
Not as an added extra, as a starting requirement. The first thing employers will look for on your CV.
It will be the expectation for almost every child in primary school today and almost every child who will follow them.
This is why our Government is making new investments in every stage of education.
We’re getting wages for early educators up – and keeping the cost of child care down.
And in the years ahead, we are determined to make early childhood education an opportunity that every child can access and every family can afford.
Around the country, we’re working with the states and territories to boost funding for every student in every government school.
And, friends, one of the biggest changes we have made in education has been one of the best.
We’ve put public TAFE back at the centre of training.
Under our Government, over half a million Australians have enrolled in fee-free TAFE.
35,000 in construction courses – and the same in early education.
50,000 in digital technology.
130,000 in aged care and disability care.
Tens of thousands of jobseekers getting a fresh start.
Hundreds of thousands of young people, training for a new career and older workers training for a new opportunity.
One in every three places taken up by people in regional communities.
Six in every 10 enrolments have been women.
And you know what the Liberals and Nationals said?
They called it ‘wasteful spending’.
I’ll tell them what’s a waste: the waste of potential when people are held back from a new job because they can’t get the qualification they need.
The waste of experience when older workers are left to fall through the cracks, rather than getting the chance to re-train.
The waste of time and opportunity when housing and energy projects can’t get off the ground because of skills shortages.
The waste when businesses have to look overseas, instead of Australians being trained and ready here at home.
No Labor Government would ever call TAFE a waste.
Because we know that TAFE and university are equally important to our workforce and equally vital to our future.
And the choice to enrol in one or the other should be driven by one consideration alone – what is best for the student.
Because both are good for Australia.
Today I am proud to announce our Government will lock-in free TAFE and make it permanent, nationwide.
We will legislate to guarantee 100,000 fee-free TAFE places, each and every year.
More tradies to build more homes.
More apprentices getting a start.
More carers to look after our loved ones – whether they be young or old.
More opportunities for Australians to train and re-train in a changing economy.
TAFE gives our country and our people all of this.
And as long there is a Labor Government, free TAFE is here to stay.
Whether it’s TAFE or university, post-school education is an investment individuals make in themselves and their career.
But it’s also an investment that government makes in the future of our country: the creativity and innovation that Australia needs to grow and thrive.
For the individual, the return on their investment is a job they love, a career that lets them build a life for themselves and their family.
For the country, it’s bigger and broader than that – it’s discovery and research, industry and ideas, a more productive workforce and a more equal society.
Our whole nation benefits when we make it easier for people to access education.
That’s what I meant on election night, when I spoke about opening the doors of opportunity – and widening them.
It’s why we are doubling the number of university hubs in the regions and outer suburbs, to bring higher education to communities that were missing out.
It’s why we created Paid Prac. New financial support for our future teachers, nurses and social workers, so they don’t have to worry about missing work and wages while they’re on placement.
And it’s why in this year’s Budget, we wiped $3 billion in debt from around three million Australians who had been caught out by the spike in inflation.
Saving a person with an average debt around $1,200.
Part of this was about addressing a one-off. Just as importantly, we changed the system, we made it fairer and better, so it could never happen again.
Liberal Governments have done a lot of damage to the university system.
If you think back, to when a Labor Government created HECS, they chose that name because it was about students making a contribution to the cost of their education.
But the Liberals changed it, to say you were getting a loan.
As if you were borrowing money for a new car, rather than working to earn a degree to assist yourself and also our nation.
That Liberal obsession with squeezing every possible dollar out of students has brought us to the point that just when university has never been more important, for more Australians it's never been harder to pay off.
This generation of students are graduating from three-year degrees with debts of thirty, forty, even fifty thousand dollars.
That level of debt hangs over you – you can see it when you log into MyGov, or do your tax return.
It affects how much you can borrow for a home, it impacts decisions you make about family and career.
And because of the changes the Morrison Government made, it comes out of your take home pay, sooner.
Fixing this intergenerational unfairness will require substantial investment, it will take time.
But that’s not an excuse to delay – it’s the reason we’ve already started.
We’re already fixing indexation.
And today we are going further.
Today I announce that if we win the next election, we will deliver more help for all three million Australians with a student debt.
A re-elected Labor Government will take 20 per cent off student debt – for everyone who has one.
It will be the first piece of legislation we bring into the next Parliament.
The first thing we do in our second term.
And it will take effect by the 1st of June, next year.
This measure alone means a typical university graduate will see their debt cut by $5,500.
But we are not stopping there.
We will make it easier for young Australians to save for their future – and we are going to make the system better and fairer as well.
We will raise the repayment threshold from $54,000 up to $67,000, lower the rate of repayments – and index both to keep them fair in the future.
This means if you’re earning $70,000 you will save $1,300 a year in repayments.
It helps everyone repaying a student debt right now – and it delivers a better deal for every student in the years ahead.
Permanent, structural reform to boost take home pay for young Australians.
This is about putting money back into your pocket – and putting intergenerational equity back into the system.
Good for cost of living.
Good for this generation – and for generations to come.
Good for building Australia’s future.
Just like the wage increases we’ve delivered for workers and the tax cuts we’ve delivered for every taxpayer, these reforms will help Australians earn more and keep more of what they earn.
These policies are our next big step – and they won’t be the last.
Because Labor will always be the party of education.
We will always be the party of aspiration.
And no matter where you live, no matter how much your parents earn – we will always work to ensure the doors of opportunity are open for you.
This is what Labor Governments do – we help people under pressure and we build for the future.
We deal with the challenges in front of us – and we do it in a way that anticipates and creates a better future for all of us.
That principle will be at the heart of the positive and ambitious plan we take to the Australian people next year.
At the next election the choice our nation faces will be as clear and important as it has ever been.
A Labor Government working every day to get costs down for families, wages up for workers and inflation back to where it should be.
A Labor Government securing the progress our nation has made, delivering the better results that all Australians have worked so hard together to earn.
A Labor Government driving the change our nation needs – and creating the opportunities our people deserve.
Or, a return to the denial, delay and division of the past, the Liberal and National Parties.
The same people who spent nine years in Government creating the problems – and have spent every day in Opposition trying to block the solutions.
Their cuts, their waste, their neglect left Australia wide open to global uncertainty – and now they want to go further.
They want to cut what is helping and punish people who are struggling.
To claw back the tax cuts we’ve delivered.
To close the Medicare Urgent Care clinics we’ve opened.
To stop the housing projects we’ve started.
To take away the help with power bills you deserve.
To push up the price of medicines you need.
To rip away the pay rises you’ve earned and the rights you have won.
To derail the progress we’ve made on renewables – so they can burn hundreds of billions of dollars on nuclear reactors.
A plan that will deliver less than four per cent of the energy Australia needs – and two decades too late.
Peter Dutton has spent every day as Opposition Leader hoping for the worst for this country.
He thinks Australia can’t compete for good jobs, he thinks workers don’t deserve fair wages, he thinks you don’t need help with your power bills, he thinks medicine should be more expensive and Medicare less generous.
He’s wrong about our country - and his agenda is all wrong for Australia.
Because the challenges facing us will not be solved by cutting, the opportunities ahead of us will not be seized by wrecking.
This is a time for building.
Building better education for all.
Building more homes for Australians.
Building the cleaner and cheaper energy to cut our emissions and power our homes and industries.
Building an economy defined by good jobs, fair wages and equality for women.
Building an economy connected to the growth and opportunities of Asia, where we make things here in Australia.
Building a society defined and uplifted by better aged care, a more secure NDIS and stronger Medicare for everyone.
Building a nation that is secure at home, strong in our region and respected on the world stage.
Building an Australia where we care for our environment and keep it safe for our grandchildren.
Building an Australia where we embrace every culture, faith and tradition that enriches our nation – beginning with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
My fellow Australians
Next year, with respect for our people, optimism for the future and a determination to shape it, our Labor Government will be asking for the opportunity to continue to serve the greatest country in the world – and the chance to make it greater still.
Building on the strong foundations we have laid.
Building together.
Building to last.
Our Labor Government – Building Australia’s Future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I’m proud to be here tonight to celebrate 40 years of Medicare.
Forty years of a great and enduring Australian achievement. 
Forty years since the leadership of Bob Hawke and the determination of Health Minister Neal Blewett paid off.
Universal health care is a proud Labor legacy that all Australians share in – a legacy that will keep changing the lives of Australians long after the last of Medicare’s architects is gone.
And it is a source of pride for all of us as Australians – because it speaks so clearly to the sense of fairness that we see as one of the central traits of our national character.
That is why protecting and strengthening Medicare is one of the biggest priorities of this Government.
One year ago, the Government made the largest investment in bulk billing in Medicare history, targeted to families with children under 16, as well as pensioners and concession card holders.
The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners called the investment a “game changer”.
Twelve months on, we’re seeing the results.
More than 5.4 million extra bulk billed appointments in the past year, with 2.2 million in regional and remote areas.
Part of being Australian is knowing that when you need healthcare, your need is not measured by the size of your bank account.
All you need is that bit of green and gold – either the old school plastic, or the virtual version on your phone.
For decades, the humble Medicare card has been one of the greatest and most meaningful expressions of the fair go.
However, as extraordinary as Medicare is, it’s little more than a noble ideal without the people on the ground who make it work.
Tonight we acknowledge those who make Medicare possible.
The Stronger Medicare Awards are the perfect opportunity to recognise just some of the people who go above and beyond for their patients, from our biggest cities to regional centres, right across the breadth of our continent.
More than 140 exceptional nominations were received from across the country, with 37 outstanding finalists chosen by a panel of experts.
Our nation owes an incredible debt to all of you who have dedicated your lives to protecting and improving the health and well being of your fellow Australians.
You put yourselves on the line in so many ways for the sake of helping others, quietly demonstrating one of the noblest facets of the human spirit there is.
Yet for all you do – whether it’s routine, or the stuff of borderline miracles – you keep your feet planted firmly on the ground. And you are there for us.
Each of tonight’s finalists has made a significant contribution to health care in this country.
You have demonstrated selfless service, commitment to excellence, and passion for your patients and communities. 
On behalf of the Government, and all Australians, congratulations to all the nominees and the winners.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I’m delighted to be here tonight to celebrate the contribution that the businesses and workers represented in this room make to our national prosperity.
It’s fitting that we are gathered in the magnificent National Gallery - because your organisation has a proud history of looking at the big picture.
You engage with the detail of policy, the here and now.
But you also take the broad view, you recognise the global circumstances we have to manage and the global opportunities we must work together to seize.
I understand that this decade has brought more than its fair share of challenges for business.
The economic aftershocks of pandemic and conflict.
Disrupted supply chains, shortages in critical skills and a worldwide surge in inflation and energy prices.
In the face of this global uncertainty, the businesses and workers represented here tonight have shown extraordinary resilience.
And when we look at our economy today, we can be optimistic that the rewards of that resilience are now in sight.
There is new cause to hope that the worst is behind us.
The inflation figures tell that story.
Two years ago, annual inflation had a 6 in front of it and was rising.
Today, it has a 2 in front of it and it’s falling.
Inflation is down to its lowest level in nearly four years.
Consumer confidence is turning around.
Business investment is up.
Real wages are up.
The participation rate is at a record high.
The gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
Over one million new jobs have been created.
And consecutive budget surpluses have been delivered.
This is a set of achievements in which everyone here can take a measure of pride.
More importantly it’s a record of performance from which we can draw confidence in facing what’s ahead.
Together, we have navigated a global storm.
And even in rough seas, we’ve kept an eye on the horizon.
Dealing with the challenges in front of us, in a way that seeks to anticipate and create a better future for all of us.
All of you have shared in this national effort.
You’ve done more than keep your doors open.
You’ve created new jobs, invested in new energy, new technology and new drivers of productivity.
You’ve embraced the opportunity to take your products and services to new markets, in our region and around the world.
You have done your part – and my colleagues and I have worked to do ours.
Creating Jobs and Skills Australia and investing in TAFE and apprenticeships.
Two policies to which ACCI gave strong public support.
In the past two years, over half a million Australians have enrolled in fee-free TAFE.
And on the weekend in Adelaide, I announced our Government would be making free TAFE permanent, nationwide.
100,000 fee-free places, each and every year.
Young Australians training for a career.
Older workers re-training for new opportunities.
And business benefiting from the skills and knowledge of both.
TAFE is vital for the construction industry and the caring economy.
It is also essential for the technology sector, the hundreds of thousands of workers we need to strengthen our cyber security and drive our digital transformation.
For the same reason, we’re doubling the number of university hubs in our regions and suburbs, taking higher education to communities where people were missing out.
We are fixing indexation on student debt – wiping $3 billion that 3 million students incurred as a result of the one-off spike in inflation and making sure that can’t happen again.
We’re reforming the repayment threshold – and the rates - to boost take home pay for young Australians, so people don’t have to start paying off their university until university starts paying off for them.
And we are cutting 20 per cent off the student debt of everyone who has one, saving a typical graduate over $5,500.
These new initiatives are at the heart of our plan to drive the change our nation needs and create the opportunities our people deserve.
Helping people under pressure, rewarding effort, nourishing aspiration – and building for the future.
The University Accord which ACCI has engaged with in a very considered and detailed way – underlines a truth that all of us understand.
It’s never just the individual who benefits when we make it easier to access education - our whole nation gains from it.
When we invest in education, we’re investing in a more productive workforce.
A more creative and innovative culture, new research and technology.
The breakthroughs that become products and the discoveries that become industries.
The tradies and electricians, engineers and programmers we need to build and plan our future prosperity.
All of this is why TAFE and university are fundamental to Australia’s economic future.
Because we need to boost productivity. This is a long-running challenge and a long-term one.
In the decade to 2020, productivity growth in Australia was the lowest in 60 years.
In the five years leading up to the pandemic, the rate of productivity growth fell every year.
There’s no single, simple fix to turn this around.
But there are things that will make a valuable difference.
The work we are doing with the ACCC and in merger reform, is about strengthening transparency and competition.
This will deliver a better deal for consumers but also create a more level playing field for businesses.
A more dynamic environment that rewards innovation and drives greater productivity.
Cheaper child care is a productivity measure too.
An investment in future generations and their early learning – but also an economic reform that delivers greater choice and flexibility for parents balancing family and career.
That helps participation as well.
And so do the changes we’ve made to the tax cuts we inherited.
By delivering a tax cut for all 13.6 million taxpayers, our plan boosted labour supply and participation by creating greater incentive for low and middle income earners and part-time workers to take-on more hours.
Good for working parents and young people – and good for business and the economy as well.
Of course, one of the biggest challenges faced by businesses and households alike over the past few years has been the worldwide surge in energy prices.
From day one, we’ve made it a priority to restore certainty after years of chopping and changing.
Legislating our 2030 emissions reduction target and our commitment to net zero by 2050 – and, just as importantly, laying out the clear framework that will get us to these goals.
Our Safeguard Mechanism, incentivising firms to invest in technology that will reduce their emissions.
Our Capacity Investment Scheme, mobilising private capital to support the roll-out of large-scale renewables and storage.
This is bringing new, cleaner and cheaper power into our national energy grid.
It’s attracting new investment to our nation, from energy generators to global digital and technology firms.
And there’s a very clear connection between those two sectors.
The new data centres that will help drive the next wave of economic growth need a first, class fibre National Broadband Network and they need affordable and reliable clean energy that is ready to go, right now.
Ahead of tonight, I was reflecting that the first time I spoke to ACCI as Prime Minister two years ago, many of us had just returned from the G20 and B20 forums in Bali.
That was also where I had my first meeting with President Xi.
At the time, the first leader to leader meeting between Australia and the People’s Republic of China for 6 years.
Today, the patient, calibrated work we have done to stabilise the relationship with China has seen over $20 billion in trade impediments removed from Australian farmers, growers, miners and winemakers.
And while we have worked together to re-open those channels with our largest trading partner, so many businesses in this room have been key ambassadors in our efforts to diversify and deepen Australia’s trade links across South East Asia.
Seeking out those new markets, using your connections and your presence to advance Australia’s interests.
Taken together, South East Asia will be the 4th largest economy in the world by 2040.
Yet up until now it has been home to only 4 per cent of our investment.
Your efforts are critical to converting that potential into prosperity.
Because while Australia is a great trading nation – we can be an even better one.
We do that by building on our traditional partnerships and enduring strengths – and going beyond them.
This is not a matter of choosing one region or another, or prioritising a particular industry over another.
It’s not a question of risk mitigation, or hedging our bets.
It’s about building our supply chain resilience and boosting our economic and energy security.
In global trade, as in our local economy – diversity is strength.
Diversity in what we trade, diversity in who we trade with and diversity in the products we make and the services we can offer the world.
This is where our strategy for greater engagement with Asia, fits together with our vision for a Future Made in Australia.
The tax credits and incentives our Government is putting on the table so we can convert our critical minerals and clean energy into a source of comparative advantage.
Powering a new generation of manufacturing and value-adding.
Making the most of the global imperative to reach net zero.
Making things here – competing and succeeding in the world, our way.
With a skilled workforce and dynamic business sector offering high-value services and high-quality products.
I said at the beginning that ACCI sees the big picture.
You also call it as it you see it – and I respect that.
I value the constructive engagement I’ve had with people in this room going back many years.
The perspective you bring to the national policy debate and your willingness to be participants and advocates, not merely observers.
Our democracy is healthier for that – and our economy is stronger for it.
And while there are areas where we will have our differences, when you look through energy policy, skills, education, trade, engagement with the region, there is a strong and broad foundation that we have built together and that we can build on together.
We’re here tonight in a place that celebrates the creativity and genius of Australians.
Like our continent, the collection looks back tens of thousands of years. Starting with art from the oldest continuous culture in the world.
And like Australia, it looks out to the world and our place in it.
It says we can be the home of the best, we can embrace every culture and tradition and nourish our own unique identity.
In the years ahead, I’m sure we will face new tests.
There will still be problems to solve, challenges to meet, people under pressure who need our help.
But I can assure you, I’ve never been more optimistic about Australia’s future.
And my colleagues have never been more determined to deliver for the workers, businesses and nation we serve.
We look forward to continuing to work with all of you, in this vital task.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I extend a very warm welcome to all our international guests.
I am delighted that Australia is hosting this year’s Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference, so soon after a very warm and productive Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Samoa.
It was a uniquely Pacific CHOGM – the first to be convened by a Pacific island country.
Our discussions focused on the threat that climate change poses to all our nations: to our environment and economy, our fishing and farming, our future security and prosperity.
This is not a challenge any one of us can meet or solve alone - it demands the co-operation and commitment of us all.
It requires, as King Charles said at the Australian Parliament recently:
 “Both ancient and new thinking”.
The ancient respect for land and waters, paired with new breakthroughs in science and technology.
All of it driven by the organising and mobilising power of democracy.
Looking out on this extraordinary crowd, I see proof of the enduring strength of your Association.
I also see evidence of a shared determination, to learn from each other and work together, in the service and spirit of the oldest meaning of Commonwealth – the common good.
Where we are tonight, Sydney Town Hall, holds a special place in my heart.
For members of the New South Wales Labor Party like myself, this is almost-sacred ground.
The home of our State Conference: theatre, arena and colosseum all in one.
And for me, the cradle of my political life.
This is where I learned about putting arguments, demanding better for working people than the status quo – and respecting the outcome of democratic processes.
This is where my engagement in democracy and politics began - so I’m delighted to be part of your discussions on engaging and empowering citizens to sustain democracy around the world.
That’s a challenge we all face, it’s a responsibility we all share – and it can be an opportunity we all seize.
A chance to show that parliament, politics and democracy are not part of the problems facing our world, they are central to the solution.
A few hours ago, I was in Canberra for the final Question Time of the sitting week.
In our chamber, the two despatch boxes from which questions are asked and answered were a gift to Australia from King George V.
They were presented by his son the Duke of York, when he opened what we now call Old Parliament House in Canberra, in 1927.
And those boxes are such faithful copies of the ones that sat in the House of Commons that they even bear the pattern of nicks and scratches supposedly caused by the signet ring Prime Minister Gladstone used to wear, which would bite into the timber when he pounded the lid with his fist during speeches.
The King’s gift was the second Westminster replica presented to Australia’s Parliament.
The first was the Speaker’s Chair. An elaborate oak masterpiece packed into crates and shipped to Australia by the forerunner of this group, then called the Empire Parliamentary Association.
That chair included timber taken from the beams of Westminster Hall, the scene of the trial of Charles I.
And Nelson’s famous flagship at the battle of Trafalgar, HMS Victory.
Virtually every nation and parliament represented here, can point to a similar gift and tell a similar story.
Across the tremendous diversity of the Commonwealth we can trace this shared network of symbols and traditions, ritual and practice.
But of course, what truly binds and unites us is not the architecture of our chambers or the language of our proceedings.
It is the Parliaments in which we serve and the democratic systems that serve our nations.
And in different ways over the years all of us have done much more than diligently preserve the foundation stone.
We haven’t kept our democracy under glass, or treated it like a museum piece.
We’ve helped it grow and watched it evolve.
We’ve shaped our systems to the unique needs of our own nations, the values of our people, the history and culture of our lands.
We’ve expanded the right to vote and reformed the way we vote –strengthening our democracies by broadening their foundations.
And we’ve learned from each other – and helped each other.
In May 1941, a German bomb landed on the House of Commons.
It started a fire which reduced the chamber to nothing but a smoking shell.
And in the years after the war, when the time came to rebuild, it was the Parliaments and peoples of the Commonwealth that made it possible.
From New Zealand, new despatch boxes, using Australia’s as the template.
Australia reproduced the Speaker’s Chair, replacing English oak with Queensland timber.
From the people of Zambia, the bronze brackets to hold the mace.
Jamaica, the bronze bar beyond which visitors to the chamber cannot pass.
Pakistan, a new door for the South Entrance.
Uganda furnished the lobby for the Noes.
Nigeria, the Ayes.
And from the people of Sri Lanka, the chair for the Serjeant at Arms.
The list goes on.
All of it adding up to more than a mere reconstruction of what had been.
Instead, something stronger, better, drawn from a wider world.
Given shape by the aspirations of every nation that drew inspiration from that mother of Parliaments.
That’s the unifying spirit of this association.
A mutual respect, a shared willingness to listen and learn.
A common resolve to tackle the environmental challenge of climate change – and seize the economic opportunities of clean energy.
There is powerful diversity in the Commonwealth story.
And there is also a shared understanding that every nation’s history contains complexity, trauma and sorrow.
And no nation’s democracy is beyond improvement.
Recognising that while tradition can bind us, teach us and inspire us – it is not enough to sustain us.     
Because no system that derives its authority from the people will ever be the definite article, a complete and finished artefact.
And we should never put ourselves in the position of saying that democracy peaked sometime in past.
The value, power and relevance of Parliament is not something we can merely assert, it’s something we have to demonstrate, by rising to meet the challenges of the future.
We live in a time when trust in institutions is low and the media landscape is fragmented.
When people are confronted online with more and more opinions and fewer and fewer verified facts.
When the challenges of climate change, technology and population are complex and sometimes controversial.
We cannot simply trust to the weight of tradition.
Instead, just as the House of Commons built on its history with new materials drawn from all over the world.
All of us must be willing to draw on new ideas for engaging our citizens and new initiatives for strengthening our democracies.
And a great place to start is making our Parliaments look more like the nations and populations we serve.
In my time in politics, one of the most significant changes in culture and representations can be traced to a decision the Labor Party took at our 1994 National Conference.
I was proud to be among the delegates who voted for our party to adopt Affirmative Action with the aim of equal representation for women in our ranks.
Today, I am even more proud to lead the first Government in Australian history with a majority of women.
Over those three decades, I’ve seen firsthand that such change doesn’t just mean better representation, it also drives a better culture and better decisions, informed by a broader range of views.
The final point I want to make is that making Parliament and democracy better is not about reducing disagreement or dialling-back the contest of ideas.
We serve in adversarial systems – that’s a feature, not a flaw.
Parliament should be a proving ground for ideas and policies, a place where we apply the sternest possible test to the strength and rigour of propositions.
A fierce contest can be a good thing, as long as it’s a contest about substance, about things that matter to people and issues that affect the country.
Sometimes this means things can be loud or unpredictable, sometimes the arguments are more sledgehammer than scalpel.
When the stakes are high, passions run high.
But these are not warning signs, they are vital signs. Proof of life and cause for hope.
Because only dictatorships pretend to be perfect.
Democracy is proud to be human.
It is, in every sense, a work in progress.
And that’s why I’ve always believed that the strongest antidote to the corrosive forces of cynicism and division.
And the most compelling argument in favour of democracy, is not an abstract, theoretical or historical one.
It’s about demonstrating the capacity of government to make a positive difference.
Delivering for people.
Proving worthy of their trust. Living up to our shared values.
And taking on the big challenges – even if the causes are complex and the solutions unknown.
In all of this, we must make people our partners in this task.
Showing the humility to listen and explain and advocate, not just assert.
The courage and capacity to push back against cynicism and extremism, division and disinformation. 
In many ways, this has never been more difficult.
But in every way that matters, it’s never been more important.
Thank you all for visiting Australia.
Thank you for the contribution you make to life and strength of Parliaments around the world.
Have a wonderful evening.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Can I thank everyone for joining us at relatively short notice. As you're aware, my Cabinet passed a position on Monday for a comprehensive plan to ban social media for under 16. This is what parents want to see around Australia. It's something that we know is talked about on the sideline of every sporting activity, outside school grounds. And it is something that state Premiers and Chief Ministers have raised with me directly, with Minister Rowland, who's with me this morning, and with their own constituencies as well. So part of the reason for convening the National Cabinet is to make sure that we have uniformity. We don't want to see different rules in different jurisdictions, because one of the things that parents are looking for here is clarity. And this is about keeping our young Australians safe. I think it is a very positive initiative that we'll be looking to get your endorsement today. I have said and committed to introducing legislation before the end of this year, we have two sitting weeks to go. So arising out of today, what we're hoping to do is to get your endorsement. We'll also, of course, give you access to the legislation when it is finalised for introduction into the Parliament as well. But I do want to acknowledge as well, the leadership of CAF and the leadership of Premiers and Chief Ministers on this really important social issue that's confronting Australians.


XI JINPING, PRESIDENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: It's a pleasure to meet you, Mr Prime Minister, in the beautiful city of Rio de Janeiro.
Last November, we had in-depth discussions on the strategic and overarching issues critical to the long-term development of our relations. And our discussions were very productive over the past year and more. We have maintained close communications at all levels, actively promoting the implementations of our common understandings, and made positive progress.
Ten years ago today, I was on a state visit in Australia. And on this very day, during which our two sides agreed to establish a comprehensive strategic partnership. And over the past decade, we have made some progress in China-Australia relations and also witnessed some twists and turns. That trajectory has many inspirations to offer.
Now, our relations have realised a turnaround and continues to grow, bringing tangible benefits to our two peoples. So, this is the result of our collective hard work in the same direction, and should be maintained with great care.
I wish to work with you, Mr Prime Minister, to make our comprehensive strategic partnership more mature, stable and fruitful and eject more stability and certainty to the region and the wider world.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well, thank you very much, Mr President. And it is a pleasure to meet you here today for what is our third formal meeting, but particularly auspicious to be on the 10th anniversary of the comprehensive strategic partnership between our two great nations.
Let me express, as well, my appreciation for your tremendous hospitality when I visited Beijing last year, and where we have recommenced our leaders meetings. Since then, there has been further encouraging progress in the stabilisation of our relationship.
We've resumed a range of dialogues. And the tempo of bilateral visits is increasing. Trade is flowing more freely to the benefit of both countries and to people and businesses on both sides. We continue to explore opportunities for practical co-operation in areas of shared interest, including on our energy transition and climate change.
Our whole region will benefit from the prosperity that can flow from peace, security and stability in our region. That is why our direct discussions to build deeper understanding on the issues that matter to us are so important.
We live in the fastest growing region of the world in human history. And the rise of China has contributed to this while lifting the living standards of hundreds of millions of people through increased economic activity. And I look forward to another productive discussion today.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Good evening, everyone.
Thank you, Peter, for that warm introduction.
I’d like to acknowledge all our distinguished guests tonight, including all my parliamentary colleagues.
I especially want to thank all the veterans and serving personnel of the Australian Defence Force who are here tonight.
Australians owe a debt of gratitude to all those who serve our nation – and to their partners and families who support them.
Friends,
I’m delighted to join you for this wonderful celebration.
Each year, these awards recognise the extraordinary skills and talents of our veterans, the support and dedication of their families, and the contributions of employers right across Australia.
These awards matter because they acknowledge that moving into the civilian workforce can be a challenging journey.
Yet is important that the journey is undertaken for the simple, powerful fact that our veterans have so very much to offer.
Your hard-won skills — like leadership, teamwork, and the ability to work well under pressure — are an asset to any employer.
Your work ethic is a strength in any team.
You have extraordinary capacities as leaders, planners, thinkers, and communicators.
And you are steeped in the values of the Australian Defence Force: service, courage, respect, integrity, and excellence.
Everyone here tonight gets it.
But we’re sharing the message with people and organisations outside these walls, too — from small businesses and NGOs, to government agencies and big corporate employers.
All Australians need to appreciate that our veterans have the powerful combination of experience and personal qualities that are the makings of a valuable contribution.
A meaningful job and secure workplace are crucial to this.
Our Veteran Employment Program has improved how we’re supporting veterans move into meaningful civilian work.
It’s doing more to empower our veterans, and help employers better understand the unique skills and experiences veterans bring.
I’m also delighted by our renewed Veteran Employment Commitment, which asks employers to create the sorts of workplaces where veterans can thrive.
Thank you to all the organisations who’ve joined the VEC so far. It is my hope that many more will follow their lead.
Our veterans are some of the most resourceful and skilled people I have ever met.
We must also acknowledge the role played by their partners and families.
They’ve made enormous personal sacrifices, and in the process they have made so much possible.
For so many veterans, there is no greater source of strength than their loved ones who have stood by them over the years.
You have all stepped up for us, so we must step up for you.
One meaningful way of stepping up is help you navigate the challenges of forging your own careers.
Just as there are challenges that can be made easier, there are very real rewards there for the taking – for employees, and for employers.
The benefit of gaining a highly skilled and motivated employee speaks for itself.
So tonight, as we celebrate veterans and honour their partners and families, we acknowledge the employers who are leading the way in helping our veterans build a future.
Congratulations to all of tonight’s finalists.
Along with every other thing strength and quality you bring to the table, you are sources of inspiration.
You’re helping to build inclusive, supportive and thriving workplaces and communities, for the benefit of all Australians.
You’ve stepped for Australia. Now you’re finding ways to lift up the nation.
I thank you all.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well, it is my great pleasure to welcome President Adeang back to Canberra. As I said during the President's last visit here, our countries share a special bond. We share geography, we share history, we share a region. And of course, we share deep and strong bonds between our people.
So, I'm delighted to join President Adeang here in signing the Nauru-Australia Treaty to strengthen our relationship even further. Australia is Nauru's largest economic, security and development partner. We view this partnership as a serious responsibility and a sign of the enduring respect between our two nations.
Together in the spirit of friendship and cooperation, Nauru and Australia developed this Treaty guided by the best interests of both countries. President Adeang has expressed clearly to me that Nauru's long term economic resilience, including access to banking services, is his priority and Nauru's greatest need. Here in Australia, we recognise that the economic stability of our neighbours benefits our entire region. The Nauru-Australia Treaty will take our relationship to a new level. It will strengthen Nauru's longer term stability and economic resilience. It is also firmly in Australia's interest in a peaceful, secure and economically resilient Pacific region. The region that together we call home.
Under our Treaty commitments, Australia will ensure the people of Nauru have ongoing access to banking services, including correspondent banking services which the Commonwealth Bank will provide from 2025 after Bendigo Bank departs. And I thank the Commonwealth Bank for their support. This is a vital outcome for keeping Nauru connected to the global economy. Australia will also provide Nauru budget support of $100 million over five years. This will give the Nauru Government the certainty it needs to make long term investments for its citizens in areas like education, health and social services.
The Treaty also reflects our nation's shared commitment to Pacific led security. Australia will invest $40 million over five years to enhance Nauru's policing and security through support for recruitment, training and infrastructure. Recognising that the security of one of us affects the security of both of us, the Treaty provides that Nauru and Australia will jointly agree to any engagement by other countries in Nauru's security, banking and telecommunications sectors.
The Treaty underscores Australia and Nauru's commitment to strengthening Pacific led solutions to meet our region's security, economic and development needs. This Treaty will make our region stronger and it will make it safer.
This is a good day for Australia. This is a good day for Nauru. And it is a good day for the security and resilience of the Pacific region. We are both part of the Pacific family and this Treaty reflects that. And I thank President Adeang for his friendship, for his partnership and for his leadership. And I look forward to strengthening the deep bond that our two countries share. Thank you, President.
DAVID ADEANG, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAURU: It is my great privilege and honour to represent the Government and the people of Nauru to mark this historic milestone in the Republic of Nauru's relationship with the Commonwealth of Australia.
The signing of this Treaty reaffirms our deep friendship and shared commitment to building a peaceful, prosperous and secure future for our two nations and for our region. To Nauru, Australia it's not just a friend, but family bound by shared history and values. This Treaty strengthens our own economy, enhances also our mutual security and addresses critical challenges like banking and ensuring inclusive growth and resilience for our own people.
I welcome very much the efforts by the Prime Minister and the Government of Australia in ensuring that the Commonwealth Bank of Australia will commence banking operations in Nauru in 2025, a step toward greater financial stability for our people.
This partnership is vital for Nauru. The United Nations classifies Nauru as the most vulnerable nation in the Pacific and the fifth most vulnerable nation in the world. We appreciate Australia's steadfast support as we try to address our unique development challenges while we continue diversifying our economy, exploring innovative opportunities and safeguarding our region's peace and stability.
My heartfelt appreciation to Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and several of your Government Ministers who work tirelessly for your unwavering friendship, leadership and commitment. I also acknowledge and commend the hard work of officials from both our sides who have brought this Treaty to fruition. With these few words on behalf of our Government and people of Nauru, thank you Mr Prime Minister, and may God bless Nauru and Australia and our partnership.


This week, as students and teachers here in Queensland and around the country count down to the holidays, and families look forward to Christmas we also look back on the year that’s been and the challenges that we’ve faced.
I want every Australian to know that I understand things have been hard.
I want every Australian to know that when times are tough, we’ve got your back.
Our Government is working every day to make next year easier for you and your family.
To put the worst of global inflation behind us - and to put the last of the Liberals’ mess behind us too.
The cuts and neglect that left Australia wide open to global uncertainty.
If you think back to the strain that the pandemic and its aftermath put on our health system - that came on top of Peter Dutton’s cuts to hospitals and Medicare.
Problems with global supply chains were compounded by a decade of hollowing-out skills and driving manufacturing offshore.
The biggest international energy crisis in 50 years was magnified by a decade of denial on climate change and renewable energy.
And the surge in global inflation hit family budgets harder because the Liberals spent a decade deliberately keeping wages low.
My colleagues and I have spent the last two and half years working to turn this around.
We’ve tripled the funding for bulk-billing and opened 84 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics, which has helped millions more Australians see a doctor for free.
We are rebuilding skills and manufacturing through Free TAFE and our investments in a Future Made in Australia.
We’ve delivered energy bill relief for every household and every small business.
And we’ve locked-in more new energy in the last two years, than the previous Government built in a decade.
And much more new energy than Peter Dutton’s nuclear power scheme would deliver – ever.
We’ve backed three consecutive increases in award wages for 2.6 million workers.
We’ve funded significant pay rises for aged care workers – and our early educators.
We’ve brought the gender pay gap down to a record low.
And we’ve got real wages growing again – four consecutive quarters of growth.
We’re helping Australians to earn more - and to keep more of what they earn.
Because our Government has delivered a tax cut for every single Australian taxpayer.
All 13.6 million, not just some.
We are boosting rent assistance, backing the dream of home ownership – and building more homes in every state and territory.
We’re taking action on the cost of living – and we are getting inflation back to where it should be.
When we came to Government inflation had a 6 in front of it and was rising.
Today it has a 2 in front of it – and it’s falling.
Over one million new jobs have been created.
And we’ve delivered not one but two budget surpluses, for the first time in nearly two decades.
We’re helping people under pressure here and now.
We’re cleaning up the mess of the past decade.
And we are laying the foundations for an economy that is stronger and fairer.
Indeed an economy that is stronger because it is fairer.
Where people are rewarded for their hard work, and we invest in their potential and nourish their aspirations.
Where Australians have the security to plan for their future, save for a home and build a good life for themselves and their families.
An economy connected to the growth and opportunities of Asia - where we make things here in Australia.
An economy where we compete for new industries and succeed with new technologies by building on our oldest and greatest strength – the skills and capacity of the Australian people.  
Our Labor Government understands that in every part of this, every stage of education is vital.
We know that many of the jobs of the future will need either a TAFE qualification or a university degree.
That’s why, in our first term, we’ve put public TAFE back at the centre of vocational education and training.
 This has helped a half million Australians train for their first job, or re-train for a new opportunity – for free.
In our next term, we will lock in Free TAFE and make it permanent, nationwide.
In our first term, we fixed the unfair spike in student debt for 3 million Australians.
In our next term, we will cut 20 per cent off the student debt of every Australian who has one.
And we’ll make the repayment system fairer for everyone with a student loan now and into the future.
In our first term, we’ve brought down the cost of child care for over 1 million families.
And we are boosting the wages of up to 200,000 early educators by 15 per cent.
Today is about where we go next - our Government’s vision for the future of early education.  
We know that making early education and care affordable for families delivers real help with the cost-of-living every week.
It gives working parents more choice and more flexibility.
More opportunities to balance their caring responsibilities with career opportunities.
It helps businesses hold on to valued and experienced employees. 
And in doing so, it boosts productivity and participation across our entire economy.
So, even if there were no other benefits - making child care more affordable is good for families and good for the economy.
But all of us know there’s more to it. Much, much more.
There are more than one million reasons to invest in early education.
Some of whom are here with us today.
Because early education makes the biggest difference for our littlest Australians.
Every expert tells us how significant those first five years of life are for brain development.
And every parent knows children at that age are growing and changing and taking it all in, every day.
Early education introduces children to letters and numbers - it also teaches them about listening and co-operating, taking turns and making friends.
It gets them ready for the routines and rhythms of school.
Above all it shows them that learning is something to enjoy and embrace.
It encourages them to give art and science and music and sport a go.
And our Government wants these opportunities and these benefits to be open to every child.
Friends
A Labor Government created universal Medicare because we believe that every Australian has the right to quality, affordable health care.
A Labor Government created universal superannuation because every working Australian has the right to dignity and security in retirement.
A Labor Government created the National Disability Insurance Scheme because every Australian with disability has the right to choice and control.
And our Labor Government believes every child should have the right to quality, affordable early education.
That’s why we want to build a universal child care system.
Simple, affordable and accessible, for every family.
Where every child is guaranteed access to at least three days of high-quality early education and care.
Let me be clear: universal and accessible doesn’t mean compulsory or mandatory.
The choice will be up to parents, as always, as it should be.
But we want families to have a real choice.
We want to make sure that your decision isn’t dictated by where you live, or what you do for a living.
It’s driven by one thing only, what you want for your child.
This is the future we are working to build – and over the past two and a half years, we’ve been putting the foundations in place.
The single biggest policy commitment we took to the last election was our plan for Cheaper Child Care.  
This investment has cut the cost of child care for over 1 million Australian families.
With the average family saving over $4,400.
And at the same time, the number of children enrolled in early education has grown by nearly 100,000.
The coming Budget update will show Commonwealth funding for child care subsidies is increasing by $3.1 billion over the next four years - to support an extra 200,000 children to receive early education. 
Alongside this, 34,000 more early educators have joined the workforce.
With another 125,000 in training – including in Free TAFE, across the nation.
We are training more early educators and we’re paying early educators more.
At the end of last month, we legislated a 15 per cent pay increase for early educators.
Ten per cent from this month.
And another five per cent on top, next year.
For someone earning the award rate, that’s an increase of over $100 a week right now – and increasing to $150 a week next year. 
And we’ve tied these pay rises, to caps on fee growth, so we’re getting wages up for workers while keeping costs down for families.
This pay increase is a tribute to the tireless advocacy of workers
It’s also a statement of our Labor Government’s values.
It’s our message to all those early educators going about their work today and every day with such devotion and patience.
Who bring joy and discovery into the lives of our children. 
What you do matters to our nation – your work lifts up two generations of Australians at the same time.
For all this, you deserve much more than just our thanks and praise.
You deserve this pay rise. Every dollar of it.
Boosting the wages of early educators is about rewarding workers, it’s about retaining workers – and it’s about recruiting new workers.
One of the privileges of this job is visiting child care centres all over the country.
I hear from educators saying they can keep doing a job they love.
I hear from employers saying that the number of job applications is going up.
But you know what we hear from the Liberal and National Parties?
They said this was ‘dodgy’. Peter Dutton mocked it as a ‘sugar hit’.
And a Queensland Senator that he personally endorsed as someone who is not afraid ‘to defend the values of the LNP' said that this had something to do with a ‘woke mind virus’ because ‘early education destroys the family unit’.
Another day and another issue where the Liberals are not just stuck in the past, they want the rest of Australia to go back there just to keep them company.
We’re building up the wages and skills of the workforce.
And today, we’re taking the next big step – building more child care centres.
There are simply not enough child care centres in the regions or in outer suburbs that are growing fast.
Too often, that’s because large corporate providers don’t see an opportunity for profit in these places.
This means children in these communities are left behind and families are left with no option.
Early education isn’t about making money - it’s about changing lives.
And child care isn’t a luxury – it’s an essential service for modern families.
When the market fails, Government should step up and act.
That’s what we are going to do.
Today I announce that our Government is establishing a $1 billion Building Early Education Fund.
The single biggest investment by an Australian Government ever in new child care services.
Starting with building or expanding over 160 early education and care centres where they are needed most.
And not just signing-off on the plans and walking away.
We are ready to invest in owning these centres, to keep the doors of opportunity open for children in these communities - and to support high-quality, not-for-profit providers.
Building centres means we can work together with state and local government, philanthropic organisations and communities themselves.
Meaning we can bring a whole range of related and important services under the same roof - child care, maternal and child health, early learning.
Our Government wants to see more centres built in the regions and the suburbs – and more centres at local schools.
Because schools already have that connection to community, the convenience for families and that security and safety for children.
So we’ll look at schools that have space we can use and we’ll work with states and territories when they build new schools to make early education part of the plan, from day one.
Centres on school grounds build a link between early education and primary education.
They give children a sense of confidence and connection with their local school.
And they make life easier for parents doing drop-off and pick-up.
Better for children, better for parents, better for communities.
Building more early education and care centres and creating more places is about breaking down barriers of distance.
We also need to break down barriers the Liberal Government deliberately built.
Starting with the Activity Test.
The only thing this does is put extra weight on the shoulders of parents who are already doing the hard yards of looking for work while locking their children out of early education.
Denying them those learning skills and social skills that get you ready for school.
Too often, the children missing out on early education are the ones for whom it would make the biggest difference.
I know this for certain: parents do not need to go though a bureaucracy or work a certain number of hours, to want the best possible education for their child.
The aspiration to give your children the best chance in life drives every parent - whoever you are and wherever you live.
The Liberals might treat early education like a luxury parents have to prove they need.
We know early education is an opportunity every child deserves.
For the whole of the 20th Century, it’s been understood that every child has the right to go to school - and government has a responsibility to make that possible.
In the 21st Century, every child has the right to go to early education, to help get them ready for school - and our Labor Government is going to make this possible. 
Today I announce we will replace the Liberals’ Activity Test with a new Three Day Guarantee in early education.
Under a re-elected Labor Government, every family earning up to $530,000 will have access to the child care subsidy for three days a week - guaranteed.
Our Three Day Guarantee will ensure every family can afford three days of high-quality early education.
Three days of early education: affordable for every family, funded for every child, building a better education system every step of the way.
These are the building blocks of a world-class universal early education system:
Getting fees down for families and wages up for workers
More places for children.
More centres and services in our regions and suburbs.
And a new Three Day Guarantee in early education.
These are the next steps in a nation-defining journey.
This is work that can only be done through long term commitment and real investment.
It can only be done with a real change in the role Government plays – building more centres, backing more choice, stepping up when the market fails.
It can only be done with real change in the way we as a society think about early education and care – not just a boost for the economy, not just an essential  for parents but also a life-changing opportunity for children.
And all this change, all this reform, all this investment, all this work of training and building for the future our children deserve can only be done, will only be done by our Labor Government.
Because only Labor does the big things, only Labor drives these big reforms, only Labor builds for the future.
That’s the opportunity – and the choice – for all Australians in 2025. 
Over the next three years, we can work together to build on the foundations we have laid.
We can turn the meaningful progress we’ve made into profound and enduring change.
We can give the next generation of Australians the best possible start in life - ready for school and ready for all the opportunities the world holds for them.
We can seize this moment and shape our future – smarter, stronger, a world-leader in education from the early years right the way through.
Or we can watch as the Liberals and Nationals wreck it all.
Watch as they recklessly rip away the support families count on and cut the pay educators deserve.
Watch as they abolish the Free TAFE our workforce needs and leave the next generation to fall behind.
If you want to know what the next three years would like under the Liberals and Nationals – just look at their actions over the last three years.
Every Australian would have been worse off if Peter Dutton had blocked our tax cuts, cut people’s wages, stopped energy bill relief and made it harder and more expensive for people to see a doctor.
Child care and medicines would cost more, HECS debts would be higher, hundreds of thousands of people would have been denied free TAFE.
If Peter Dutton had his way, every Australian would have been worse off over the last three years and if he gets into government, every Australian will be worse off over the next three years.
Because you don’t grow the economy by cutting wages and education.
You don’t help families under pressure by pricing them out of child care.
You don’t set Australia up to compete and succeed, by holding children back or leaving them behind.
The Opposition have spent every day trying to stop us cleaning up their mess.  
They are arrogant enough to think they got nothing wrong through their wasted decade in Government.
And they are reckless enough to inflict it on Australia all over again. 
This is not a time for cutting and wrecking.
This is a time for building.
Building the education system that will drive our prosperity.
Building the workforce that will help our youngest Australians learn and grow.
Building the new child care centres that will bring the opportunity of early education to regions and suburbs that have been forgotten for too long.
Building an economy where our people have the capability to compete and succeed and the skills to make things here in Australia.
Building a nation where no-one is held back and no-one is left behind.
Building for the next generation.
Building for the best start in life.
Our Labor Government: Building Australia’s Future.


Honoured guests.
My fellow Australians.
Fifty years ago, children across Darwin went to bed dreaming of Santa Claus and Christmas and awoke to a nightmare.
The sound of torrential rain gave way to the screech of corrugated iron as sheets ripped from roofs hurtled through the sky and scraped across the ground at over 200 kilometres an hour.
Windows shattered.
Trees uprooted.
Cars upended.
Fibro walls torn clean away.
An entire city almost wiped off the map.  
Antony Bullock remembers his Dad shining his torch out their front door.
He said: “It was like looking into the gates of hell.”
Flying debris flashing past on the wind, too fast to identify. 
And as his Dad tilted the torch up to their verandah roof, the wind peeled it away and it disappeared into the darkness: “like tissue paper out of a car window”.
Across Darwin, families huddled fearfully in the safest places they could find, whispering prayers, holding each other tight.
Waiting for the howling darkness to pass.
When, at last, an eerie silence fell and the sun rose, it was on a scene of utter devastation.
Cyclone Tracy’s trail of destruction rendered tens of thousands of Territorians homeless.
And – tragically - it claimed at least 66 lives.
Today, we gather to pay our nation’s respects to all those taken from their loved ones that fateful night. 
We think of their families, for whom every Christmas means revisiting that grief.
And we remember all the survivors, so many of whom honour us with their presence here this morning.
People who spent those days after Christmas as part of the biggest peacetime evacuation in Australian history.
And people who still carry the pain and trauma of those days, because in the words of one: “Tracy doesn’t go away”.
Today, as we reflect on the destructive force of nature at its very worst, we also remember and honour the strength and kindness of Australians at their very best.
The Australian Defence Force and emergency services personnel who were there to help from the first moments of crisis, right the way through.
And everyday Australians, everywhere, who responded with characteristic generosity.
An appeal created by the service clubs of Alice Springs raised over $100,000 in less than 48 hours.
At the Boxing Day Test, Australian and English cricketers walked around the ground with buckets, collecting donations from the crowd.
As Acting Prime Minister Jim Cairns put it: “Darwin became a magic word throughout Australia…evoking assistance in every form.”
Above all, we pay tribute to the resilience of the great city of Darwin and the proud people who call it home.
Because the hard work of rebuilding – homes, communities and lives – is always an act of profound courage.
The three-year reconstruction of Darwin was an unprecedented national effort.
And it set new national standards – for quality and safety in construction.
Meaning that when Cyclone Larry and Cyclone Yasi struck North Queensland this century, there was nowhere the same damage done to homes and nothing like the terrible loss of life.
On the 28th of December 1974, one reporter on the ground in Darwin wrote for the Canberra Times:
“The city can be rebuilt…but the casual, friendly and somewhat independent way of living can never be put back together again.”
Fifty years later, visitors and locals alike can take pride in just how wrong that was.
Because while the modern city of Darwin has grown and thrived, changed and evolved, the unique character of this place and the special warmth of the people who call it home endures stronger than ever.
The monument we unveil together today stands in tribute to these qualities and this truth.
The story of Darwin – and the story of Australia.
No matter the challenge: we face it together, we look after each other.
We learn from what we’ve been through and we hold on to what matters most: the memory of those we have lost, the love of our family and friends.
And on this most solemn Christmas morning here in Darwin, the love of our nation, Australia.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, welcome back everyone. 2025 is going to be a big year, and we, of course, have been already working hard for the beginning of the year. I spent Christmas Day in Darwin to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Cyclone Tracy. That was a very moving experience, I've got to say. I attended with the Governor-General as well. And last week, I was out and about with many of you, showing our plan for building Australia's future, dealing with immediate challenges, but also with our eyes always firmly on the horizon, of how do we support people during the cost of living pressures, but also build Australia's economy in the future. There’s much that we can be proud of that we've achieved over our first two and a half years. Inflation with a 2 in front of it, it had a 6 in front of it when we were elected. More than 1 million jobs created. I attended two Medicare Urgent Care Clinics last week. They've been an enormous success. All 87 of them, which are open, have seen over a million Australians, one third of whom are under the age of 15. We have provided Energy Bill Relief. We've provided Cheaper Child Care, Free TAFE – more than half a million Australians getting the skills that they need.
And that stands in stark contrast to our opponents who want to take Australia backwards. Yesterday, Peter Dutton, there was a big build up to a speech, but not a single new policy announced, and this morning he was out there describing cost of living relief as 'a sugar hit'. Well, no wonder he's opposed every single one of those measures that we’ve put in place. But today, we get down to work building further on our agenda and putting forward a positive, optimistic vision for Australia. One that unites Australia, not one that seeks to divide. One that seeks to bring people together, not looks for a political opportunity at every single occasion. We face an Opposition that have shifted to the right over a period of time, who are more conservative than they've ever been, which is no wonder that the Coalition chose to elect Scott Morrison above Peter Dutton, because there were too many in their ranks who were concerned about his political agenda.
But we'll continue to put forward that positive agenda. Today, Michelle and I will have, along with Katy, another positive announcement that we've got with the NBN, and we'll continue to roll out that positive agenda. So thanks everyone for gathering early in the year, and let's get down to work.


Thank you, Laura, and can I join in paying my respects to the memory of Ken Randall and offer my condolences to his family and friends.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge all my colleagues joining me here today.
Everywhere we’ve been this summer, the work of building Australia’s future is underway.
A $7.2 billion investment to boost productivity and make the Bruce Highway safer.
Upgrading key roads in Western Sydney and vital ports in Western Australia, connecting communities with economic opportunity.
Building new homes for Australians in our cities and regions – from Cairns and Karratha to Heidelberg and Hobart.
Finishing the NBN with fibre, not copper, delivering high speed access and keeping it in public hands.
Now it’s no secret I’ve always loved infrastructure.
Infrastructure matters to me because I’ve seen the difference it can make to people: to communities, to our regions, to our economy, to our national quality of life.
However, I know that building Australia’s future is about more than homes and roads and ports and broadband.
More than bricks and mortar.
Building Australia’s future is about all of us.
Every one of us, in every part of our country.
Tradies and farmers, small business owners, teachers and nurses.
Building Australia’s future is about your future.
Because it’s your effort and sacrifice and aspiration that powers our economy and nourishes our society.
And that effort should bring you fair reward.
The hard work you do enhances and shapes our country – and it should add up to a better life, for you and your family.
That’s why building Australia’s future means building better Medicare.
Like the 87 new Urgent Care Clinics we've opened right around the nation.
Clinics that have already helped more than a million Australians see a doctor for free.
And in order to keep growing our economy and creating prosperity, building Australia’s future is about what we sell to our region and the world.
Manufacturing workers turning resources the world needs into products the world wants, through our plan for a Future Made in Australia.
Aluminium workers in Tomago, Gladstone, Portland and Bell Bay gaining new security because we’re connecting them to cleaner and cheaper energy.
Farmers and fishers and producers exporting world class beef and barley and wine and seafood to China again, because we have stabilised our relationship.
And building Australia’s future is about training Australians for that future.
Free TAFE has given 600,000 Australians the chance to learn new skills for new jobs.
Free TAFE has changed lives – and we want to expand on this success.
Because we recognise the next generation of tradies, the people we’re counting on to build the new homes we need, are under significant financial pressure.
Right now, a first-year carpentry apprentice earns about two-thirds of the minimum wage.
Some apprentices earn even less.
That’s before you buy things like tools, safety gear, clothing and boots.
Many apprentices have said they could earn more stacking shelves at the supermarket.
And too many leave training, because they can’t afford to stay.
Our Government wants to encourage more Australians to learn a trade and stay in construction.
That’s why we are going to provide more support for tradies while they’re training.
Today, I announce we will be raising the allowance paid to apprentices who are living away from home.
The first time this payment has been increased in over two decades.
And, in occupations essential for residential construction, jobs like bricklayers, electricians, plumbers and carpenters, we will be providing eligible apprentices up to $10,000 through our new Housing Construction Apprenticeship Program.
Five payments of $2000 each, on top of their wages.
This means that apprentices in residential construction will now get the same training incentives as those in the energy sector.
More new homes, more new energy – and more support for the tradies who will build both.

My colleagues and I know there’s more we have to do.
To keep building an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
To bring more good jobs and stronger Medicare and new housing and better education to suburbs and communities that have been overlooked for too long.
To help more Australians make up the ground they’ve lost over years of global uncertainty and a wasted decade of Liberal neglect.
Cleaning up the mess the Liberals and Nationals left behind would be more than three years’ work in ordinary times - let alone during the global storm we’ve faced.
Like every other advanced economy, Australia has had to deal with global inflation and its consequences.
Here in Australia, inflation peaked lower and later than most.
The United States, the United Kingdom and Canada all endured higher rates of inflation, higher interest rates, rising unemployment and slower job creation.
When we came to government inflation was rising and wages were falling – we’ve turned both around.
Inflation had a 6 in front of it and was rising - now it has a 2 in front of it.
Back in the Reserve Bank target band for the first time since 2021.
Inflation is down.
Wages are up.
And 1.1 million new jobs have been created.
Under our Government, Australia has maintained a faster rate of employment growth than any G7 nation, bar none.
Faster than Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK and the USA.
And stronger economic growth than any G7 country bar the United States.
This is because, from the outset, we made a choice to get inflation down, without treating people as expendable.
And it was a choice.
Our Opponents made it clear, they would have made a very different one.
They said - loudly and often - we should have cut everything, frozen investment, turned our backs on people and turned the whole place off at the wall.
But that’s not the Australian way – and it’s certainly not the Labor way.
When Australians are making sacrifices, we refused to sacrifice their jobs and wages, their Medicare and child care.
And we refused to give up on shaping the future.
Because even when you’re navigating rough seas – you have to keep your eyes on the horizon.
And while my colleagues and I are encouraged by the progress Australia has made and confident that the worst is behind us, we recognise things are still hard for people.
I can promise every Australian this.
We will keep working, every day, to get your costs down.
To get your wages up.
And to keep inflation where it should be.
Delivering two consecutive budget surpluses for the first time in nearly two decades has helped put that downward pressure on inflation.
These back to back budget surpluses are a credit to the hard work of Jim Chalmers and Katy Gallagher.
They are a measure of our responsible economic management.
And so is the fact that annual real wages growth is back, four quarters in a row.
So is the fact that the gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
So is the fact that bulk-billing is on the way back up.
Because when it comes to the economy and the budget, a Government’s responsibility goes beyond making savings and cutting waste.
Responsible economic management is about boosting wages and job security, funding the services families count on.
And responsible economic management is about meeting your responsibility to the future.
Investing in the energy and industry and infrastructure and trade and technology that will power our growth in the years ahead.
And investing in Australians – people’s skills and education, housing and health care, the next generation of secure, well-paid jobs in every part of our country.
In all this, the contrast between us and our opponents is night and day.
We’re strengthening Medicare, the Liberals want to cut it.
We’re growing wages, they want to cut them back and keep them low.
We’re looking after people’s jobs, the Liberals say we should sacrifice them.
We’re building new energy to bring bills down now, their nuclear fantasy means pressing the pause button for 20 years and then funding the most expensive form of new energy on the planet.
We’re backing a Future Made in Australia, the Liberals are happy to send jobs offshore.
They dismissed our plan to put nurses back into aged care and lift the pay of those who deliver and dignity to our older Australians.
And while we are investing in education – they oppose it at every turn.
The Liberals say reducing student debt by 20 per cent is ‘unfair’.
Their Deputy Leader says that 600,000 Australians who have been given a chance to learn new skills through Free TAFE, don’t value that opportunity because they didn’t pay for it.
They mock the 15 per cent pay rise we are delivering for early educators and they stand against our plans to build new child care centres – and make child care more affordable for families.

Two weeks ago, the Leader of the Opposition published a list of his 12 priorities for government.
Education and skills didn’t even rate a mention.
For Labor, nothing is more important to building Australia’s future than education.
Early education.
TAFE and apprenticeships.
University.
And, of course, schools.
Fourteen years ago in his landmark report, David Gonski outlined a national Schooling Resource Standard.
A level of funding, calculated per student, designed to ensure no Australian child would be left behind.
As a nation, we’ve never reached that level for public schools.
We’ve never met that standard.
Today we take a big step forward, to making it happen.
Today I announce we have secured new schools funding agreements with South Australia and Victoria.
They join the ACT, Northern Territory, Tasmania and Western Australia.
Meaning six of the states and territories are now signed up to Better and Fairer Schools, to meet the standards in education Australian children deserve.
I want to take this opportunity to thank Premier Malinauskas and Premier Allan for their co-operation.
And I also want to thank Premier Crisafulli and Premier Minns for their constructive engagement.
Today is about a principle that has driven me my whole life: no-one held back and no-one left behind.
Making sure that every child in government schools gets the support they need to thrive.
Because this agreement is not about dividing-up the same amount of dollars in a different way.
Instead, both levels of government, are stepping up our commitment to schools over the decade.
Importantly this new agreement means accounting practices like capital depreciation can no longer be counted as education investment.
Instead, every dollar of funding will go into helping children learn.
This will mean more money than ever for public schools – but it’s not a blank cheque.
Our new funding is for real reform and it will deliver real results.
Because what we are offering every state and territory is new Commonwealth investment in the fundamentals.
The methods and resources that work, that make the biggest difference.
Evidence-based instruction.
Phonics and numeracy testing in Year 1: identifying students who need extra help early on, not waiting until they’ve fallen behind.
Classroom assistants and catch-up tutoring for small groups and one-on-one.
More opportunities for students who need an extra challenge.
More support for every teacher and more individual attention for every child.
This is about every parent knowing that their child can get the best start in life at their local school.
Education opens the doors of opportunity and widens them.
It changes lives.
A great education is what every parent wants for their child, it’s what every Australian student deserves.
And it’s what our Government is determined to deliver.

Building Australia’s future through every stage of education, will be a defining priority of a re-elected Labor Government.
And it is a defining point of difference between us and our opponents.
As is helping with the cost of living.
Over the past three years, the Liberals and Nationals have opposed every single measure we have delivered to help people under pressure.
Peter Dutton sneers at them as ‘sugar hits’.
The Liberals talk about waste.
This is the party that gave billions of dollars in JobKeeper payments to companies making record profits.
They wasted hundreds of millions of dollars on commuter carparks that weren’t even anywhere near train stations, something to keep in mind next time you hear them talk about ‘getting back on track’.
The Liberals voted to make medicine more expensive and harder to get.
They opposed two years of energy bill relief for families and small business.
And they promised to fight our tax cuts for every Australian before they even saw them.
Now after all this, the Liberals want every taxpayer to pick up the bill for long business lunches, trips to the movies, golf days and karaoke nights.
And they don’t even have the decency to tell taxpayers how much this will cost them.
All through the past three years, the Liberals have openly sought to make Australians worse off, here and now.
And they have publicly and repeatedly committed to sweeping cuts that will leave Australians worse off in the future.
When Peter Dutton talks about ‘economic surgery’, he means cutting wages off at the knees – and putting Medicare on life support.
The Liberals are prescribing a lethal dose of cuts to all the help we have provided families with their cost of living, and to all the investments we are making in jobs and communities through a Future Made in Australia.
Dutton’s ‘economic surgery’ won’t be done with a scalpel, it will be carried out with an axe.
Hacking away at jobs and wages and Medicare, child care and housing.
And let’s be clear: when it comes to paying for their nuclear reactors, all these Liberal cuts won’t even touch the sides.
All that money they want ripped out of Medicare and child care and TAFE.
All those new jobs and opportunities in manufacturing and technology forsaken.
All those homes and child care places and doctors’ appointments taken away every year, for seven nuclear reactors that won’t be ready until sometime in the 2040s.
A scheme that costs way too much, takes way too long and will push up power bills while dragging down economic growth.
That’s based on the Liberals’ own numbers.
The modelling they commissioned forecasts the Australian economy using 40 per cent less energy in the future.
They are banking on the closure of heavy industry and manufacturing.
They are counting on mass job losses.
Just like when they drove car industry out of Australia.
Nuclear power means lower wages, in a smaller economy, with less energy, that costs more.
That’s the choice the Liberals have made.
And it means the choice facing Australians is crystal clear.
There is Labor, strengthening Medicare, investing in education, building Australia’s future.
Or there is Peter Dutton, his nuclear reactors and cuts to everything else.

This is the 10th time I’ve spoken at the National Press Club as Labor Leader.
I’ve focused today on the choice Australia is facing this year.
The challenges we’ve overcome, the opportunities ahead – and the risks.
Because I’ve always seen this as the place where you come to make your case.
To explain what your plan means for people - and to have it tested by the national media.
That’s what I did this time last year, when I stood here to announce we were changing the tax plan we inherited from the Morrison Government to make it better and fairer.
To deliver a tax cut for all 13.6 million taxpayers, not just some.
To make sure that part time workers, young people, women and low and middle income earners didn’t miss out.
To help Australians earn more – and keep more of what they earn.
It wasn’t an easy decision. But it was the right decision, made for the right reasons.
Tomorrow marks the one year anniversary of that announcement, and the anniversary of the Opposition Leader demanding an election to stop our tax cuts going ahead.
When you think about that moment, our Government acting to help Australians under pressure, and the Liberals and Nationals trying to stop it at all costs.
That sums up so much of the last three years - and it speaks volumes for the choice Australians have to make about the next three years.
Because this year’s election is not a matter of competing plans striving for the same outcome.
It’s not two roads that ultimately lead to the same destination.
This election is a choice between two fundamentally different approaches and vastly different agendas.
Two completely different visions for our nation, for our economy, for our people and our place in the world.
It’s a choice between Labor’s plan to help Australians under pressure and reward their hard work, against the Liberals’ promise to cut what is helping and abandon people who are hurting.
It’s a choice between our determination and optimism or their fear and negativity.
It’s Labor’s belief in the opportunities this decade holds and our plan for Australians to seize them, against the Liberals’ view that Australia can’t compete and shouldn’t try.
It’s Labor’s focus on helping people earn more and keep more of what they earn, against the Liberals’ plan to make Australians work longer for less.
This difference, this contrast means that when the time comes for Australians to cast their vote, people can know with absolute certainty that there are things only Labor can offer, things only a Labor Government will do.
Because only Labor has a plan to keep the economy growing, in the face of global uncertainty.
Only Labor will keep wages up and inflation down.
Only Labor will not just defend Medicare – but grow it and strengthen it for all.
Only Labor will invest in your child's education, from their first day at child care, right through to their last day of school and beyond.
Only Labor will help you with your apprenticeship, cut your student debt by 20 per cent and lock-in free TAFE nationwide.
Only Labor will build the new homes we need - and build the clean energy to cut our emissions, bring down power bills and make things here in Australia
Meanwhile, the Liberals are upfront – it’s spelled out behind them nearly every time they stand up - they want to take Australia back.
Back to aged care in crisis, back to bulk-billing in free-fall, back to child care being out of reach.
Back to an economic plan that boasted about shutting manufacturing down.
Back to keeping wages low.
Back to Australia being isolated on the world stage – and adrift in the Pacific.
Back to women’s economic equality being treated as a curiosity not a priority.
Back to chaos and conflict.
That’s why at this year’s election, your choice has never been more clear.
And the consequences of your choice – for your job, your wage, your child’s education, your health care and our environment - have never been more immediate.
There’s a reason my opponent hasn’t fronted up here, his whole time as Opposition Leader.
He doesn’t like questions, because he doesn’t have any real answers.
He’s obsessed with talking Australia down, to try and build himself up.
But this is not a time for wrecking, for cutting, for thinking small, aiming low and looking back.
This is a time for building, for looking after people and looking to the future, for a Labor Government investing in the hard work and aspiration of all Australians.
Thank you very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Friends, how special it is to come together like this on the eve of Australia Day.
As we take up our anthem’s invitation to rejoice, we take the opportunity to reflect, and to celebrate the modern nation we are so privileged to call home.
To contemplate all that our nation is – and all that it can yet become.
A nation that is not an accident, or the mere jackpot of good luck.
All that Australia has become is the work of generations.
Sometimes with resilience in the face of adversity – yet facing the tough times with humour, tenacity, and big, generous hearts.
On Australia Day, we think of every Australian who has put on the uniform and served in our name.
Every farmer who has faced a land sometimes short of forgiveness, yet stepped on to it with determination.
Everyone who has stood by friend and stranger alike in hard times.
Every Australian who has, through their own hard work, perseverance, energy and talent, added to who we are.
Among them are the generations of migrants who looked to Australia – in all its possibility and all its wonder – and saw themselves making a life here for their family.
The story of Australia is not a simple one. There are so many strands that intertwine to create a powerful whole.
We are a modern nation on an ancient continent. A vibrant, modern society the home of oldest continuous culture on earth, a home nurtured by Aboriginal and Torres Islander people for 60,000 years.
Ours is a land with a natural heritage unlike anywhere else on the planet.
A land of so many contrasting physical environments with so many contrasting beauties – sometimes gentle, sometimes spectacular, sometimes harsh, but always proudly and recognisably ours.
We are a young nation, yet an old democracy.
We are grateful for what we have, but we do not take what we have for granted.
Nor do we settle for things as they are, because Australians have always found ways to do things better, to make our country better.
It is that spirit that drives us as we look ahead and set about building the future.
For what burns in our hearts as brightly as our compassion, fairness and generosity is our ambition, our curiosity, and our courage.
That’s the spirit we see embodied by every Australian of the Year, and by every Australian who has ever been nominated.
Every nominee who is here tonight is already an extraordinary part of the Australian story.
I want all of us to thank the class of 2024:
Local Hero, David Elliott.
Young Australian of the Year, Emma McKeon.
Senior Australian of the Year, Yalmay Yunupingu.
And, of course, our 2024 Australians of the Year, Professor Georgina Long and Professor Richard Scolyer.
We see in you so much of what is best in the Australian character.
And as we celebrate you, we keep seeking out those who show us those qualities and values through the power of their example.
That’s what we see in all of tonight’s nominees.
It was my great privilege as Prime Minister to host you at The Lodge this morning with Jodie.
And I was once again reminded of that powerful truth – that of all Australia’s extraordinary resources, none is greater than our people.
Tonight, we celebrate some of our finest.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Your Excellency, distinguished guests.
My fellow Australians.
And, in particular, can I welcome the 24 of you who took your seats at this ceremony as citizens of Brazil, France, Germany, India, Nigeria, the Philippines, South Africa, the United States, Sri Lanka and Vietnam but will leave here as our fellow Australians.
It’s an honour to share this moment with you and your loved ones.
You will always remember this Australia Day, your first day as an Australian.
Today, in our big cities and country towns, at beaches and backyard barbecues, and in over 280 ceremonies like this one, we celebrate everything that brings Australia together and everything that sets our nation apart from the world.
We look back on all that we have built together and all that we have learned from each other.
And we look to the future with the optimism and determination that the Australian people bring to the life of our nation, each and every day.
The very first one of these ceremonies took place here in Canberra, in 1949.
Not where we gather today, because 76 years ago this lake was still just an idea.
The Australian War Memorial had only been open 7 years.
The Australians who’d served in the First World War and whose bravery and sacrifice had inspired its construction, were in their 50s and 60s.
And the veterans of the Second World War were young men re-adjusting to civilian life.
In this and countless other ways, it was a different Australia, in a very different world.
Yet the seven people who received their citizenship on that day, 76 years ago the more than 6 million who have followed and all of you who will join us as Australians today.
We all belong to the same proud story.
We are all part of a nation built by hope and hard work, aspiration and determination.
A democracy where every citizen counts themselves equal.
A society where your character counts for more than your name, where your hard work matters more than where you come from.
Where we measure ourselves by the care we extend to the most vulnerable and the fair go we offer to all.
A nation that has been enriched by people of every faith, background and tradition.
From the unique privilege we have of sharing this ancient continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture to the multicultural society we have built, where everyone has the right to be proud of who they are, to worship how they choose and to live in peace and safety - side by side.
That is the legacy of previous generations, it is the nation you are joining and it is the responsibility all of us owe to future generations.
To safeguard our social cohesion, to uphold Australian fairness and continue Australia’s progress.
At that very first ceremony, Prime Minister Ben Chifley said to Australia’s newest citizens:
“You have come to a country in which great opportunities will present themselves.
You have come to a country where democracy is not just a platitude but something which is practised.”
Through a world of change, the truth of those words endures.
This remains a country of great opportunities, ready to be seized.
And we remain a democracy, where every citizen holds the same rights and shares in the same responsibility.
Because whether we are born Australian, or we choose to become Australian, citizenship is a commitment that all of us make to each other.
Today, your talent and skill, your enterprise and drive, your hopes for the future join this great national endeavour.
On Australia Day, let us celebrate the privilege we have to live in the greatest country on earth.
And together let us seize the opportunity to make it even better in the future.


Xin nian kuai le.
Gong hei fat choy!
I’m delighted to be with you all again, back at this magnificent festival for another year.
Here in Box Hill this weekend – and at so many Chinese New Year and Lunar New Year celebrations around our country, families, friends and communities are coming together to share in centuries of tradition.
We gather to welcome the Year of the Snake in a spirit of joy, surrounded by vibrant colour and energy.
We look forward together with optimism for the new opportunities that a new year brings.
And we wish each other good fortune in all that matters most: our happiness, health, family and prosperity.
Chinese culture has enriched Australia and broadened our horizons.
And the contribution of the Chinese Australian community is something to celebrate every day of the year.
Because whenever I’m in this part of Melbourne, I meet young people, studying hard to make the best of themselves.
I talk with small business owners, working hard, creating jobs and supporting their families.
I speak to parents and grandparents who have come to Australia from different places but all driven by the same determination: making sure their children and grandchildren get a better life.  
These values of family, hard work and aspiration at the heart of this community - and they have helped write the Australian story.
And just as you have made this city and our country a better place, your ties of family and tradition have strengthened Australia’s connections to our region as well.
Our Government has worked hard to stabilise Australia's relationship with China.
This means that families in Shanghai and Beijing sitting down to enjoy a meal together can enjoy Australian beef and Australian lobster again.
There will be friends exchanging gifts of Australian cherries.
And there will be people toasting the Year of the Snake, with the best wine in the world.
We’ve restored that trade and rebuilt our dialogue.
I had the honour of being the first Australian Prime Minister to visit China in seven years – and Australia then hosted the first visit by a Chinese Premier in 7 years.
In all of this work, the Chinese Australian community have been powerful ambassadors and vital contributors.
Better than anyone, you understand how important this is - and you know we cannot afford to turn back.
I will never take your community, or your contribution to our nation, for granted.
Because it’s the job of leaders to uphold our social cohesion in the national interest – not undermine it in search of political advantage.
Many of you would know that last year UNESCO officially recognised Chinese New Year as part of the cultural heritage of all humanity.
And celebrations such as this are absolutely part of Australia’s cultural heritage, the fabric and identity of our country.
I want to thank everyone who has worked so hard to bring this year’s event together.
Congratulations to all the volunteers and staff, led by the President of the Asian Business Association of Whitehorse, Bihong Wang.  
Our Government wants to help you make this festival even bigger and even better in the future.
Today I am pleased to announce that our Labor Government will be providing $150,000 over the next three years towards this Festival.
This will help transform Bank Street, meaning more local businesses can be part of this event – and more people from all over Melbourne can join these iconic celebrations.
I wish you all a great day and a safe and happy Year of the Snake.


Well, welcome back everyone, for what is going to be a great year. I must begin, though, by saying that I've just spoken again with the Premier of Queensland, David Crisafulli about what Queenslanders are going through with these floods.
We know at this time there are floods in Queensland. There are also bushfires, of course, and a heat wave across southern Australia. So it's indicative of what we have to deal with.
And this morning I went to the National Operations Office that we established there in Barton here with NEMA and with Jenny McAllister, the Minister, and Brendan Moon, got a full briefing on what was occurring there.
We already have choppers on the ground to help with people. We've mobilised the support that we have and the presence in Townsville. But we've activated as well income support, and we will do whatever is necessary to provide support for people.
But I do want to say, once again, at the worst of times, we're seeing the best of the Australian character. We're seeing not just emergency personnel, we're seeing volunteers helping their neighbours, helping people out, even going door to door knocking with the evacuations that have had to take place in Townsville.
So Jenny, if she hasn't gone, she's going back up there this week, so you won't see all of her in the Senate. I think that is the priority that we have going forward. But we will do, as always, what we do, and we'll work constructively as we always do with state and territory governments. And I know that David Crisafulli appreciates the support that's been there on the ground.
Well, we begin 2025 with a great sense of optimism. Inflation is down, wages are up, unemployment is low. Indeed, our average rate of unemployment is the lowest that it's been in many, many decades, going back more than fifty years. And that is something that we can be proud of.
I think the hard work that this group have done in making sure that we provided cost of living relief for people who are most in need in a way that helped to put that downward pressure on inflation, rather than what some of the economics orthodoxy would suggest we do, which is not worry about what the impact of the economy was as if the statistics weren't about people.
Well what we understand in this room is that we want an economy that works for people, not the other way around. And that has meant prioritising making sure that people aren't left behind. So we've done that at the same time as we're fulfilling the second half of our objectives of not holding people back either.
So something like free TAFE, where I was at Swinburne TAFE on Friday there in Melbourne in the electorate of Deakin. Was there talking with construction apprentices about the announcement that we made at the National Press Club of $10,000. Making sure that we're supporting now electricians as well as people in carpentry and in other areas of construction throughout to get their apprenticeship.
That combined with free TAFE is having an impact on living standards short term, but it's also setting up those young Australians and other Australians as well - retraining for a new career and setting them up for that.
Indeed. One of the people that I met there last Friday was someone who's still doing his law degree, but he's decided that he'd rather work in construction. So - certainly more job security going forward as well.
So we know that people are still under financial pressure. We know the job is not done. That's why we work each and every day.
And throughout this period, the Expenditure Review Committee and our Cabinet processes have continued to work through, led by Jim and Katy, have worked through the preparation for the budget this year. And we're continuing to make sure that we think about, okay, how can we provide that assistance in a way that lifts people up, whilst continues to see the figures that we saw last week?
2.4 per cent is certainly well within the range. Indeed now in the bottom half of the range of 2 to 3 per cent that the Reserve Bank have aimed at. If you look at the quarterly figures, 0.2 of headline, 0.5 of underlying for that quarter. Now that is in stark contrast to the last quarter in which the Coalition were in government was 2.1 in March 2022.
So we've more than halved inflation, we've kept unemployment low and kept people employed, kept the economy positive, unlike many of our trading partners who went into recession. And we have made sure as well that people have got that cost of living relief.
You couldn't find a more stark choice that Australians are going to face in some period of time. Which is Labor providing that cost of living support, building Australia's future for the long term - where are the future jobs, future industries going to come from?
And a Coalition saying under Peter Dutton, saying themselves that they want to go back. They want to go back and being worse off under Peter Dutton.
Now we know that they opposed all of our cost of living measures. They opposed energy bill relief, they opposed cheaper child care, they opposed free TAFE and think that people don't value it. They of course most starkly opposed our tax cuts for every single Australian taxpayer.
And we know as well that they oppose wages increasing.
They wanted low wages to be a key feature of their economic architecture.
But having waited three years for a cost of living measure, they've come up with one and it's a doozy, this one.
They don't want workers to get a tax cut, but they do want bosses to get a free lunch - and that is the big distinction. And they want workers to pay for it.
They want every Australian to pay for up to $20,000 for the, there's about 4 million different businesses registered, sole traders, $20,000 a pop for people to engage in meals, entertainment, liaisons on golf courses, karaoke nights, weekends away. Who knows what it would be? What we know is that $20,000 would be paid for by people who will never get that opportunity. And we know as well that they didn't put forward any costing of it.
But then yesterday, yesterday we learned now that they do have cuts, they confirmed the $350 billion they keep speaking about as being waste, that they want cuts to be made there. And that's before you get to the $600 billion they need to build their government-owned and operated nuclear power plants into the 2040s. And that that depending upon who you listen to.
If you listen to David Littleproud, construction will begin the day after the election.
If you listen to others, it'll begin in a couple of years time to consult and deal with the law.
The few little simple facts that it's outlawed in Queensland and David Crisafulli doesn't want to change it. And indeed this is a friendless policy amongst any state and territory government or indeed any state and territory opposition as well.
But they won't tell you what the cuts will be. But they will tell you they're coming. But they'll tell you after the election. But they won't have an independent audit, they'll just decide themselves what the cuts will be.
Well, we need to hold them to account because we know that the last time they came into government the biggest cuts were to Medicare and the bloke who was in charge of that was Peter Dutton.
And there were attempts to put in a GP tax, A tax every time people visited an emergency department.
$50 billion ripped out of the hospital system.
Massive amounts ripped out of the school system and education sector as well. And that was after they promised that there wouldn't be any cuts. Imagine what it's going to be like when they're saying, ‘oh, well, we told you there'd be cuts, and we told you that we'd tell you after the election’.
Well, that's not the Australian way. And we have an opportunity to really drive that home over the next fortnight and over the coming period as well.
Australian families, if they had got their way, would be $7200 worse off right now if Peter Dutton had got his way and blocked the cost of living relief that we’ve put forward.
And I want to give a shout out to Jason and the work that he's done on schools. We now have six of the eight states and territories signed up to proper schools funding.
No matter what school people go to, public or private, they should get, they should get that resource standard that was identified by David Gonski all those years ago, and that suffered a setback when the Abbott Government ripped money out of schools.
So we understand that the idea that people completing year 12 has gone backwards is completely unacceptable. And we've got a plan, not just for better funding, but for making sure that kids get the best start in life.
We were in a school there in Mary's seat, last Wednesday, I think it was. Boronia Heights Primary - what a school it was with phonics learning, with these amazing young Australians just being so excited.
It was their second day at school and the joy in learning that they were receiving - every child deserves that. And that's why the learning of literacy, numeracy, phonics teaching, all of this is a part of the agreement that Jason has negotiated with the states and territories.
We're still working on a couple of them and we'll get them there, I'm sure.
But it is so important and so important for the students. But also - they were pretty happy teachers at Boronia Heights Public School because they know that they were being valued as well, the work that they do.
Being given that opportunity to make sure, for example, that if a kid's falling behind, you don't want to wait till they're eight, you want to pick that up in year one and lift them up, because that's how we compete in the 21st century.
So early childhood learning, schools, TAFE, Universities Accord - all of this fits together with how we build Australia's future.
Along with child care, the reform we've done there.
The biggest reforms in aged care in this century, all about building Australia's future.
As well as support for manufacturing, the announcement that we made for green aluminium up there in Tomago a couple of weeks ago. Making sure we can make more things here through manufacturing.
All of these things fit in together.
And this two weeks we have to progress some of this. We'll have legislation on three days of child care subsidy, making free TAFE permanent, Production Tax Credits for critical minerals and rare earths, keeping the NBN in public hands. Pretty good idea. And the response to the Robodebt Royal Commission.
So we’ve got a busy couple of weeks and then some other legislation as well, preparing for the budget this year.
But I'm optimistic that Australians will respond to a positive agenda with fully costed policies. Ones that build on the foundations we've built this term, but builds on that for the better Australia that we need to create and one that we are busy working on each and every day.
So welcome back everyone. Look forward to the next fortnight and beyond as well.


A short time ago, we joined together in that most solemn reminder:
Lest we forget.
Just three words, yet they hold within them such a profound power and dignity.
And what they tell us – year in, year out – is that memory is a conscious act.
It has to be tended as carefully as the eternal flame.
It must be passed from each generation into the care of the next.
For nearly eight and a half decades, the Australian War Memorial has kept memory alive and strong.
Memory of all who have served in our name.
Memory of all who have fallen.
That memory emanates from within these stone walls and spreads right across our continent, carrying with it the precious sense of the debt we all owe, and the gratitude we all feel.
The Australian War Memorial is one of our most precious national treasures.
It is a great honour to be here at the beginning of a new stage in its life with the opening of this new main entrance.
This is an addition that is both true to the spirit of the Memorial, and an enhancement of it.
It is a place of light.
It is a physical rendering of the Ode of Remembrance.
And in honouring Captain Reginald Saunders, the first Australian Aboriginal commissioned officer in the Australian Army, it honours a spirit of courage so deeply ingrained in this continent that all Australians can be proud.
When Prime Minister John Curtin opened the Memorial in 1941, the Second World War – in all its horror and calamity – was barely months away from coming over the horizon and reaching our shores.
Prime Minister Curtin said this place would bring us closer to the meaning of all the courage and sacrifice and faith that Australians had shown in the past – and would be so desperately needed in the coming years.
As he said, “This Memorial belongs, like the capital city itself, to all Australia.”
What this new entrance does is open the Memorial’s heart even wider to all Australia.
It is my great and humbling privilege to declare it open.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I would like to acknowledge David Pearson and Chloe Pearson, family of Flying Officer Charles Edward Suffren.
I also acknowledge the Leader of the Opposition, and all my colleagues from across the parliament;
Air Marshal Robert Chipman, representing the Chief of the Defence Force;
Major General Greg Melick, National President of the RSL;
The Honourable Kim Beazley, Chair of the Council of the Australian War Memorial;
Matt Anderson, Director of the Australian War Memorial;
Vice Admiral Mark Hammond, Chief of Navy;
Lieutenant General Simon Stuart, Chief of Army;
Air Marshal Stephen Chappell, Chief of Air Force;
We come together here at the start of each parliamentary year in remembrance and respect.
We come because we share a solemn duty to reflect on our debt to all who have put on the uniform and served in our name, and to all who serve now.
It is a debt whose scale is written in the faces of our veterans.
It is measured in places made hallow by the bodies of our fallen – from battlefield to seabed.
And it is weighed in the stones that stand sentinel over graves in military cemeteries across the world, silent testament to all we have lost.
Some bear names, many do not. Some ache with messages from loved ones, words of parting chiselled into tombstone they knew they would never see.
The power of those messages is untouched by time – from Port Moresby, where the final resting place of Private Bruce Stanton bears the inscription:
“Beautiful memories of my only son, so loved, so mourned."
To Gallipoli, where Lance Corporal William O’Bree is mourned forever in the devastating simplicity of five words:
“We miss him at home.”
Then there is the grave of Private Frank Roberts.
Private Roberts fought at the Battle of Hamel under Monash – the first time Australian soldiers fought alongside US infantry.
He so very nearly made it to the Great War’s end and the long journey home to his wife that they must have both dreamed of over and over.
Then at Mont St Quentin, scarcely two months before the Western Front finally fell silent, Private Roberts was felled by an enemy bullet.
Over the coming years, his father would go on to pour his grief into an ever growing pile of scrapbooks, a towering paper monument to the symmetry of love and grief.
Yet the inscription on Private Robert’s gravestone is a reminder of something brighter, his family choosing a line from one of his letters home.
A line that would stand as well for him in death as it did in life. It reads:
“Not lonely with the boys I’m one of the Aussie family here.”
For amid war’s bleak rhythm of fear, boredom and horror, there was a camaraderie no enemy could ever crush.
So as we gather here, we think of that spirit that has carried every Australian who has answered the call through the decades.
We think of every place Australians have stood and every place they have fallen, all of it mapped out in our hearts in an atlas of loss and sacrifice.
And we think of the multitudes cast into the ranks of the unknown soldier as they were torn from life.
As we vow in the Ode of Remembrance, we remember them at the going down of the sun.
For it is perhaps then, as day yields to night, that we can let ourselves imagine them most clearly, gathering about us at the edge of the light.
All those faces, all those voices. Every street that once rang with their youth. Every household whose collective heart beat louder with their presence.
Households that grew quieter when war called them away.
As the sun’s glow fades from the sky, we remember them – not as photographs held distant by dust and sepia, nor as a cenotaph’s solemn rollcall – and we hold them in our hearts.
We remember every time they stood tall against the nightfall of humanity.
We remember every hope they carried for a brighter dawn.
And as the rays of the sun come to warm us once again, we remember them in the morning.  
Lest we forget.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I’m delighted to be with you again, ahead of International Women’s Day.
This year’s call to “March Forward” is a chance to reflect on areas where Australia has come a long way and to be clear about where we still have a long way to go.
To look at the foundations we’ve laid – and to be ambitious for what we can build.
There has been a great deal of overdue change in the last three years: in economic opportunity, pay, representation and rights.
And there is more that must change, urgently - including the right of every woman to live in safety, free from the threat of violence.
The starting point in all of this is that issues affecting half the population are not questions of ‘special interest’.
Creating opportunity for women is a matter of national interest.
It’s more than a measure of our national fairness – it’s a driver of our national success.
It grows our workforce, lifts our living standards, boosts productivity, liberates the talent and capacity we need to build Australia’s future.
When women ‘march forward’, our whole nation makes progress.
That’s why as Katy Gallagher often says: “equality for women is not an add-on”.
Not an afterthought.
Not a discussion we have at a morning tea once a year.
Not an issue we discover ahead of election time.
It is a fundamental economic and social priority.
It drives the national action our Government is taking on violence against women.
Our Leaving Violence Payment and our expansion of the Single Parenting Payment, so women aren’t trapped in violent relationships by the threat of poverty.
Record new investments in crisis and transitional accommodation, so there are more safe places to go.
And just as importantly, a new and stronger focus on perpetrators and prevention.
Because we shouldn’t wait for a hospital admission or a police report to identify the risk of violence.
We are also making change in our health system, opening 22 new endometriosis and pelvic pain clinics across states and territories.
We are expanding Paid Parental Leave to 6 months, making it more flexible – and adding superannuation to it.
And we’re driving change in work and wages too.
Gender equity is now an objective of the Fair Work Act.
10 Days Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave is now part of the National Employment Standards.
And all 55 Recommendations of the Respect@Work – including a duty on employers to try to stop sexual harassment at work – are being implemented.
These reforms have helped bring the gender pay gap to an all-time low – and they have made our economy stronger, across the board.
The same is true for the 15 per cent pay rise our Government is delivering for early educators.
Firstly, this pay rise is about recognising the value of the work these Australians do.
Making it clear – as we did with aged care – that the people who bring joy and discovery into the lives of our littlest Australians deserve more than our thanks and praise.
They deserve fair pay.
These pay rises help with retention - because people can afford to keep doing a job they love.
They help with recruitment – attracting the new workers we need for a growing care economy.
And the important thing about these wage rises – as with so much else that is sometimes described as ‘Women’s Policy’ is that they don’t just benefit the workers and their families.
They benefit every family with a child in child care.
And they drive our national prosperity too.
Because everything we do to make child care more affordable and accessible boosts productivity and participation in every part of our economy.
That’s why this week in Parliament, we’ll be taking the next step to universal child care.
Introducing legislation to abolish the current Activity Test and replace it with a new 3 Day Guarantee.
Building a system where every child can access 3 days of early education.
The current Activity Test denies tens of thousands of children the opportunity of early education, every year.
And it also deprives their parents of the opportunity to find work.
Because if you don’t have that foundation of access to child care, that certainty, it’s hard to commit to working certain days or hours, or even get to an interview.
This is a barrier to education and employment, we want to clear it away and replace it with universal child care.
Three decades ago, I was a delegate at the Labor Party National Conference when we voted to adopt Affirmative Action with the goal of achieving equal representation.
The arguments against it and the criticisms of it haven’t changed much in 30 years.
But I can tell you our party has changed, and changed for the better.
When we sit in our Government Caucus Room, for the first time ever there are a majority of women members.
When I sit at the Cabinet table, for the first time ever, I see an equal number of men and women.
This has helped us make better decisions and drive better results for the women of Australia. No question.
But it’s also made us a better Government in every way.
That’s what happens when you set an ambitious goal – and back it with concrete action.
And that’s the Australian story too: every time we broaden opportunity, every time we expand the meaning of the fair go, we all gain from it.
We are all stronger for it.
Let that guide us – and drive us.
So we all ‘march forward’, together.


Xian nian kuai le
Gong hei fat choy
Saehae bok mani badeusey
Chuc mung nam moi
Thank you so much for your kind invitation to be here with you today.
Thank you to the organisers and every volunteer and every member of this great community for making this festival reality.
This is what community is all about.
It also gives me great pleasure to acknowledge Premier Chris Minns, Mayor Trenton Brown, and of course your fantastic representative in Federal Parliament, Jerome Laxale.
This is a wonderful time of year, one that has become such a cherished fixture on the Australian calendar with families, friends and communities coming together in joy and celebration to share in centuries of tradition.
As we gather to welcome the Year of the Snake, we look forward together with optimism for the new opportunities that a new year brings.
And we wish each other good fortune in all that matters most: our happiness, health, family and prosperity.
Chinese, Korean and Vietnamese cultures have enriched Australia and broadened our horizons.
The contribution of your communities is something to celebrate every day of the year., not just Lunar New Year.
I talk with small business owners, who do so much to lift their communities as they support their families – and they become part of the backbone of the economy in the process.
I speak with parents and grandparents who have come to Australia to make a better life, not just for themselves but for their families and generations to come.
You have all helped write the Australian story. You have all helped shape the great multicultural nation that Australia has become.
Just as you are an intrinsic part of who we are as a nation, you also part of our face to the world.
You have helped develop Australia’s place in the region.
I will never take your communities, or your contribution to our nation, for granted.
We are fortunate to be located just south of the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
For a long part of Australia's history, we spoke about the tyranny of distance and how we need to overcome it.
Now we speak about the proximity of opportunity, the engagement that we have, and there is no asset that we have in this country that is greater than our people.
And it's our people, and those people with people links in our region that are so important..
Once again, I want to thank everyone who has worked so hard to bring this year’s event together.
Every dream and every vision is at its most extraordinary when it is turned into reality.
I wish you all a great day and a safe and happy Year of the Snake.


Chuc mung nam moi.
I’m delighted to be here and to share in these celebrations with you.
I am proud to be only the second prime minister to be here following the Labor Prime Minister, Julia Gillard,
And very pleased that my friend and our fantastic Labor candidate for Fowler, Tu Le, is joining me on stage and has offered to translate my remarks.
I acknowledge Chris Bowen, Anne Stanley, Dai Le and all the other federal and state parliamentarians who have the great privilege of representing this wonderful part of Sydney and Australia.
Tet is a time where we look forward with optimism for everything the new year holds.
We wish each other happiness, prosperity, good health and good luck.
Tet is also time for celebrating family – and honouring ancestors.
This year, in particular, we join in honouring the first generation of Vietnamese migrants.
Men, women and children who came to Australia in search of a new home 50 years ago, and settled in this local Cabramatta community, but also in my local home of Marrickville.
People who came here seeking a better life for themselves and their families, refugees who were welcomed here, and in doing so have made this a better country for us all.
Working hard and studying hard to make the best of themselves.
Starting businesses, creating jobs, building communities, looking after others.
Enriching every part of our national life, and strengthening the social cohesion that makes Australia at its best, a beacon to the world.
This is the inspirational success story of the Vietnamese Australian community.
A story written by aspiration and determination.
And a story as rich in history and as full of joy and energy as this famous festival.
I want to recognise and thank everyone who has worked so hard to bring this magnificent event together for another year.
The New South Wales chapter of the Vietnamese Community of Australia do an extraordinary job.
And I am pleased to announce that a Labor Government will provide $150,000 over the next three years to help you make this iconic celebration even bigger and even better into the future.
I wish you and your loved ones a great celebration and a safe, happy and healthy Year of the Snake.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I would also like to acknowledge all the Indigenous members of Parliament, in particular the Minister for Indigenous Australians, Senator Malarndirri McCarthy and her predecessor the member for Barton, Linda Burney.
I am grateful for the commitment to the Partnership shown by States and Territories, responsible for so many of the services and supports that can help close the gap.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the work done by the Coalition of Peaks led by Pat Turner.
On Wednesday, it will be 60 years since the start of the Freedom Ride, a bus journey through regional NSW that opened our eyes wide to the discrimination against Indigenous Australians.
Led by Charles Perkins, it was a turning point in our self-awareness as a nation. It was the beginning of the possibility of something better.
On Thursday, it will be 17 years since Prime Minister Kevin Rudd delivered the Apology to the Stolen Generations.
It was a day of catharsis that held the promise of a fresh start.
Both anniversaries are reminders to learn from the injustices and mistakes of the past – because that’s how we grow, carefully reading the pages already written and turning to the promise of the new. 
Each one of us is a part of this nation’s story.
Each of us adds to its newest chapters.
Like anything made stronger by its layers, we draw strength from Australia’s extraordinary and profound depths.
And we can take pride.
No nation’s story is simple, least of all Australia’s.
It is a rich, proud and deeply remarkable story, a story of hope, achievement, and survival against the odds.
Our stories are intertwined, but as the Closing the Gap report routinely lays bare, there are still too many areas in which we are not together.
The latest Productivity Commission reporting shows that while we are seeing improvements on 11 of the 19 targets in the National Agreement, only five are on track to be met.
Today is about facing up to what's not working and learning from what is.
The success stories in this report have been written by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
Today our Government is investing in the practical partnerships that work and bringing the building blocks of a good life to people and communities that have been cut off from them too long.
From new medical facilities to safe housing, from clean water to real jobs.
At heart, all of us hope for the same things.
A healthy family.
A safe home and all that it entails.
An education that opens the way to a rewarding job.
Affordable medicines and health care.
Security. Justice. Fairness.
A sense of community in which we can be a meaningful part.
A stake in our economy.
And power over our own destinies, a power that rests in no small part on the strength of our financial circumstances.
In short, the chance to make the very most of our own lives and to lift those around us.
That is no more than any Australian asks for. It is no less than every Australian deserves.
Yet what we all know in this place is that it remains elusive for so many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
There is no ethos more fundamentally Australian than the fair go.
Closing the Gap is the fairest go of all.
We want First Nations people to have ownership of their futures and a stake in the economy.
That is the foundation on which everything else can be built. If we get it right, we can break the cycle that has ensnared generations.
The Government is working to enhance Indigenous Business Australia’s ability to leverage its capital and investments to support First Nations communities.
It will support more First Nations people to start, grow and sustain businesses, purchase homes, and invest in commercial ventures.
We are working to increase the participation rate of First Nations women in business through the mentoring and coaching program to give them greater access to the resources, networks, and support they need to launch a viable business, commercialise a viable business idea, or grow an existing business.
We’re requiring businesses which register as First Nations businesses for Commonwealth procurement to be 51 per cent Indigenous-owned and controlled to improve the integrity of the program.
These are all common sense options.
Our new Remote Jobs and Economic Development Program will create 3000 real jobs in remote communities, jobs with proper pay and conditions.
Jobs that make a real difference to the lives of individuals, their families, and their communities.
Good jobs that provide a sense of pride and purpose, hope and aspiration.
Jobs that can have the power to generate intergenerational opportunity.
And we’re making it easier to develop necessary skills with the National Skills Agreement ensuring the design and delivery of Vocational Education and Training to First Nations people is in full and genuine partnership.
We are also creating 1000 new Indigenous ranger jobs across the country, a great success story that has allowed Australia to draw on the expertise of our Indigenous people.
As we realistically and methodically tackle the challenges of the present, we look with optimism to the future, a future in which Australia is uniquely placed to take its rightful place as a renewable energy superpower.
The growing global demand for the renewable energy, critical minerals and rare earths, which we have in abundance, is an unprecedented opportunity for Australia.
It is the biggest change in the global economy since the industrial revolution.
As I outlined at Garma, it represents the best chance Australia has ever had to bring lasting economic growth and prosperity to remote communities.
New clean energy projects and processing and refining facilities can all unlock new jobs and prosperity for communities.
I say to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, you deserve a real stake in the economic development of the land you call home.
You deserve a stake in the future.
That is the principle upon which we can build better future.
Projects generating renewable energy on country should bring new economic power to communities.
It’s all part of unlocking the potential of the land. Even more importantly, it’s part of unlocking the potential of its people.
So much of what we are doing is guided by the instinct to ensure every Australian has their best chance to fulfil their potential.
We are dedicated to building an Australia where more families know the stability of somewhere to call home.
The stability that gives you the confidence to plan for the future.
This is what is driving our commitment to build 2700 new homes in remote Northern Territory communities over 10 years.
More than 200 were built last year, no longer a dream but a life-affirming reality. Another 64 are due by June.
We are further investing in critical services in remote First Nations communities in the Territory, with $842.6 million to roll out over the next six years under the Northern Territory Remote Aboriginal Investment.
Importantly, this investment package was designed and will be rolled out in partnership with the NT Government and the Aboriginal Peak Organisations Northern Territory.
As well as maintaining and boosting critical remote services, this investment will transform how services are delivered in the longer term.
By elevating and investing in self-determination, NTRAI will ensure that communities can decide what works best them.
Partnering with APO NT will ensure these critical services are informed by the perspectives of Aboriginal people and strengthen the capacity of Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations to deliver remote services.
Our Housing Australia Future Fund is helping with repairs and maintenance on houses in remote First Nations communities.
And whether it’s construction of new homes or maintenance of existing ones, it means jobs for locals.
Indigenous Business Australia provides access to home loans to help First Nations Australians to buy their own home.
We are making $70 million available for more concessional loans to help IBA keep pace with demand.
A portion of this will be quarantined for single-carer families. This is particularly important for women who are sole carers and are often locked out of home ownership.
By providing shared equity to people in these situations, the IBA can help people access home ownership.
The work on housing, on job creation, on getting reliable energy into remote communities, on backing indigenous businesses and helping people own their own homes is vital to building economic opportunity.
But we know we must do more, guided by common sense, focused on delivery.
We want to see the principles of economic empowerment and opportunity incorporated at every step, from employment and training, to business, to access to finance and capital, and new business opportunities.
To develop new approaches to solving this, we are investing over five years to establish a First Nations Economic Framework and a First Nations Economic Partnership.
We work to close gaps by widening the doors of opportunity and what achieves that with lasting power is education.
In the first half of last year more than 10,300 First Nations people were among the hundreds of thousands of Australians, who have enrolled in fee-free TAFE.
Our Connected Beginnings Program is improving access to early childhood health and supports school readiness, with the total number of First Nations children supported through the program now nearly 25,000 over 50 sites.
Last year, 2500 First Nations young people at boarding schools supported by the Commonwealth’s Indigenous Boarding Provider Grant.
We have also announced funding to support the core operations two education peak bodies, the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Corporation and National Voice for Our Children.
We also recognise the huge potential for internet access to close the gap and to boost opportunities.
Through the Commonwealth Digital Connectivity pilot, WiFi infrastructure has already been installed in 22 remote communities in partnership with NBN Co, with 23 more to come.
For remote communities, the internet is life-changing. It makes telehealth consultations possible. It gives young people access to a better education, and it connects workers and businesses with new opportunities.
This year will also see the establishment of a First Nations Digital Support hub and a network of digital mentors to support the digital literacy and ability of First Nations people across Australia.
And telecommunications upgrades are also underway in more than 260 remote First Nations communities through the Remote Indigenous Telecommunication program.
We are also tackling issues of access to affordable food in remote communities.
Consumer advocacy organisation Choice found on average groceries cost more than double what they do in capital cities.
And supplies can be erratic. The resulting food insecurity can have serious health impacts, including cardiovascular and kidney disease.
Today I am pleased to announce we will ensure the costs of 30 essential products in more than 76 remote stores are the same as what you’d pay in the city as well as boosting warehouse capacity to shorten freight distances and to make supply chains to remote communities less vulnerable.
We will also build on the success of the Arnhem Land Progress Aboriginal Corporation’s Nutrition Workforce initiative, which trains First Nations shop staff to promote good nutrition.
We will bring that program to more communities.
Like Australians right across the continent, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are benefitting from this Government’s reduction of the cost of medicines.
Last year, coverage by the Closing the Gap Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme co-payment plan was expanded.
We have invested $100 million into 33 indigenous health infrastructure projects to construct new clinics and, crucially, build housing for staff.
This investment is critical to improving service delivery to patients and to improve conditions for staff, who are the absolute backbone of all of this.
More than 300 of our planned 500 First Nations Health Trainees are already in place.
We’re seeing better maternity services, and with that, improved birth weights.
Today, I can announce that we are funding suicide prevention through an important program to improve First Nations Social and Emotional Wellbeing.
This includes funding to support higher education scholarships for up to 150 tertiary education students studying psychology.
We are continuing to improve renal services to treat sufferers of kidney disease, which still hangs like a spectre over the outback.
The first of 30 new dialysis units opened last year in Coober Pedy.
Eight other locations are being established across remote Australia, from Torres Strait to the Pilbara.
Today I announce we are also upgrading or opening laundries in more than 10 remote communities in northern and central Australia.
By ensuring reliable clean water, power supply and access to laundries, we can reduce infections that can open the door to asthma, ear conditions, trachoma, and rheumatic heart disease, a third world disease that has all but faded from living memory in most of the country but retains its grip on Indigenous Australia.
As well as improving quality of life, reducing preventable diseases will reduce the longer term burden on the health system.
The remote laundries will be able to access the Remote Jobs and Economic Development Program to hire new staff, upskill staff, and create more local jobs.
In every area where it can help clear the road ahead to a better future, we are working with communities to make it happen.
From measures as straightforward as additional patrols in and around Alice Springs, we are working with elders and leaders who want the same as any of us: to prevent crime, boost community safety, and keep their young people from harming their own futures.
And we are boosting funding for Family Violence Legal Services to support women and children who lived with the bleak reality of family and domestic violence, because they have to have real options.
We cannot turn our backs on the catastrophic rate at which First Nations women suffer family domestic violence, often with tragic finality.
First Nations women are currently 33 times more likely than non-Indigenous Australians women to be hospitalised due to family violence and seven times more likely to die.
This cannot stand. We are funding critical prevention, early intervention and response services to address family, domestic, and sexual violence in high needs First Nations communities.
In an effort to stop violence before it starts, three new community-led Men’s Wellness Centres will be established in the Top End to provide support for First Nations men and boys to recognise signs of unhealthy relationships.
Culturally informed and specific to community, these programs will be developed and delivered by three Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community-Controlled Organisations.
When Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people advance, the entire nation moves forward.
We are delivering real results, but we are clear-eyed about the truth that there is so much more to do.
The road ahead is not easy, but crucially there is a road, and we keep adding to it.
To Close the Gap would ultimately erase the gulf that lies between us and our true potential as a nation.
It’s about ensuring all Australians get the same chance in life.
It’s about working towards the reality in which all Australians have power over their destiny.
It’s about living the reality of the fair go.
Ours is a remarkable country. A nation that is not an accident, or the mere jackpot of good luck.
A nation lifted both by the vast sweep of our history, and the bright possibilities of its future.
A great nation with an extraordinary potential to be even greater.
And that is a story we will write together.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Thank you for the invitation this evening – and for the contribution you make to our nation every day.
The industries, businesses and workers represented in this room have played such an important role in dealing with the global challenges that have confronted our economy and our people over the past three years.
And your efforts are every bit as important to seizing the opportunities ahead of Australia in the next three years and beyond.
This is why I have always valued our constructive engagement.
Because even if we sometimes bring different perspectives to the public debate, we all share the same objective, founded on the same understanding.
We know that building Australia’s future depends on building a stronger, more competitive, more resilient and more productive economy.
An economy that creates wealth and opportunity, one that encourages innovation, attracts investment and rewards hard work.
That’s our Government’s vision but it can’t be realised by government alone.
We recognise that just as good jobs and fair wages depend on successful businesses, national prosperity depends on the engine room of private enterprise and the growth that private capital drives.
That’s why our Government has focused on providing business with the incentives, opportunity and certainty to invest: in new energy, new projects, new technology and new markets.
Of course, none of this work occurs in a vacuum.
Australia has faced the same fundamental challenges as every other advanced economy.
Global inflation has put pressure on the cost of living – and the cost of doing business.
The worst of this is behind us, with headline inflation down to 2.4 per cent.
But we know there is still work to do - and we know there will be new challenges to face.
The floods we’ve seen in Queensland are a reminder of the devastating toll natural disasters inflict on people and communities.
They also carry significant economic costs.
And as an outward looking economy, engaged in the world, global turbulence affects Australia.
Distance is no barrier to uncertainty, isolation is no answer – calm and constructive engagement is the way through, navigating differences diplomatically.
Australia is a great trading nation and a strong supporter of the free and fair trade that one in four Australian jobs depends on.
And our Government will always back Australian jobs and Australia’s interests, in strengthening ties with our old and trusted friends, restoring trade with vital partners and seeking out new markets and new opportunities.
I have a phone call scheduled with President Trump and I’m looking forward to talking with him again.
Australia has had a trade surplus with the United States going back to the Truman Administration.
And just as our alliance contributes to peace and security across the Indo-Pacific, our close economic ties have always delivered benefits for both our nations.
The reality we deal with in Australia is that the global economic and political environment is always changing.
So it’s no use waiting for the moment when all is quiet in the world.
Instead you have to invest in the skills and technology and energy, the infrastructure and the relationships that enable you to do more than just respond to change.
You can anticipate it, help shape it and make it work for people.
I’m realistic about the challenges we might face - and I’m optimistic about Australia’s capacity to meet them.
Because as we begin 2025, inflation is falling, real wages are rising.
Consumer confidence is picking up.
Over 1.1 million jobs have been created.
Including 47,000 additional jobs in manufacturing.
And last financial year saw the highest level of business investment in over a decade.
Another reason I’m optimistic about what’s ahead of us, is because I remember where we’ve come from.
Think back to where we were, three years ago.
The most dire skills crisis in 50 years.
A national energy grid on the brink, 10 years behind the world on renewables.
A broken migration system.
Our relationships with our neighbours in the Pacific and our largest trading partner in China at a low point.
A budget deficit of $78 billion.
From our first day in Government, we’ve been focused on clearing this mess away and laying the foundations to build something stronger and better.
So that Australia is prepared for the next challenge the world throws at us - and poised to seize the opportunities the world holds for us.
That’s what building Australia’s future is about.
Building the skills and capacity of our people: Free TAFE, new support for apprentices and new investments in the care economy.
Building and upgrading the roads, ports and homes that support growth, bring jobs to communities and boost productivity.
Clearing away old barriers to productivity growth – like the nearly 500 nuisance tariffs we abolished last year.
Building the new drivers of productivity – merger reform, modernising competition policy, taking the next steps to universal child care and finishing the NBN with fibre, not copper.
Australia has always been good at new technology - both creating it and embracing it.
We want to make sure that Australian workers and Australian businesses have the tools and skills to unlock the benefits of Artificial Intelligence and automation.
Because getting this right can add $600 billion to our economy by 2030.
And we’re encouraging the states to get moving on productivity too – with a new National Productivity Fund.
This is about helping with the cost of living by reducing the burden of regulation, everything from speeding up housing approvals and construction to boosting competition in the supermarket sector.
And just as the best way to make housing more affordable is to build more homes more quickly, the best way to make power more affordable is to bring more energy online, sooner.
Building the renewables, firmed by gas, that represent the only practical pathway to secure and affordable energy – now and into the future.
Because there is no industry anywhere in Australia that can afford to push pause and wait 20 years for a nuclear reactor.
Waiting until the 2040s to replace coal fired power stations retiring in the 2020s and 2030s only guarantees energy insecurity and job losses.
At its core, the Liberals’ nuclear plan means delay when Australia needs urgency.
It requires hundreds of billions of dollars in taxpayer money, because there’s not a single investor who wants to touch it.
And it’s designed for a smaller and narrower economy, with fewer jobs.
The basis of our opponents’ plan is the idea that Australia will use 40 per cent less energy than the Australian Energy Market Operator has found will be needed.
Whereas our plan is about ensuring you have access to the reliable, affordable power you need to grow your businesses and grow our economy.
Record levels of investment are flowing into renewables right now, bringing renewables up to 46 per cent of the grid in the last quarter.
Not taxpayer dollars, private capital.
Since we were elected, 15 gigawatts of solar and wind have come online.
Enough to power 5.5 million households.
Another 20 gigawatts of large-scale renewables is under construction, or about to be.
25,000 homes are adding rooftop solar every month.
That speaks for the level of catching-up that Australia has to do.
It also shows the power of certainty.
The clear 2030 target our Government set, something AiG endorsed from the outset.
The Safeguard Mechanism that rewards your businesses for upgrading to new technology.
And the Capacity Investment Scheme – driving tens of billions of dollars in investment from companies that recognise the scale of this opportunity.
From my first day in this job, when I flew to Japan to join a meeting of the Quad, I’ve made it a priority to build – and rebuild – Australia’s international relationships.
We are re-engaged in the Pacific, because we are back among the nations taking climate change seriously.
We have stabilised our relationship with China, clearing away more than $20 billion in trade impediments that were hurting our farmers, growers and producers.
And – in partnership with the Australian Industry Group and the direct participation of so many business leaders in this room - we are bringing a new comprehensive approach to our investment in India and South East Asia.
Because the fastest growing region of the world in human history has to be a bigger part of our future growth strategy.
And as we strive for greater diversity in who we trade with – we must also aim for greater diversity in what we trade.
The high-quality products and services we can offer the world.
This is why we are building-up our industrial base.
Our National Reconstruction Fund is driving new investment across medical science, technology and mining.
Working together with our Future Made in Australia plan, which is all about Australian workers and Australian companies making things here.
Production Tax Credits to incentivise value-adding in clean energy and critical minerals.
New investments in green metals, securing the future of our aluminium industry and the tens of thousands of jobs it supports.
Streamlining approvals to get new projects up and running faster.
Backing local jobs and skills, so projects in northern Australia and the regions in particular, deliver for communities.
And a more rigorous and more efficient framework for international investment.
This is a plan for economic sovereignty, as well as economic resilience.
Making sure that the next big disruption to the global supply chain – whatever form it takes - doesn’t leave Australia stranded.
But this is also about securing the next generation of economic growth.
Making the most of all our nation’s strengths: clean energy, critical minerals, skilled workers and the space we have, a continent to call our own.
A stable, open democracy on the threshold of the biggest markets in the world, with diaspora communities that give us a family connection to every nation on earth.
This an unmatched combination – and if we act now, we can make it an unbeatable one.
We can do much more than weather the next global storm.
We can compete and succeed, on our terms.
We can build a new comparative advantage for ourselves in refining, processing and manufacturing.
And we can position Australia as the destination of choice for new data centres and all the jobs they represent, all the innovation they drive.
This is the future we can build together, on the foundations we have laid.
Where our economy is stronger because your industries are stronger.
Growing because your businesses are growing.
More productive because we’re investing in the skills, education and training of the Australian people.
More resilient and diversified, because our Future Made in Australia plan means you can make new products for new markets.
And more secure because industry can count on clean energy.
This stronger, more productive, more resilient Australia is closer now than at any time in the past decade.
Let us continue to engage with each other, listen to each other, work with each other so we can seize this opportunity - and secure it - for the decades ahead.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
It is one of my greatest honours as Prime Minister to be here every year.
Of course, we wish that we weren't commemorating the apology, because we wish there wasn't a need for that apology to occur.
But indeed, of course, there was.
I particularly want to welcome the survivors who honour us with your presence here this morning.
You found within yourselves the strength to turn your suffering into a chance of a better Australia.
And make no mistake, when that apology was made, you not only provided a moment of healing for yourselves, you created a better Australia.
There was a sigh that you could actually physically feel in this nation, as people gathered in the chamber, out the front apartment of Parliament House, in school playgrounds right around the nation, screens in workplaces, the nation stopped.
And whilst it was Kevin Rudd who had the courage and the conviction to utter the words that we were told, for so many years before, that would be divisive.
At that moment, the nation said, sorry.
It was an act of leadership, the first action of the incoming Rudd Labor Government, and it remains my proudest moment to be a member of the House of Representatives.
It was only made possible because of the generosity that, quite frankly, overwhelming and in some ways not even understandable or able to comprehend that level generosity given what had been done to generations of First Nations people.
So I say to you, simply in the words that are on this beautiful photograph that is before you, thanks.
Thanks.
That photo says so much in one image of what was a moment for this parliament.
An act of grace. An extraordinary act of generosity.
We come together here in a week of pivotal anniversaries.
Yesterday we marked 60 years since the start of the Freedom Ride, a 15-day bus journey through regional New South Wales that lifted the veil on the discrimination against Indigenous Australians.
Led by Charles Perkins, the Freedom Ride aroused controversy and, in some quarters, deep hostility.
Yet what emerged from the courage of the Freedom Riders and the locals who stood with them was a wake-up call for Australia – and a turning point in our self-awareness as a nation.
We could no longer turn our eyes from the segregation that had been cemented into law and society, and hardened into cruel routine. 
The discrimination that blocked the way to every form of the fair go. It stood between Indigenous Australians, better health care, a good education and fair wages.
It trampled on the bond between a mother and her baby. It even stood between children and a swim on a hot day.
Six decades on, that remarkable photo of those local boys in the pool in Moree with Charles Perkins still speaks to us.
It was the beginning of the overturning of an injustice entrenched by law. It was the beginning of the chance of something better.
Today it is 17 years since Prime Minister Kevin Rudd delivered the Apology to the Stolen Generations.
It was a day to tell the survivors: We hear you. And it was a day of catharsis that held the promise of a fresh beginning.
The Apology could not have happened without your courage. Nor would we have had the annual report card that is Closing the Gap.
Yet like the Freedom Ride, it was the target of controversy and hostile opposition. The power of hindsight only serves to render that opposition even more baffling.
Those, like John Howard, who argued it would divide were wrong. Australians were united in a moment of fundamental decency.
When the Apology was formally offered here – in this very institution that had so often let you down – only one question remained: Why didn’t this happen sooner?
I was raised as I think most parents raise their kids. When you do something wrong on the playground you say sorry.
I keep returning to Prime Minister Rudd’s words that day:
Let us turn this page together and write this new chapter in our nation's story together. 
And I pay tribute to the leadership of Brendan Nelson on that day as well as the Leader of the Liberal Party, who had the courage to resist others those within his own organisation and say, no, this is going to be a moment of bipartisanship.
And he showed real leadership on that day and it would have been a different event were there some of the contemporaneous opposition and the opportunism that some showed on that day.
It was the first act of the new Government. And my proudest.
It was a day that mattered in the life of our nation.
When you're elected to this place, you can either make a decision to try and enlarge the nation, or you can make a decision to try and make it small.
To look at how can we create a division and an argument, about a flag, about a word.
My view is very simple, when I stood in this room on my first day as Prime Minister, when we had a breakfast for the opening of parliament, I said, we’re not here for all that long particularly when we bear in mind the fact that we share this continent with the oldest living culture on earth.
I've been here a while. Feels like a long time. It is nothing.
When you're sitting on the porch when you leave here, you want to be able to look back say, I tried best to enlarge the nation, and that certainly is my objective, that I have no regrets in enlarging our nation, because we will get there, that’s the thing.
The apology didn't come at the first suggestion. It took a long time. Two steps forward, one step back.
History does move forward. The arch of history bends towards justice as the great Martin Luther King declared all those years ago.
I’d like to quote survivor Ian Hamm, a Yorta Yorta man taken from his mother in 1964 when he was just a few weeks old. He says:
It is perhaps a measure of our maturing as a nation that we are becoming more prepared to own and accept the bits of our national narrative that are unsavoury and uncomfortable as much as we want to celebrate that which makes us proud and confident.
That day was when Australia crossed a threshold. It’s where we stopped the argument about whether there were Stolen Generations.
It marked a critical turning point, and it encompassed something greater too. Indirectly, it was a broader apology to Aboriginal Australia.
The Apology was never intended as the end of the story, rather – as Prime Minister Rudd said – the beginning of a new chapter.
We put behind us the old chapter that took from you the most profound of rights: to grow up safely in your own family.
And together we write a chapter of self-determination.
The new chapter must be an Australia in which Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have the same choices as non-Indigenous Australians.
An Australia in which the Government works carefully with you towards a future in which Indigenous Australians have the economic security of a job and a home.  
What guides my Government every day is the instinct to ensure all Australians get the same chance in life.
To work towards the reality in which all Australians have power over their destiny.
And this all began when you – and all survivors – through patience, persistence and grace at last found your nation was ready to hear your hard truths.
The process of healing that began with the Apology goes on, a process we are assisting by extending the Territories Stolen Generations Redress Scheme to 30 June 2028.
This means we will be able to continue to accept applications from Stolen Generations survivors for an additional 18 months, bringing it more into line with state redress schemes in place
I want to thank the Healing Foundation and Stolen Generation organisations for supporting more than 60 survivors from across the country to attend this breakfast. To come together to remember, make connections and heal.
I acknowledge the dozens of Stolen Generations organisations, driven by survivors, which provide much needed services and support to their communities.
The Apology was an acknowledgement that the better future that is possible for our country can only be brought within reach when we fully come to terms with our past.
The old saying that my mum used to say to me, you can’t know where you’re going if you don’t know where you’ve been.
Memory has to be a conscious act. It must be cared for, and it must be handed into the care of the next generation.
That is why this anniversary is so important.
It’s why for every year that I am Prime Minister, I will attend this breakfast. Because it is important that this moment in history be turned into practical reform making a real difference.
This is an expression of memory wrapped in our collective gratitude to all of you.
And by learning from the mistakes of the past, we renew our promise of Australia’s better future.


Well, thank you very much. I also begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting today and pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
To the Premier of South Australia, my friend Mali, and members of his team who are here.
To my Ministers, Don Farrell and Ed Husic.
To Peter Dutton, the Leader of the Opposition, and other members of Parliament who are here.
The Governor of South Australia, Frances Adamson.
It's wonderful that you're able to be here.
And to Gemma Jones, a big shout out to you for your leadership in organising these forums, which I've been to now for three years, I think, in a row - and it's a fantastic thing.
Including, I got to meet the young students who went to the Youth Parliament just across the road here just last Friday. And it's always wonderful that we're engaging with the next generation of leaders here in South Australia.
This has certainly been a big week and I'm not sure that Annabel will appreciate Mali's analogy of the marriage proposal with the divorce from Mr Gupta at Whyalla.
But that wasn't my choice. Very brave, Mali. I'm not sure I'll follow in that way.
But it is indeed, it has been a courtship, I must say, between Mali and myself when it's come to Whyalla and the vision that the Premier of South Australia has for this great state.
Under Peter Malinauskas’ leadership South Australia doesn't and should never accept that it's a smaller state.
His vision is one that sees South Australia powering the nation and leading the nation in so many ways.
And I've got to say that the case that he made for us to partner in the adventure that played out over this week, and I've been asked a number of times, and to preempt Sam Maiden's questions, we won't be going through details of what happened when and who said what to whom.
Suffice to say that obviously something that complex does not happen between Wednesday and today.
We have made sure that it certainly went through all of our internal, appropriate cabinet processes as well.
But as the Premier has said, it was important not just the future of South Australia, but the future of our nation.
There was a national interest involved here and you've always got to look at the counterfactual.
The counterfactual here is, imagine if we were here saying that the facility that produces 75 per cent of Australia's structural steel was gone.
One of the lessons of the pandemic that we absolutely have to not just talk about but put into practice is that Australia can't just be a nation that's at the end of supply chains, that's vulnerable to shocks.
Which might be another pandemic.
It might be trade issues - there's one or two you might have noticed around the world at the moment.
Or it could be an issue of conflict.
We have to not just be a quarry that digs up, the quality that it is there, the magnetite.
Exports it overseas, waits for value to be added, waits for jobs to be created, and then imports it back.
That is not Australia's future.
Australia's future is punching way above our weight. Is making sure that wherever possible we back our resources industry.
And yes, those exports are important, but wherever possible we value add.
We see the jobs created and the value added here. The economic growth that comes from that.
And without the steel that's produced at Whyalla, that goes into our railways, goes into the building where we're in right now. Goes into all of our major infrastructure projects right around the country - everything from the new Western Sydney Airport to railway projects right around this great vast continent of ours.
Without that we become dependent on someone else.
And that is why this was an issue not just for South Australia, this was an issue that demanded national leadership as well.
And I'm very proud of what we achieved together this week.
There's more work to do, but the structure that we established of ensuring that those workers at Whyalla, those small businesses and contractors who depend upon that steelworks.
Yesterday I have never felt such warmth and sheer bloody joy from a group of workers and people as when we arrived at the steelworks at Whyalla yesterday.
You could just feel a weight being lifted off their shoulders because they now had the certainty that their jobs will be maintained and that there's a future there for that regional town of Whyalla, in which the steelorks are the heart of that town, but the arteries pump economic activity right around this land.
And so it was a difficult decision on one level, but on another level it's the easiest decision that we could possibly have ever made to agree to the $2.4 billion package.
Not a bailout, importantly.
Gupta gets nothing from this.
The people who benefit from this are the workers, the small businesses, the contractors, not just in Whyalla, but everyone who relies upon the steel produced there.
And together with the other great steel producing town in Australia there at Port Kembla where I was last Friday at Bluescope. Together those two facilities are essential national assets, not just add-ons, not likes to have.
And that is why what we did yesterday was so important.
And when you look at Whyalla as well, and Ed Husic can tell you this, he's very passionate about these issues. You have the high quality magnetite at least as good, or perhaps the best in the world.
You have a port infrastructure which is critical there as well.
You have a renewable energy sector that's big now, but has enormous promise to be even bigger in the future.
But importantly as well, like everything else in this nation where we have the best solar resources in the world in the sky, and some of the best resources in the world under the ground.
Whether it be our coal and gas that have been so important historically and will continue to play a role.
But our copper, our cobalt, our lithium, all of our vanadium, all of the things that will power the global economy as we shift to net zero around the globe in this century.
Our greatest asset isn't either of those.
Our greatest asset is our people. Is our human resources, our human capital with the connections as well that they have to everywhere in the world.
And that is so important.
So yesterday I was really, really proud of what we were able to achieve.
And today we signed the documentation here at the Premier's office.
Whyalla though is just one component of a Bigger, Better South Australia.
When it comes to the role of South Australia in the Commonwealth, I can say this is my 21st visit to South Australia as Prime Minister in under three years.
I understand that this state has such an important role going forward, and one of the great satisfactions of my job is seeing the positive difference that my government is making to your great state in partnership with the Malinauskas Government here.
We of course, have had as an absolute priority getting inflation down. And of course now it's at 2.4 per cent, the headline figure.
And this week on Tuesday, it's been a very big week on a range of levels. Of course we had interest rates falling, so inflation going down, interest rates now coming down.
We also had wages rising this week with new figures five quarters in a row.
When we came to government inflation had a 6 in front of it and was rising.
Now it's got a 2 in front of it, 2.4 and is falling.
Wages had gone down in real terms for five quarters in a row.
Now wages are going up for five quarters in a row.
Interest rates began rising before the election.
Now they've begun falling with the decision by the RBA on Tuesday.
And in addition to that of course, the figures that came out just yesterday while we were at Whyalla show that now 1.15 million jobs have been created since we were elected two and ten months ago.
That is more jobs being created than under any government in Australia's history since Federation.
And we understand that there's more to do.
We understand people are under cost of living pressures.
But progress is being made.
The indicators are heading in the right direction.
And if you don't keep people in work then that's when people really, really do it tough.
We know that that's the case.
And there are some economists who would say the way that you get inflation down is to get unemployment up. Well we've taken a different path as a Labor government.
I said that we wouldn't leave people behind and we haven't.
We have got that inflation down, provided cost of living relief, whilst employment has been maintained.
The unemployment rate dipped up a bit to 4.1 but it is still relatively low - and that is so important.
And we've done all that whilst we've created support.
The Energy Bill Relief we've delivered in partnership with the South Australian Government.
The work that we've done in health care here, be it at Flinders doing research or through the hospital system here.
The creation of six Medicare Urgent Care Clinics that have seen more than 75,000 South Australians get the care that they need when they needed it and all they've needed is their Medicare card, not their credit card.
The cheaper medicines that have saved South Australians $85 million.
$2 billion additional into South Australia's health and hospital system in the coming financial year with the announcements that we made just a short while ago.
We're increasing funding to South Australia's hospitals by 15 per cent next year with a one off funding boost and an extra $300 million to help address ramping and bring down waiting lists.
The four year investment into the Flinders Medical Centre, as well as a three year investment into Comprehensive Cancer System Centres.
Just as we build in health, we've built on education. The South Australian Premier was one of the first to sign up to our new schools funding agreement. People remember, we used to speak about Gonski reforms 14 years ago.
Nothing happened for a while. It's now back on track.
The work that David Gonski did independently to identify what are the resources that a child needs to be able to take up the best opportunity in life were sat dormant for a while, that report.
We're going to deliver it so that every child, whether they're in a public or private school, no matter what the circumstances of their birth, gets the best opportunity in life as well - and that is absolutely critical as well.
This is the biggest Federal Government investment ever made into South Australian schools.
No child held back, no child left behind.
We're also making it easier for young South Australians to deal with the inter-generational issue of debt arising from the HECs debt.
We cut $3 billion of debt already through legislation. If we're reelected, we'll chop a further 20 per cent off. A commitment that I made here in Adelaide towards the end of last year.
And 18,000 South Australians have taken up Free TAFE.
Something that they do value.
Some would argue if something's free, you don't value it.
That has no understanding, and I suggest that they should talk to people who are doing carpentry, the ones that I've met here with the South Australian Education Minister, who are doing child care, aged care, who are doing electrical work.
Who are training either for their first job or importantly as well, retraining as the economy changes as we go through.
Free TAFE gives young South Australians a better chance to make more of themselves and at the same time develop the skills that South Australia needs because they're available for areas of skill shortage and that's important.
My government is also committed to giving apprentice tradies a $10,000 bonus if they take up the training in the building industry.
Now Peter also mentioned, of course, AUKUS and the role that South Australia plays there, and that is certainly critical.
The work being undertaken at the Osborne shipyards here and beyond will make a huge contribution to our national security.
And this is an issue that certainly won't be a contest at the next election.
There is absolute bipartisan commitment here in Australia towards AUKUS, as I might say there is also in the United States and the United Kingdom, and that's important as we go forward.
We want to continue to look to do more for cost of living, but we think that in terms of the work that's been done - inflation down, wages up, employment steady and continuing to grow, interest rates beginning to fall - they are all indicators, on top of the fact that we gave tax cuts to every single Australian taxpayer.
All of those things which, if you had have asked me last year or the year before when I spoke at these forums, I would have said, I'll take that.
I'll take that, because these have been difficult economic times.
But you don't get through difficult economic times by cowering in the corner.
You roll up your sleeves, you get the right policies in place and it makes a difference.
At the same time as we've done that, it's a hard thing to do to deliver a Budget surplus.
That perhaps explains the fact that no government for 20 years has delivered two Budget surpluses in a row, which we have done.
So I look forward to the coming campaign, but I also look forward to ongoing work each and every day.
And I was really pleased with the title here, ‘Bigger, Better South Australia’ because one of the things I hope that defines my leadership is I am a natural optimist.
I'm someone who wants to think big, not think small or myopic.
Enlarge Australia and our vision.
I do believe this is the greatest country on earth, but I think our best days are ahead of us.
We have such an opportunity to seize, located where we are, in the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
With the resources that we have at our disposal, both physical and natural, but also human resources.
There is no reason at all why Bigger, Better South Australia can't be Bigger, Better Australia as we go forward.
So I congratulate the Tiser and Gemma on the leadership that this paper is doing in advocating for this great state of South Australia.
And I look forward to being a part of creating that Bigger, Better South Australia for many years ahead.
Thanks very much.


My fellow Australians.
Building Australia’s Future is about your future.
It’s about your right to a great education.
Your dream of home ownership.
Your hard work being rewarded with fair pay.
Your aspiration to build a good life for yourself and your family.
And building Australia’s future is about making Medicare stronger.
Stronger Medicare is at the heart of our Government and it will be the beating heart of our election campaign.
Because we understand Medicare is at the heart of people’s lives.
Fundamental to your family’s health and security.
Front and centre in helping with the cost of living.
And a measure of the most Australian idea there is – the fair go.
That’s why Medicare is much more than an ordinary policy or program.
Medicare is a promise that Government makes to every citizen.
That if something goes wrong, if you get hurt, if your child is sick, if you need help – you are never on your own.
Medicare will be there for you.
That’s a statement about who we are as a society, as a country, as Australians.
We look after each other. We matter to each other.
Medicare is a promise that no-one will be left behind.
And it’s a platform that ensures no-one is held back.
Because a strong economy depends on a healthy society.
And reliable, affordable services are the foundation for aspiration, the starting point for so much else.
Because if you don’t have your health, if you don’t have the security of knowing that a great doctor and the best medicine are always in reach, if you have to put off seeing a doctor, because you can’t afford it, then it’s not just the individual who suffers, our whole society pays a price.
That’s the cold, hard lesson of every Liberal Government - especially the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government.
A decade of conflict and chaos, with Peter Dutton front and centre.   
A decade of cuts that pushed our health system to breaking point, and put bulk-billing in free fall.  
In 10 years, the Liberals turned bulk-billing from a service you could count on, to something you have to search for.
And that wasn’t an accident born of neglect or their incompetence – it was their goal all along.
It’s why Peter Dutton’s number one priority as Health Minister was a GP tax designed to destroy bulk-billing altogether.
He wanted to impose a medicine tax.
And a hospital tax on every Australian who had to seek care at an emergency department.
And when he couldn’t get his way, he launched a six-year freeze on Medicare rebates for GPs that stripped away billions.
Remember that, next time you hear the Liberals talk about getting ‘back on track’.
Remember what they want to go back to.
Remember the track they put Medicare on.
The dead end road to a system where every Australian paid more for less.
Thirty and forty years ago, the Liberals were open and honest about trying to abolish Medicare.
These days, they approach it somewhat differently.
Even Tony Abbott promised ‘no cuts to health’.
But every single time they get into Government, their attacks on Medicare are always the same.
The Liberals have changed what they say – but they will never change who they are.
When they talk about ‘efficiencies’ – they mean cuts.
When they talk about ‘economic surgery’ – they mean cutting bulk-billing off at the knees.
And when they talk about ‘contributions’, or ‘co-payments’ that means user pays.
‘User pays’ means patients pay.
It means families pay.
It means doctors and nurses and health care workers pay.
That’s why, in the Labor Party, we don’t call people who rely on Medicare and bulk-billing and the PBS and public hospitals ‘users’.
We call them Australians.
In health, as in so many other areas, my colleagues and I have spent every day of the last three years cleaning up the mess the Liberals left behind.
But we’re not satisfied with clearing away their failures.
In the next three years we want to go further and do better.
We want to deliver on the true promise and purpose of Medicare.
If the Australian people entrust our Labor Government with a second term, a single, straightforward objective will be the foundation of our health policy.
By 2030, we want 9 out of every 10 visits to the GP to be bulk-billed.
We want 9 out of every 10 visits to the GP, to be free.
That’s an ambitious goal - but people deserve ambition from their Government on Medicare.
Because just as every Australian wants the best health care for their family, our Government wants the best health care for every Australian.
That’s why two weeks ago, we delivered a $1.7 billion funding boost for public hospitals in the coming year.
A 14 per cent increase, for Tasmanian hospitals.
That’s on top of the $120 million we’ve put in to build the new Northern Heart Centre right here in Launceston.
Our plan for stronger Medicare is about ambition - and it’s about action.
Setting the goal – and outlining what we will do to get Australia there.
At the last election, we promised to open 50 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics.
Less than three years later, we’ve opened 87.
Including five right here in Tasmania.
Since the clinic in Wellington Street opened 18 months ago, it has helped over 26,000 Tasmanians get the free urgent care they need, fully bulk billed.
So if you get a burn or a sprain, if your child falls off their bike after school or hurts themselves at footy training or is running a fever before bedtime, you don’t need to wait around in the hospital emergency department.
You don’t need to ring around trying to find a GP who might be able to see you the following day.
You don’t need to risk a small thing becoming much more serious later on – and all the costs that go with that.
You can get help, and you can get it straight away.
And you don’t need to put it on the credit card.
All you need is your Medicare card.
In less than three years, our Medicare Urgent Care Clinics have become a key part of the health system – and a vital part of so many communities.
They take pressure off our hospitals and our healthcare workers.
And they save people money.
Medicare Urgent Care Clinics have helped more than one million Australians see a doctor for free.
Parents and families swear by them: one third of patients have been under the age of 15.
But the most important number in this equation is one.
One card guarantees it all.
One card covers it all.
Not your credit card - your Medicare card.
And our Government wants your Medicare card to carry the same value in every community.
We want to encourage more GPs and local practices and medical centres in every town and suburb to bulk-bill.
Whether your home is in the suburbs or the regions, whether you live on the north island or here on this beautiful south island, you should be able to see a doctor for free.
That’s the meaning of Medicare.
Yet for too many people, that security has been slipping out of reach.
When we came to Government, doctors were warning that bulk-billing was in “free-fall”.
So we took action.
We tripled the bulk-billing incentive for 11 million people.
The people who need to see a GP the most: pensioners, concession cardholders, and families with young children.
The doctors of Australia called it a ‘game changer’ - and they were right.
Because last year, when those families and pensioners went to see a doctor, more than 9 out of 10 of their appointments were bulk-billed.
And the largest rise in bulk-billing happened right here in Tasmania.
This turnaround was the direct result of our investment, the biggest investment in bulk-billing since a Labor Government created Medicare, four decades ago.
The biggest investment in bulk-billing – until now.
Today, we go further.
Today I announce that our Government will expand the bulk-billing incentive to cover all Australians.
From 11 million people – to all 26 million of us.
This is the biggest boost to Medicare in its history.
And it is the most important investment that we can make in Medicare’s future.
An $8.5 billion commitment to deliver stronger Medicare, everywhere.
Saving people hundreds of dollars in out of pocket costs.
Getting bulk-billing up to full strength.
And making it easier for Australians to see a GP for free, wherever they live.
Because Medicare is for all Australians and we are a Labor Government for all Australians.
One of the big challenges facing our health system is that 10 years of Liberal cuts have driven too many GPs away from bulk-billing.
We’re going to bring them back.
Today I announce we will offer every GP practice a new incentive payment to bulk-bill.
This payment will go to every doctor in every practice that commits to bulk-billing every patient, every time.
This will mean three times as many GP practices, fully bulk-billing.
It will provide around 4,800 medical practices across Australia with the security they need to bulk-bill every visit.
And it will provide millions of Australians with new security too.
Because whenever and wherever you see that green and gold Medicare sign.
You will know, straight away.
No asterisk, no fine print. No terms and conditions.
Just 100 per cent bulk-billing, covered by Medicare.
Of course, strengthening Medicare is more than investment, it’s about people.
It’s about doctors and nurses and midwives and healthcare workers in each and every part of the system.
That’s why – starting next year – our Government will deliver the biggest GP training program in Australian history.
Another 2,000 new GPs each year.
We will encourage more junior doctors to become GPs and to work in the regions and suburbs where they are needed most.
And we will create 400 new scholarships for nurses and midwives.
One of the best things about our nation’s health system is – and always will be - the people who work in it.
Our Government will invest in the doctors, nurses and midwives who will deliver the stronger Medicare that all Australians deserve.
In the last year alone, our Labor Government has delivered a tax cut for every taxpayer, not just some.
Energy bill relief for every household, not just some.
We are cutting student debt for all 3 million students, not just some.
And we will boost bulk-billing for all Australians, not just some.
Meanwhile in the past three years, Peter Dutton has only come up with three ideas.
One, $10 billion for taxpayer-funded long lunches.
Two, $600 billion for 7 nuclear reactors that won’t be ready until sometime in the 2040s.
And three, cutting everything else to pay for them but they'll let you know where the cuts are after the election.
The Liberals refuse to say where their axe will fall.
But we know. Australians know.
Australians know that every single time the Liberals come to Government with a plan for cuts, Medicare is the first place they look.
We know that when Peter Dutton was Tony Abbott’s Minister for Health, he said he was proud of cutting $50 billion from public hospitals.
The Liberals spent a decade in Government trying to destroy Medicare - and three years in Opposition haven’t taught them anything.
When it comes to health care the Liberal Party will never learn – and Peter Dutton will never change.
They tried to stop us from making medicines cheaper.
They called our Urgent Care Clinics ‘wasteful spending’.
Peter Dutton said boosting bulk billing for families was a ‘sugar hit’.
The Liberals will never stop trying to make Australians pay more for their health care.
The only way to stop them, the only way to protect Medicare, strengthen it and secure it for all, is to re-elect our Labor Government.
At this year’s election the decision Tasmania faces, the decision Australia faces, is so much more than a choice between two different parties or two different plans.
On every issue that matters: jobs and wages, education and skills, energy and housing, cost of living and the economy, the difference and the contrast between us and our opponents is night and day.
When the Liberals left office: inflation was rising, wages were falling and interest rates were going up.
Together, we’ve turned this around.
Under the Liberals inflation had a 6 in front of it, and was rising.
Under Labor inflation has a 2 in front of it, and is falling.
Under the Liberals wages were kept deliberately low – and real wages fell for their last 5 quarters in a row.
Under Labor, real wages have increased 5 quarters in a row.
Under Labor, employment is strong – with over 1.15 million new jobs created.
And on Tuesday, the hard work of Australians delivered the first cut in interest rates since 2020.  
Inflation down.
Wages up.
Tax cuts delivered.
Unemployment low.
Debt down.
Interest rates falling.
Building a stronger economy - and today, building stronger Medicare.
This is an $8.5 billion commitment to the fundamental promise and purpose of Medicare.
Our plan will mean more bulk billing, in every part of our country.
Because our Government wants 9 out of 10 visits to the GP to be free.
And against us stands a Liberal Leader condemned by his own record.
Peter Dutton did more damage to Medicare than any Liberal before him.
The doctors of Australia voted him the worst Health Minister in our nation’s history.
And his agenda represents the greatest threat to Medicare’s future.
Because he will have to cut Medicare, to pay for his nuclear fantasy.
Even under the Liberals’ own scenario, Tasmania won’t get anything from nuclear reactors that won’t be finished until sometime in the 2040s, but every Tasmanian will have to pay for them starting straightaway.
They won’t send you any power - but they will send you the bill.
My fellow Australians
This election is a make or break moment for Medicare.
A re-elected Labor Government will make it easier for Australians to see a doctor for free.
We will make Medicare stronger than it has ever been.
But if the Liberals get their way, they will break bulk-billing – and break the promise Medicare is built on.
Through half a century of change, through everything the world has thrown at Australia, Labor’s commitment to universal health care has never wavered.
Labor built Medicare for Australia – and it was built on the Australian values of fairness and opportunity for all.
We don’t want our health system to be more American.
We don’t need to copy the ideologies of any other nation.
We only want our health system to be more Australian.
There for more Australians to count on.
Free for more Australians to use.
Only our Labor Government believes in that.
Only our Labor Government will deliver it.
Only Labor is building stronger Medicare.
Only Labor is building Australia’s future.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of land on which we meet today and acknowledge elders past, present and emerging. Well, it's been a big week. On Tuesday, we had the first interest rate cuts since 2020. On Wednesday, we learned that real wages are increasing still, now five quarters in a row compared with the five quarters of the former government, the last five quarters where wages went backwards. On Thursday, we learned that employment was continuing to grow. We're now up to 1,152,000 jobs have been created since we were elected to government less than three years ago. On Friday, I signed an arrangement with Premier Malinauskas to save Whyalla and save the steelworks, very much a part of our Future Made in Australia agenda. And I've got to say, in walking through the fine streets of Adelaide, every person in South Australia appreciates and it stands in stark contrast with what happened under the former Government, when there was administration in 2016-17, and where there was no federal dollars, no federal involvement, South Australia was cut loose. Just like they were cut loose when the then Abbott Government and Joe Hockey told the car industry to bugger off and told those jobs and those high value manufacturing to leave. Then on Saturday, we were in Tasmania, there in Devonport, where we had two important announcements. In Devonport, of course, our support for the salmon industry. Aquaculture has a critical role to play, and we want those jobs to be maintained, and we're working with those communities, and we had a fantastic family event with Anne Urquhart, who's such a champion for North West Tasmania, as well as the West Coast. Little kids with their faces painted, we met, we were at Petuna, an example of the best of this country. There we met, it stands for Peter and Una, a couple who started this business in 1949. Peter is still involved in the business at a bit more of a distance these days, but to meet him at the establishment that was built in 1983 to process what is amazingly high quality salmon and ocean trout and other seafood products there, employing generations of people in Northern Tasmania. And then we went to a small distillery with the wonderful Rebecca White there in Killara Distillery in Richmond, a small town near Hobart. And there we made the announcement increasing the amount which is free of excise, from $350,000 to $400,000 that's about helping about 1500 small distilleries, producers of whiskey, gin, craft brewers, as well as changing the WET, the wine equalisation tax, so that that would benefit about 3000 small wineries. These are all businesses that are very much a part of their local community and are so important. And yesterday we had the big one. Yesterday we had our package to save Medicare, to make sure that the bulk billing incentive, which has been so successful for concession card holders, families with children, that we extend that across the board. A commitment that is the largest commitment to Medicare in 40 years. And on top of that, a plan to make sure we deal with the workforce, that we have 2000 extra GPs, that we provide scholarships for nurses and midwives to make a difference as well. A Labor Government will always defend healthcare. Healthcare, and my personal experience with my mum is what politicised me and why I'm here today as the Prime Minister. And we know that Medicare isn't an add on. It's not something that's a play thing. It's not something that you can make an announcement of in 30 seconds, which is what we saw from the pretence from the Opposition. The same guy who wanted to introduce the GP tax, a tax every time people visited an emergency department. Not quite sure how that would work. I know the couple of times I've been in emergency departments, I haven't worried about having my credit card with me, but he wanted that tax on pharmaceuticals and of course, ripped out $50 billion from hospitals. So as Mark said yesterday there in Launceston, this is one of the great divides in Australian politics between Labor that understands that Medicare is the heart, the beating heart of our health system and the Coalition who don't believe that things should be free, whether it's Medicare, a visit to the doctor, or whether it's Free TAFE, or whether it be our commitment to schools and to other services on the basis of need, is how we go about things. So today we've got more work to do, more policy work. We continue to govern and govern well. And I think when we get to the crunch point, the contrast is so clear. Under Labor, inflation down, wages up, interest rates falling, jobs continue to be created, 1.1 million, debt lower, taxes lower as well, a tax cut for every single taxpayer. And I note that Peter Dutton yesterday was saying we should not have an election anytime soon, it should be longer. This time last year he was saying we should have an election immediately in order to stop people getting a tax cut. These are all just thought bubbles, and you can't govern with thought bubbles. You have to govern with serious policy, and that's what we're delivering.


I thank the Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Herald Sun for bringing this forum together.
My Government is focused on building Australia’s future – and Victoria is central to this in every way.
This state represents over 20 per cent of Australia’s economy.
More than a quarter of Australia’s value-added manufacturing.
More than 700,000 small businesses.
And in so many fields, from medical research to renewable energy technology, Victoria is a global leader, not just a national one.
Victorian businesses, universities, TAFEs, research centres, cultural and sporting institutions are ambassadors for Australia.
You build and strengthen our connections to the region and the world.
Indeed, later today at Deakin University, we’re launching our Roadmap for Economic Engagement with India.
A plan to deepen and diversify our two way trade and investment with what will be the third largest economy in the world before the end of this decade.
Victoria will be front and centre in seizing these opportunities.
Of course, I recognise the state is facing challenges too.
The world has thrown a lot at Australia in recent years - and Victorians have endured more than their fair share.
Far and away the toughest economic test that all of us have faced is global inflation.
Inflation puts pressure on the cost of living and the cost of doing business.
It affects the input costs for your business, as well as the buying power of your customers.
The tail end of the Covid pandemic, combined with the international energy crisis caused by Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine led to average inflation among advanced economies reaching its highest level since the 1980s.
Australia wasn’t immune from any of these pressures.
In fact, we were more exposed than we should have been, because of years of inaction and neglect from our predecessors.
Households were already under pressure when inflation and interest rates started rising, because wages had been kept deliberately low for years.
People’s power bills were already higher than they should have been, because years of Liberal-National civil war on climate change and energy policy had put us a decade behind the world on renewables.
Australia’s place in the global supply chain was already vulnerable, because our skills and manufacturing sector had been hollowed out.
And even before the pandemic, our health system had already been pushed to breaking point by cuts to hospitals and Medicare.
From our first day in Office, we’ve been working to clear away this mess.
To rebuild the long-term drivers of growth and productivity, while tackling the immediate challenge of inflation.
At the outset, we made a deliberate choice to bring down inflation without giving up on growth, sacrificing people’s jobs or cutting their wages.
This is why Australia’s economy has continued to grow, while other nations have gone backwards.
Employment here has been strong - jobs growth in Australia has been faster than all the G7 economies.
And inflation here peaked lower and later.
When we came to Government, interest rates were going up, inflation had a 6 in front of it, and was rising.
And real wages had fallen five quarters in a row.
Now inflation has a 2 in front of it.
Annual real wages have grown, five quarters in row.
We’ve turned a $78 billion budget deficit into a $22 billion surplus – the first in nearly two decades.
We backed that up with a second surplus.
Over 1.15 million new jobs have been created, including more than 320,000 right here in Victoria.
And last Tuesday, the hard work of Australians saw the first interest rate cut since 2020.
Important relief for households – and small business.
This is the progress we’ve made together.
Inflation down.
Wages up.
Tax cuts delivered.
Unemployment low.
Debt down.
Interest rates falling.
And at the same time, we are investing in the future and building for it.
People sometimes talk about knowing the difference between what’s urgent and what’s important.
In Government, as in business, so often the urgent is important.
But you can’t allow yourself to be consumed only by the here and now.
You can’t say ‘oh we’ll get around to the future, once the present settles down’.
You can’t hold off or hang back for a moment when all is calm and quiet.
Even when you’re navigating rough seas, you’ve got to have your eyes on the horizon.
That’s why, at the same time as we are opening Medicare Urgent Care Clinics, boosting funding for public hospitals and making medicines cheaper, we are also delivering the biggest investment in Medicare and bulk-billing in Australian history.
A reform that will deliver nearly 5 million more free GP appointments for Victorians and support over 1,200 Victorian medical practices to bulk-bill every patient, every time.
At the same time as we’re working with the state government to deliver Energy Bill Relief to every Victorian household and small business, we’re building the renewable energy that will get prices down and keep them down into the future.
At the same as time as we’re boosting Rent Assistance, we’re building more homes.
At same time as we’re making child care cheaper, Free TAFE permanent and cutting student debt, we’re opening new university hubs in Broadmeadows, Epping, Melton, Swan Hill and Gippsland.
Taking the opportunity of higher education to suburbs and regional communities that have been overlooked for too long.
And, under the agreement we signed with the Victorian Government last month, every public school in the Education State will be funded to the national student resourcing standard.
David Gonski’s landmark review set that standard 14 years ago: the level of funding that every school and every student should receive to get the best possible education.
As a nation, we’ve never achieved it.
Now, under this agreement, Victorian students will get the resources they deserve and the school system will get the reform it needs.
And we are bringing this same approach to infrastructure.
Practical, immediate action.
Fast-tracking more homes in the regions and suburbs with new incentives to speed-up planning.
As well as new funding to connect the power, water and service roads that are essential for construction.
We’re supporting local councils to upgrade community facilities.
And we’re also investing in the big nation-building, state-shaping projects.
I’m a former Infrastructure Minister – and an ongoing infrastructure nerd.
I love it, because it’s real.
It’s a tangible, visible, enduring way that good government can make a positive difference to people’s lives.
Building and upgrading roads and rail, ports, airports, broadband – this creates jobs, boosts productivity and drives economic growth.
It brings new life to our cities, connects our regions and suburbs.
It makes it easier for Australian businesses and farmers to get their great products to market – here and around the world.
And it strengthens communities, it makes them better and safer places to live.
I created Infrastructure Australia 17 years ago because I wanted governments to be able to make informed choices about which projects would make the biggest difference and deliver the biggest benefit.
I also made sure Infrastructure Australia was established as an independent, expert body.
Applying commercial rigour to its assessments.
Because I understood that while infrastructure projects can show the best of government, they can also bring out the worst of politics.
Project timelines are long and election cycles are short.
That means there will always be some who stress about the costs and inconvenience while projects are under construction.
It takes true leadership and real commitment to look beyond that.
That’s what the Victorian Government has done with the West Gate Tunnel and in particular the Metro Tunnel.
My support for the Metro Tunnel goes back a long way.
When I was Infrastructure Minister, we committed $3 billion to the project.
On the original timetable, trains would be running through the Metro Tunnel already.
Some of you would have travelled on it here today.
But when Tony Abbott won the election, he cut the funding.
It is a huge credit to the Victorian Government that it held firm and took full responsibility for finishing the job through a decade when it was starved of Federal funding.
And I know that in a matter of months now, when the Metro Tunnel is open, Melburnians will absolutely love it.
It will change the way public transport works for the better – overnight.
And it will shape the city for generations to come.
It will drive productivity and deliver better and faster services to the CBD and the suburbs.
The 84 level crossings that have been removed in the last 10 years have saved Victorian drivers tens of thousands of hours they would have spent waiting at the boom gates.
They’ve given communities new public space to use and enjoy.
Metro Tunnel will unlock the next level of benefit for rail users, clearing the bottleneck at the city loop and enabling more trains to run more often.
Suburban Rail Loop East will bring benefits on this same scale.
It will connect new housing and growing business precincts like Box Hill and Clayton, with great public transport.
And it will finally deliver a station for Monash University.
Our Government has contributed $2.2 billion to the early works, which are now underway.
Suburban Rail Loop East is a missing link in Melbourne’s transport network.
North-East link is another - connecting the M80 ring road with the Eastern Freeway.
In last year’s Budget, we put in a further $3.25 billion for this project, taking our total investment to $5 billion.
I’ve been on the site at Watsonia and seen the extraordinary scale of the work.
The benefits will be even bigger.
This project will cut up to 35 minutes off the journey from Melbourne’s north to the south east and vice versa.
And, like all good projects, it will benefit the communities surrounding it as well.
The North East Link will mean 15,000 trucks off local roads every day.
Safer, less congested suburban streets – and less wear and tear on local roads.
Of course whenever we talk about missing links in Melbourne infrastructure, the conversation goes to airport rail.
This vital project – in all its various incarnations – has been delayed for far too long.
I am sure there are editions of the Herald Sun dating back 20 and 30 years talking about the urgent need for a train to Tullamarine.
It’s easy to point to the expense or the difficulty.
But I’ll give you the big tip – putting it off hasn’t made it any cheaper or easier.
And I think everyone here would agree that airport rail is essential for a great global city like Melbourne.
This time last year Melbourne hosted the 50 year anniversary of Australia’s partnership with ASEAN.
A gathering of 11 national leaders from the fastest growing region of the world in human history and all their delegations, together with business leaders and civil society.
This city was a magnificent venue, because it showcases so much that is great about Australia.
People come from all over the world to experience Victorian food, fashion, culture, innovation and – of course - sport.
And the first impression that visitors and tourists have on arrival, their trip into the city, should match the great experience they will have for the rest of their time in this great state.
All of that goes double for Victorians.
Whether you’re going on holiday, or travelling for work, getting to and from the airport shouldn’t be the most complicated part of your trip.
It should be affordable, convenient – and the travel time should be predictable.
Melbourne Airport needs a rail link. Melbourne needs one. And Victorians deserve one.
Today, as Prime Minister, I give this straightforward, concrete commitment to all Victorians.
Our Government will partner with the Victorian Government to fund and build a rail link to Melbourne Airport.
And we will do it in a way that delivers maximum benefit for people in Melbourne’s west and north.
To make this happen, our Labor Government is committing $7 billion to build Melbourne Airport Rail - the next important step in Suburban Rail Loop.
This includes our existing $5 billion to build the rail line to Tullamarine.
Funding that will build the track, as well as the bridge and signalling improvements to deliver future upgrades to service Melbourne’s north and west.
On top of this, we will invest a further $2 billion to help transform Sunshine station.
And the Victorian Government will bring forward their funding to kick start work.
Building the extra platforms and a dedicated spur line that will make Sunshine Station the hub for regional rail services connecting to the airport.
So if you’re from Ballarat, like our Minister for Infrastructure, Catherine King.
Or Bendigo, like the Premier.
Or Geelong, or Waurn Ponds.
If you are travelling from regional Victoria, you don’t have to catch a train all the way into Southern Cross and then back out to Tullamarine.
Instead, your V-line service will be able take you to Sunshine, then express to the terminal.
And in addition to the $7 billion we are committing to this project, we will also begin work to enable the electrification of the Melton Line.
This is a vital part of delivering better rail services for people in the west going to work, not just the airport.
And let me be clear: we are locking in this investment now, because we want to lock in a start date.
We are proud to be partnering with the Victorian Government to deliver these missing links for Melbourne infrastructure.
These will be transformative projects for the south east, the north and the west.
At the same time, I know there are parts of Melbourne that need urgent work, here and now.
I want to make it clear – even as we build these missing links around the city, local suburbs won’t miss out.
Today I announce we are launching a $1.2 billion Suburban Road Blitz, in partnership with the Victorian Government.
This money is ready, right now, to fix roads in need of repair.
To seal and upgrade roads that are slowing communities down – and to tackle dangerous intersections.
Because smaller projects can deliver big productivity gains and make a big difference to communities.
The first three projects in this blitz will be:
Sealing and upgrading Old Sydney Road where it connects with Cameron’s Lane, supporting the growth and new jobs being created by work on the Beveridge Intermodal Terminal.
We will also partner with the Victorian Government to upgrade the intersection of McLeod Road and Station Street in Carrum.
And Evans Road between Duff Street and Central Parkway in Cranbourne West.
These are three important projects – but they are only the first three.
There will be more to come, in suburbs and regions that need this investment the most.
Building Victoria’s future, building Australia’s future is about building this vital infrastructure, up and down the scale and across our suburbs and regions.
It’s about building more new homes and more renewable energy.
It’s about finishing the NBN with fibre, not copper – and keeping it in public hands.
And building Australia’s future is always about more than bricks and mortar.
It’s about the foundation of a strong economy – where wages and productivity and living standards grow together.
It’s about delivering on the purpose and promise of Medicare, so people can find a bulk-billing doctor and see a GP for free.
Wherever they live.
Investing in every stage of education – Cheaper Child Care, better schools, Free TAFE and greater access to university.
Backing small business and local manufacturing, investing in the skills, energy and incentives that will ensure Victoria can continue to compete and succeed in the world.
Global uncertainty has presented our nation with significant challenges over the past few years.
Australians – and Victorians – have shown extraordinary resilience and great determination.
The reward for all this hard work is now in reach.
Because when you look at the world today, when you think about what will define and shape the economy in the decades ahead.
There is nowhere else you’d rather be than Australia.
There is no other nation that can match our combination of strengths: our natural resources, our space, our universities and TAFEs, our superannuation system and its investment power, our stable democracy, our diaspora communities that give us a family connection with every nation on earth.
And our greatest strength is – and always will – be our people.
The courage, kindness, aspiration and determination of the Australian people is the great story of our history.
It is the continuing inspiration of our present.
And it is the very best reason for all of us to be optimistic about the future of Victoria and Australia.


Thank you, Tim, for that warm introduction – and for all you do as CEO of the Centre for Australia-India Relations.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land we're meeting on and pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
I’d like to acknowledge;
His Excellency Gopal Baglay, High Commissioner of India;
Deakin University’s Deputy Vice-Chancellor of Research and Innovation, Professor Matthew Clarke;
Members of the Australia-India CEO Forum;
And all my colleagues from across the Parliament.
It is such a great pleasure to be here with you to launch the new Roadmap for Australia’s Economic Engagement with India. 
There is no greater time to engage economically with India than now.
It’s the most populous country in the world.
It’s on track to be the third largest economy by the end of this decade.
And it is growing in ways that are complementary to our own economy.
What we are able to build on is the strong relationship our two nations already enjoy – economically, culturally, and through the ties of education and sport.
Crucially, what has grown out of this relationship is a powerful friendship, one that is based in no small part on the growing Australian-Indian community.
And what an extraordinary and dynamic community it is.
For generations, you have added so much to what Australia has become that you are an integral part of our shared ability to imagine a bigger future. 
Just as you are an important part of who we are as a nation, and what we can yet become, you are a powerful strand in the bond between the land that is your home, and the land of your heritage.
The significance of India cannot be overstated.
Through its long history of achievement, the richness and breadth of its people, and the staggering vastness of its potential, India is a giant on the world stage.
A giant that continues to grow in stature.
I have had the profound honour of visiting India twice so far as Prime Minister, visits elevated by the hospitality of Prime Minister Modi, and the warmth of the Indian people.
And I have had the privilege of hosting Prime Minister Modi here.
My personal relationship with India began in 1991, when I spent over a month backpacking around the country.
I say if you want to understand India, catch a train – or a video bus!
As I have returned to India over the years I have seen firsthand its economic development.
There was no metro to Swaminarayan Akshardham in New Delhi back in 1991.
Both our nations have the chance to brighten each other’s future.
It is a future that calls on us to keep nurturing and improving the bond between our nations in the present, never pausing to rest on our laurels.
India is already Australia’s fifth largest two-way trading partner and fourth largest export market for goods and services.
It is a trading relationship enhanced by the Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement, which has already saved Australians $300 million on goods imported from India.
Since the ECTA entered into force, almost 200 Australian products have been exported to India for the first time, or reintroduced after a long absence.
Agricultural exports have grown substantially, increasing by 146 per cent since we came to government.
And there has been similar growth in iron and steel exports since we came to government, which increased by 189 per cent between 2022 and 2024.
What the Roadmap does is give us detailed directions to the greater realisation of the potential of the Australia-India relationship.
Successfully tapping that potential will be good for Australian business and Australian consumers.
It will help secure our supply chains in an uncertain world.
And it will create jobs and growth.
The Roadmap is a guide to seizing the enormous trade and investment opportunities of India’s economic rise, one that is shaped and informed the knowledge and experience gathered from 400 consultations in every state and territory, as well as in India.  
And it identifies four key sectors of significant potential: clean energy, education and skills, agribusiness and tourism.
Through the Roadmap, we are delivering for Australians – by finding paths towards the better future we know is possible and crucially, by funding them.
We begin implementing the Roadmap today by launching a new Australia-India Trade and Investment Accelerator Fund, to create an even better enabling environment for Australian firms – small, medium and large – to seize new commercial opportunities.
And we are expanding our flagship Maitri Grants program, which is committed to enhancing our people-to-people, business-to-business and cultural links.
Australia’s relationship with India is stronger, deeper and more consequential than it has ever been – but there is much more to come.
What is truly exciting is the sheer scale of the opportunities in the near future if we get things right in the present.
The fact that this is good for Australia - but also is good for India - is recognised.
It calls on us to focus and accelerate our efforts, and to draw on our country’s strengths.
We are building a better future for Australia, a future in which India can – and will – play a significant role.
With this Roadmap, the way ahead looks a lot clearer.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Welcome everyone. Another busy day today, as we've said, in the work that you have before us, and the work of government continues each and every day, and I want to thank everyone for the efforts that everyone is making. In the last couple of weeks, we've had big announcements on Medicare, three big ones.
Firstly, the more than half a billion dollars to assist women's reproductive health, and on Saturday – March 1 – came in the first new listings of contraceptive pills in some 30 years, making an enormous difference as well. For some of these, they were recommended by doctors to women as being appropriate for their healthcare, and that's why these changes are so important, as well as acknowledging the importance of issues such as menopause and dealing with that as a health issue going forward.
Secondly, of course, we had the big announcement of Medicare bulk billing, the tripling of the bulk billing incentive for all 27 million Australians on top of the 11 million Australians who received the tripling of the bulk billing incentive. Now we know that that resulted in 90 per cent of those people being bulk billed, and that that was important going forward. So, on top of that, the additional training for doctors and nurses.
And then yesterday, we had the announcement of 50 additional Medicare Urgent Care Clinics. Now, what that means in practice is that four out of every five Australians will be able to drive 20 minutes or less to get to a Medicare Urgent Care Clinic. Already, one million Australians have received this support, and we had the rather astonishing decision by the Coalition that they're going to get out the colour coded spreadsheet and they're going to support just four of the 50 that we announced. Now we didn't of course, do that in a partisan way. We think that every Australian deserves access to the best healthcare, not based upon the margin of the electorate that they live in, but based upon the Australian ethos. We don't need an Americanisation of our health system. We should be proud that Australia has created Medicare, and as much as Peter Dutton tried his best to undermine it, of course, wanted to abolish bulk billing when he was Health Minister by bringing in a GP tax. We resisted that. We resisted the tax on every time people visited an emergency department, and the increased tax on pharmaceuticals that he wanted as well. Medicare is a part of who we are. Labor created Medicare, and we will always strengthen it and look to ensure that it doesn't just continue, but indeed is made stronger during our next term of government.
I spoke with Premier Crisafulli yesterday, and Minister McAllister has also been engaged with the Premier. I spoke to him yesterday as well. The Cyclone Alfred off the coast is a very real threat in South East Queensland. We hope, of course, for the best outcome possible, but we will stand with Queenslanders at this difficult time, and we'll continue to provide support, just as we have for the impact of the floods that have had a devastating impact in North Queensland as well. There, we have signed off on building back better as well, not just rebuilding what was there on the Bruce Highway, making sure that we build back better. That we fix the Kennedy Highway as well, complete the full asphalting. There's 10 kilometres of that road that was so important to get services and goods into Cairns and to North Queensland. We'll make sure that that job, which we started in government a long time ago, gets completed after the neglect that we inherited.
People would also be aware of the Government's strong statements that we have made in support of Ukraine. We regard this as an issue of doing what's right, but also what is in Australia's national interest. The brave people of Ukraine, led so extraordinarily by President Zelenskyy, are fighting not just for their national sovereignty and for their democracy. They are fighting for the international rule of law. And it is an easy choice that Australia has made. It's a bipartisan position that Australia has had. We've contributed one and a half billion dollars of support, $1.3 billion of which is military support. We continue, as well, to monitor the Chinese ships that are in international waters around Australia. HMAS Stuart and HMAS Warramunga, as well as P-8s will continue to monitor what is going on there. It stands in stark contrast with what happened prior to 2022 where there were ships – or there was a ship, a surveillance ship – off the Western Australian coast that had no monitoring. And of course, I commented yesterday that Scott Morrison was out there making comments about this. Well, there were ships that were noticed and monitored because they were in Sydney Harbour, docked at Garden Island when he was the Prime Minister. We’ll continue to respond in an appropriate way, and we’ll continue to monitor there. I have every faith in our Australian Defence Force to make sure they get that done. So I look forward to dealing with our big agenda here this morning. Thank you.


It is such a pleasure to be here with you to talk about this new chapter in the story of Western Sydney – all of it driven by the airport that bears the name of a great Australian.
Nancy-Bird Walton was a woman of curiosity and extraordinary courage. What she saw in flight was the power to connect people and communities across this vast continent.
She looked to a bigger, bolder future – and she blazed her own trail right into it.
This is such a fitting way to honour her.
As the beating heart of an entire economic ecosystem in the fastest growing part of New South Wales, Western Sydney International (Nancy-Bird Walton) Airport represents so much of what A Future Made in Australia is about.
It is about ambition for our nation, and optimism for all that we can achieve when we work together.
It is about the confidence to take that vision of the future and build it into reality.
It is about creating jobs and creating opportunities, building the skills that let us stand more firmly on our own feet as a nation in an uncertain world and strengthening and connecting the communities that are the backbone of our country.
Thanks to our nation’s long record of achievement – the result of generations of Australians working together – we can look ahead to the better future within our reach, confident we have what it takes to grasp it.
For the community here, and communities right across Australia, it is a future in which a forward-thinking and ambitious government has an important role.
Which is why we have so proudly played our part here.
We are a Government with a vision for the future – and a plan for how to build it.
I stand before you proudly as a long-term advocate for Western Sydney Airport. In my very first speech to Parliament in 1996, I described the prevarication over building this airport as "a sad example of decision making on a short-term accounting basis without due regard for the long-term economic and social impact on people."
As I have learned, patience is every bit as important as passion – but that doesn’t mean waiting forever.
That is why the Australian Government has committed $5.3 billion to fully fund the development of Western Sydney International.
WSI is a transformational infrastructure project that will drive economic activity for decades to come.
It has injected over $500 million into the region through contracts awarded to Western Sydney businesses.
It is supporting domestic manufacturers. The terminal roof alone – completed last year – is bolstered by more than 40 kilometres of Australian-made steel purlins and more than 3500 tonnes of steelwork.
It will provide long-term employment opportunities closer to home for people in the Western Sydney region.
The construction of the airport has so far supported more than 11,000 direct jobs, unlocking opportunities for locals including apprentices and trainees.
Within five years of the airport opening next year, the airport will support almost 28,000 jobs.
Take a moment to consider that number.
Every one of those jobs will make a difference to an individual, to a family, to a community and the businesses within it.
And by creating job opportunities closer to home, it will spare many Western Sydneysiders long daily commutes, giving them back all those hours that can be so much better spent with their families.
Western Sydney International doesn’t just befit Sydney’s status as a global city, it enhances it.
It will meet Sydney's growing aviation needs with an initial capacity for up to 10 million annual passengers and a boost to cargo.
And it is a catalyst for the further urbanisation of Western Sydney, fulfilling the vision of Greater Sydney as a metropolis of three connected cities.
As part of this catalyst, the Western Sydney Aerotropolis will drive innovation and jobs growth in Western Sydney.
At the heart of it, Bradfield City Centre will house an Advanced Manufacturing Readiness Facility that will support manufacturing businesses in the region to thrive.
Manufacturing is central to my Governments agenda because it isn’t just about making things – it’s about making our economy more resilient and making our nation more self-reliant.
However, I see more. A region growing as fast as this demands nothing less than an ambition to match.
And in southwest Sydney – in suburbs like Bringelly, Oran Park, Leppington, Narellan and Macarthur where the population is growing rapidly – that ambition has to include ensuring people can access the new employment opportunities.
Just as I have long been an advocate for a major airport in Western Sydney, I am also a long-term supporter of extending the South West Rail Line past Bradfield.
That’s why my Government put additional funding into the South West Sydney Rail Planning Business Case to include extending the line to the Macarthur region.
I am pleased to announce that a re-elected Albanese Government will build on this work, investing $1 billion to preserve land corridors to facilitate the building of future rail extensions from Bradfield to Leppington and Macarthur.
This is the next practical step in safeguarding the future and ensuring we are well-positioned to deliver the infrastructure communities across southwest Sydney need.
To connect people with the jobs of the future, and with each other.
And connectivity is at the centre of it all.
The other missing piece of the network is connecting St Marys and Tallawong, via Schofields and Marsden Park in the north.
This is the bridge between the northwest and the southwest – two of the largest, growing and unconnected parts of the city.
Completing the project would allow connections with local job opportunities in the Blacktown area and further afield to Norwest and Macquarie Park.
These connections are critical to Western Sydney's economic and employment growth, and work is now underway on a business case for the Tallawong to St Mary's link, which the New South Wales Government is funding.
This comes in addition to our joint commitment with the New South Wales Government to deliver $1 billion for Fifteenth Avenue to create a critical transit corridor from Liverpool to the new Western Sydney International Airport.
My Government is also investing in the new Sydney Metro that will connect to Western Sydney Airport, and in the new M12 Motorway to connect the airport to the motorway network.
Since the 2022 election, my Government has also invested in other transport infrastructure projects across Western Sydney including:

The Mamre Road Stage 2 upgrade;
The Elizabeth Drive upgrade; and
The Townson Road and Burdekin Road upgrade.

We also have our ongoing investment in the Moorebank Intermodal Interstate Rail Terminal, which is saving 3000 truck journeys a day, especially on the M5.
And as we keep working to keep people moving, we are also making the investments to make it easier for them to put down roots.
Across Western Sydney, that includes carefully targeted support for projects including affordable housing.
Put it all together and what it represents is a reimagining of Sydney – a great city with its gaze no longer fixed on its harbour and Sydney CBD, but turning west to where the opportunities are there to be seized.
As much as we’ve achieved as a country, this is not the time to down tools and look back with admiration.
This is a crucial time to keep working, to keep looking ahead and building a future worthy of Australia.
We are working to deliver nationally significant infrastructure projects that increase productivity and resilience, improve liveability and enhance sustainability.
My Government is doing the serious work of shaping the future rather than let it shape us. Working with care, clarity and deliberation. Listening to experts.
And always ready to work productively in partnership with local councils, state governments, and with the private sector.
That is an instinct that has done so much to define our approach to government.
You can see it across Australia in so many ways.
Last month in Melbourne, I committed the Government to partner with Victoria to fund and build the much-needed rail link to Melbourne Airport.
We’re keeping Rex airborne and keeping regional Australia connected with a loan to keep Rex’s vital regional routes operating until the end of June.
We are working with the administrators and shortlisted bidders on what support the Government can give to maximise the prospect of a second sale.
And if that sale doesn’t eventuate, we will – in consultation with relevant state governments – work on contingency options, which includes the possibility of Commonwealth acquisition.
We do all this because my Government believes regional and remote communities deserve reliable, affordable and accessible air travel.
That is why we have made historic investments in regional airports.
This is on top of investments in airports around the country through the Growing Regions and the Priority Community Infrastructure Program.
In December 2024, we announced that we are putting money towards upgrading Whyalla Airport to ensure the community remains connected.
We’re also investing in the upgrade of the runway at Hobart Airport, and the international terminal facilities at Newcastle Airport.
Just as we’re keeping things going in the air, we’re keeping them going on the ground – and, indeed, under the ground.
We’re finishing the NBN with fibre, not copper, delivering high speed access and keeping it in public hands.
We’re Rewiring the Nation with the investments needed to upgrade and extend our transmission capacity and give Australia a grid fit for the 21st Century and our future as a renewable energy superpower.
We’re boosting the ability of households to take control of their own energy with rooftop solar and household batteries.
We’re investing in batteries, wind, and solar generation at grid scale – and we’re doing it now and with co-investment from the private sector.
And with steel central to our self-reliance as a nation, we’re supporting Australian steelmakers – not least in Whyalla where we’re working in partnership with the South Australian Government.
At this stage, the US Government has not granted Australia – or any other nation – an exemption from their global tariffs on steel and aluminium.
As I said yesterday, we consider that decision entirely unjustified. We will keep working hard for a better outcome.
But our Government is prepared. We've been engaging directly with the Australian steel and aluminium industry, and we will continue to work through this with them.
We have great confidence in the quality of what Australia produces and we will continue to diversify markets for our products which are in demand across the globe.
Our Government will always stand up for Australian jobs and Australian industries. All Australians can join this effort and support our industries by taking the opportunity to buy Australian.
The world has thrown a lot of challenges at Australia over the past three years.
Because of the hard work Australians have done together, our economy is turning the corner.
Inflation is down.
Wages are up.
Interest rates are coming down.
And 1.1 million new jobs have been created.
Under our Government, Australia has maintained a faster rate of employment growth than any G7 nation.
And unlike other advanced economies, we've avoided any negative quarters of growth.
None of this is the happy accident of good luck.
It is powered by the choice we made to invest in Australia.
Responsible economic management is about looking after people while managing the books.
It’s about boosting wages and job security and funding the services families count on.
And just as much as economic management is about taking care of the present, it is about meeting your responsibility to the future.
This is the instinct that guides us every day – and it’s why we can now look to the future with growing optimism.
Australians have been through testing times – but we’re beginning to see the rewards, and we are growing ever more confident about dealing with the challenges that remain.
This is not a time to cut or wreck or aim low.
It is a time to keep building.
Because building Australia’s future is about all of us.
We must seize the opportunities that this decade holds.
We must actively plan for the future, anticipating it, shaping it piece by piece.
This is the momentum we have.
This the momentum we cannot risk.
It’s a momentum that is so powerfully embodied by Western Sydney.
What we see in Western Sydney International – and all that it is already driving – is the very power of aspiration that drives Australia.
It is the ambition we must all have for Australia.
There is a better future that we are building together right now – and Western Sydney is showing the way.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of land on which we're meeting, and pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
And I thank Trent for the introduction and for the invite to be with you here today with my Minister, Mark Butler, the magnificent Minister for Health, who is doing so much, not just in pharmacy, but about strengthening Medicare, strengthening our hospital system, and putting health at the centre of our agenda, not just for this term, but for future terms in government as well.
It is healthcare that brought me in the politics, why I'm here today.
My mum was an invalid pensioner and that experience in life is what educated me about the importance of healthcare, including the relationship that she had with her pharmacist in Ross Street, Glebe, who as a young boy, certainly, I remember when Mum was unable to get out of the house, we would have deliveries from the chemist.
Not just in terms of pharmaceuticals, but other things that were needed as well.
It's a part of the relationship that I know that you have with the people who you serve.
And I use that term deliberately.
Because, from my experience, your local GP, your local pharmacist, are the two areas that really impact your quality of life and your interaction with your local community.
Which is why I have respect for all of you here today, and why I have brought that personal experience, myself, into the policy deliberations that we've had and the engagement that I've had with the Pharmacy Guild and with individuals as well.
So, it is indeed my great pleasure to be with you here today, and as we reach for the better future that I want for Australia, nothing is more important than strengthening our health system.
There's always room for improvement, and of course, there are challenges to overcome, but our health system is the envy of the world, and we need to defend it and protect it.
It is a system in which you play an absolutely vital and central role.
Medicare is the strong foundation on which our health system is so proudly built.
Since it was launched by the Hawke Government back in 1984, that patriotic piece of green and gold plastic, or these days on your phone, is something that is a proud part of our Australian identity.
Medicare is one of the most meaningful expressions of that most Australian of sayings – the fair go – that we have, and that is why my Government will always work to protect it and enhance it.
It is why our Government has made the biggest investment in Medicare since its creation, expanding bulk billing incentives to all Australians to help more Australians see a GP for free.
In the last Budget, of course, we tripled the bulk billing incentive, and that resulted in 90 per cent of concession card holders being able to see their local GDP for free, being bulk billed.
Now, we know because that worked, that the extension that we’ve put in place and the announcement I made in Launceston just a few weeks ago, an $8.5 billion dollar commitment to triple the bulk billing incentive, not just for the 11 million concession card holders, but all 27 million Australians, will be effective.
Will make a difference.
And that is why Medicare, a great Australian achievement, is something that we will continue to take pride in as Australians.
We can also take great pride in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
Like Medicare, it has become part of the Australian story.
And like Medicare, the arrival was met with fair bit of resistance.
In the 1940s the Curtin and Chifley Labor Governments faced two High Court challenges, two referendums – bit of a flavour of the month at the moment – and significant opportunism and political opposition from the then Opposition.
Universal and affordable access to medicines through the PBS was an idea that survived all of that opposition to become one of Australia's truest pillars of strength.
It doesn't mean that it hasn't been under attack, and the last time Labor lost government, of course, the incoming Government tried to introduce an increase in the PBS, and indeed introduce legislation and increase the costs at the same time as they were trying to introduce the GP tax and a tax on visiting an emergency department.
But they were, of course, defeated.
What that says is that despite its success, we should not take the PBS for granted, and we are always awake to the threats to the PBS that are here, both domestically, but also from overseas.
I said this morning in a couple of those interviews, sitting on the M1, that I want to represent the people who are your customers – Australians.
Not represent big pharma.
It's not surprising that there is a push and some opposition to the PBS, but let me be very clear and explicit, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is not for sale.
Under Labor, under my leadership, it is not and will never be the subject of negotiation.
It is a core part of who we are as Australians, and we will proudly defend it.
And like Medicare, it is a monument to the fairness at the heart of Australian life.
And we don't negotiate our values.
Simple as that.
We do these things because they improve the lives of Australians.
We do it because they're essential ingredients in the better future we're building for Australia, and we're building it together with you, the pharmacists of Australia who are at the heart of the communities that you serve.
Because you're on the front line of healthcare in this country,
It is you that Australians see when they pick up the cheaper medicines that have become available under this Government.
And of course, at the last election, I went to that election promising as Prime Minister to reduce the cost of medicines, from $42.50 down to $30.
These cheaper medicines have reduced cost of living pressures for so many people.
These cheaper medicines have made it easier for Australians to look after their health.
This has been a priority of the Government that I've been privileged to lead.
Again and again, we've made medicines cheaper and delivered important cost of living relief that puts down pressure on inflation, and that's included the additional listings that have been there on the PBS.
And in some cases, I must say, when the Health Minister said to me that the listing of some contraceptives was the first new listing in 30 years, I said “that can't possibly be right, are we sure?”
But you bet it was.
But making a difference to medicines that make a difference to people's lives has been important.
That's also, the introduction last year, of 60 day prescriptions, an important and growing part of my Government's cheaper medicine reforms.
As each phase of medicines become eligible, millions of Australians with an ongoing health condition are getting a bit more help with their cost of living.
In January this year, for the first time in over 25 years, the price of medicines didn't rise with inflation for all Australians because of the changes that we put in place as part of the pharmacy agreement.
Pensioners and concession car holders will continue to benefit from the freeze – just $7.70 –to the cost of their PBS medicines until 2030.
And of course, all of this has been delivered through the stability and strength of the pharmacy sector.
Stability and strength secured by the eighth Community Pharmacy Agreement, an agreement that we managed to reach before time.
We didn't wait for the last minute.
We negotiated in good faith an agreement that delivered a $3 billion funding boost and a total of more than $26 billion in funding over the life of the eighth Community Pharmacy Agreement.
We're investing in a stronger pharmacy sector, and we're investing in cheaper medicines.
And I want to pay tribute to the Guild on this factor as well.
I see – lots of people make representations to me as Prime Minister, it’s part of the job.
And of course, you always back self-interest, as Paul Keating once said.
One of the things about the pharmacy sector, about your sector, is that the representations you've made are about your sector and your success as businesses.
But importantly, as well, it's about others.
It's about others.
So, the campaigns and the support that you have run in support of cheaper medicines is actually not really about you.
It's about the people you serve, the people you care about.
So, I'm very pleased – this is an appropriate forum to announce – that from the 1 January 2026 the costs of medicines will be cut yet again.
For every single Australian with a Medicare card who isn't on a concession card, the maximum amount they'll pay for a PBS prescription is just $25.
So in a period of just three years, from 2023 to 2026, instead of it being $42.50 and being indexed over and over and over again, that cost will have gone from $42.50 or more because there would have been indexation, down to just $25.
The same price that it was in 2004, more than 20 years ago.
This measure will save Australians over $200 million a year.
The reform will make PBS scripts cheaper than any time in the last two decades, and today's announcement will add to the more than $1.3 billion that Australians have already saved from cheaper medicines since we came to government.
Cheaper medicines policies working together to provide cost of living relief and they will be included in next week's Budget.
It adds to the list of cost of living relief measures that are carefully designed to assist people, but importantly as well, they'll put down the pressure on inflation.
So they’ll help our economy as well.
The cost of living measures will make a difference.
We have inherited a system where medicines were $42.50 and to be indexed into the future.
We've turned that into $25.
But we've designed cost of living relief under these difficult global inflation times – to every single one of the measures – whether it be Cheaper Medicines, Cheaper Child Care, Energy Bill Relief, tax cuts for all Australians, not just some. Free TAFE.
They've all been designed to put that downward pressure on inflation.
So the inflation, which had a six in front when we came to office, is now in the lower half of the band that the RBA aims for at 2.4 per cent, and is falling.
Making a difference to the economy, making a difference to families, making a difference to pharmacists, as well.
And I want to make this point, because I know firsthand from speaking to you the job of pharmacists will be made that little bit easier by this change.
We know from experience that too many people will make a decision to go without medicine because they can't afford it.
So, they’ll come into one of your pharmacies and say, “I've got these couple of scripts – which is more important, which is more important? Which can't I go without?”
Now, that's not great.
In Australia, we can do better than that.
And reducing the cost of medicines will assist those customers of yours, but will also assist you, because you shouldn't be in that situation of having to give that advice or have those difficult conversations which people are in.
We want people who need medicines to get them.
We want them to stay healthy, and you have an important role to play in that, and today's announcement will assist that to occur.
You are very much sources of wisdom, knowledge, advice and guidance in what is one of the most profoundly personal aspects of any human being's life – their health.
I know the community pharmacy across the road from my Electorate Office has –  in a very multicultural area – it has a Vietnamese speaker, a Chinese speaker, a Greek speaker, an Arabic speaker, and for them, it's a connection.
It is constantly crowded in at that – it’s Blooms, give them a shout out – Blooms Pharmacy in Marrickville Road.Whether that, or a wonderful Adele that at Roselle, who sees people from, particularly from the Housing Department community there.
I know the important role that you play.
You do so much to help make our vision of a better health system for Australians a daily reality, and that's why it's vital that we work together.
And as Trent said, time to time there'll be negotiations and argy bargy – that's fine.
We want strong advocates, but we've been managed to get outcomes that are rather extraordinary in just this term.
As long as we are working towards the same thing, we're a bit like two different fuels that get pumped into the engine of the rocket.
A bit of volatility.
But when we get the mix right, we have lift off.
And today we have lift off.
Our destination – and I know yours as well – is doing what's right for Australians, having their back.
And together, we're working in the knowledge that when we lift the health of Australians, we linked our entire nation.
That's why we've supported your efforts to deliver more primary health services.
Last year, the Commonwealth started fairly funding pharmacists to give flu shots and shingles vaccines and every other vaccine on our national immunisation program to Australians free of charge.
Last year was also when we signed a new five-year agreement together, that agreement that made such a difference, but also increasing the number of free medicine Webster packs pharmacies can deliver by 50 per cent.
All of this is making a positive difference.
So, I thank you.
I want to also conclude by congratulating every winner here today, not the least the Guild Pharmacy of the Year.
I also want to congratulate every nominee, because every nomination is a high accolade in itself.
It's also a message to you that says, ‘keep going, you're clearly doing something right.’
But finally, I want to thank all of you for what you do each and every day to help your fellow Australians.
If we get things right this decade, we can set up Australia for the many decades ahead.
But this is crunch time in so many areas of local politics as well as the Australia that I want to see.
An Australia that is stronger economically, but also fairer.
Because it will be – a fairer economy is a stronger economy as well.
But also one in which we continue to not just be proud of the health system that we've delivered, but work to strengthen it into the future.
I look forward to working with you hand in hand in the years ahead to make sure that we deliver on our joint commitment to do just that.
Thanks very much.


My fellow Australians.
Serving as your Prime Minister is the greatest honour of my life.
And it is with a deep sense of humility, and a profound sense of responsibility that the first thing I do tonight is say thank you to the people of Australia, for the chance to continue to serve the best nation on earth.
I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay respects to elders past, present and emerging today and everyday.
Today, the Australian people have voted for Australian values.
For fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
For the strength to show courage in adversity and kindness to those in need.
And Australians have voted for a future that holds true to these values.
A future built on everything that brings us together as Australians and everything that sets our nation apart from the world.
In this time of global uncertainty, Australians have chosen optimism and determination.
Australians have chosen to face global challenges, the Australian way – looking after each other, while building for the future.
And to serve these values, meet these challenges, seize these opportunities and build that better and stronger future, Australians have chosen a majority Labor Government.
A majority Labor Government promised and delivered.
A short time ago, I spoke with Peter Dutton who has of course conceded defeat.  
I thanked him – what we do in Australia is we treat people with respect. I thanked Peter for his generous words, at the end of what has been a hard-fought campaign.
And I want to take this opportunity to wish Peter and Kirrilly and their family all the very best for their future.
Now at election time, parties and candidates ask people to make a choice.
And, inevitably, the campaign and the coverage is about our differences and our disagreements.
That is the nature of our democracy and it is role of the media who serve it.
But now that the Australian people have made their clear choice, let us all reflect on what we have in common.
Because no matter who you voted for, no matter where you live, no matter how you worship, or who you love. 
Whether you belong to a culture that has known and cared for this continent for 65,000 years or you have chosen our nation as your home and enriched our society with your contribution. We are all Australians.
So let all of us work together to build our national unity on the enduring foundations of fairness, equality and respect for one another.  
My fellow Australians, I know the world has thrown a lot at our country over the past three years.
I know so many of you have worked hard, in the face of significant challenges.
And I know there is still much more to do, to help people under pressure.
That is why it means so much that in these uncertain times, the people of Australia have placed their trust in Labor once again. Including so many Australians who have voted Labor for the first time.
I make this solemn pledge. We will not forget that. We will never take it for granted.
Repaying your trust will drive our government, each and every day of the next three years.
The positive program we took to this election, was shaped by the Australian people’s priorities.
And our government will dedicate the next three years to making a positive difference to your lives and to your future.
Bringing the rewards for your hard work within reach.
Investing in our youngest Australians, looking after older Australians.
And building an economy and a society that is every bit as strong and fair, as resilient and generous, as Australians are themselves.
From tomorrow – tomorrow, back at work, maybe not everyone here and that’s probably for the best – we take up this task with new hope, new confidence and new determination.
Because together, we are turning the corner and together we will make our way forward with no-one held back and no-one left behind.
Friends, I was raised to be an optimist.
My mum had a hard life, and we struggled financially.  
But she taught me to always be positive and see the best in people.
When it comes to Australia’s future, all of us have so much reason to be optimistic.
Because when we look at everything going on around the world today, when we consider the changes that will shape the future of the global economy,
when we think about our people and their smarts and skills, truly, there is nowhere else you’d rather be, than right here in Australia.
This is a time of profound opportunity for our nation.
We have everything we need to seize this moment and make it our own.
And we must do it together, all of us.  
Because for Australia to realise our full potential, for our nation to be its very best, every Australian must have the opportunity to be their best.
To serve our Australian values – we must value every Australian and Labor will govern for every Australian.
Every Australian who wants a fair go at work, fair wages for their work and the right to disconnect when they are done with work.
Every Australian who deserves the security of a roof over their head, or who dreams of owning their own home.
Every woman who wants her contribution to our economy and society to be valued equally.
Every parent who wants their child to get the best start in life, with cheaper child care and with fair funding for every student in every school.
Everyone who counts on the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We will be a Government for every Australian who wants to train or re-train for new skills and a good job at public TAFE.
Every Australian who works hard for the life-changing opportunity of higher education and wants 20 per cent cut from their student debt.
Every Australian who knows that climate change is a challenge we must act together to meet, for the future of our environment and knows the fact that renewable energy is an opportunity we must work together to seize for the future of our economy.
We will be a government that supports reconciliation with First Nations people, because we will be a stronger nation when we close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And, friends, we will be a government that relies and helps every Australian who relies on Medicare.
Because this card is not Labor red, or Liberal blue, it is green and gold.
It is a declaration of our national values, in our national colours.
Medicare belongs to all Australians and together, we will make it stronger for all Australians.
Friends, I stand here tonight as the proud leader of an extraordinary team.
I stood on the hallowed turf of the ‘G this morning, doing live crosses making that point. I want to thank all my colleagues, beginning with my friend, our incredible Deputy Prime Minister, Richard Marles. No one could hope for a better Deputy and I thank him so much.
My friend and our Senate Leader, Penny Wong and her Deputy Don Farrell.
Our economic team, led by Jim Chalmers and Katy Gallagher.
Our campaign spokesperson, Jason Clare. And we’ve got a bit of a shared party tonight, Burke is here, the Member for Watson.
My amazing Labor Caucus, which when you look at it across the benches, it’s representative of the Australian people.
I acknowledge all of our Labor candidates, in every seat, who put up their hand and gave up their time for our cause and their community. If you’ll excuse me, for singling out one of them, who ran for a third time in Dickson, Ali France.
So many of whom will be joining us as Caucus Members of Parliament.  
To the people of Grayndler most of whom are here tonight, I’ve got to say something, it was very special, on the way here, I don’t know if there was a drone above us or what have you. My security team said, you know, maybe they’re just out on the street. You know people don’t just hang about Canterbury Rd and from Lilyfield, Liechhardt, all the way here. I’m sorry but I won’t be moving back for a little while.
The people of Grayndler did me an incredible honour in choosing me as their representative, 29 years and 10 elections ago. I’ve lived in this community in the Inner West my whole life, and it is an incredible privilege to serve a community that you love, and I do love it.
To the Labor Party’s heart and soul, our rank and file members and the mighty trade union movement of Australia.
Everywhere I have been through this campaign, your energy, your enthusiasm, your dedication to the cause has lifted me up. The Labor Party will always stand up for jobs and people’s wages and conditions. Everywhere I have been through this campaign, your energy, your enthusiasm, your dedication to the cause has lifted me up.
You inspire all of us in your service of working people and we thank you.
To our magnificent campaign director, National Secretary Paul Erickson.
Paul has run an outstanding campaign, Paul and I did tell people May was the right time. And he managed to become a dad during the campaign. He was supported by an absolutely brilliant team.
All of those dedicated people own a part of this victory and I thank you.
To my personal staff, led by Tim Gartrell. The loyalty, the passion and the commitment that you’ve shown, you have a tough job that you perform with grace, with humour, with joy and a passion for changing our country for the better.
Thank you for what you do.
To my son Nathan, who has grown into a fine young man who I am so proud of, thank you. To my fiancé, Jodie Haydon, probably wasn’t expecting this to be in your life half a dozen years ago. I am so grateful for your support, your friendship and your love.
You make me so happy, which matters, you have my heart, I love you and look forward to living our lives together. 
My fellow Australians, Australians have chosen the Australian Labor Party as their government.
And our government will choose the Australian way.
Because we are proud of who we are – and all that we have built together in this country.
We do not need to beg or borrow or copy from anywhere else.
We do not need to seek our inspiration overseas.
We find it right here in our values – and in our people.
Tomorrow, we dedicate ourselves to your service.
We renew the great responsibility and opportunity of government.
And with pride and purpose, optimism and determination, with faith in the fair go and faith in each other.
We return to the work of Building Australia’s Future.
Thank you all.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, welcome to your first ministry meeting of this term, the 48th Parliament. It is an incredible honour to be elected as a Member of Parliament, but an even greater honour to serve in the Executive of a Labor Government and it's important that we repay the faith and trust that's been placed in us on the 3rd of May. We are ahead, at this point, in 94 electorates. There is a possibility of a 95th. We'll wait and see as counting continues there.
But what's clear is that we represent the largest Caucus of Labor members in Australian history since Federation. And that's because of the discipline and focus that we showed in our first term. We had a clear plan. We set about focusing on the issues that were close to people. We understood that we governed in really difficult global economic times and we were focused on cost of living relief whilst getting that downward pressure on inflation, whilst continuing to provide better services in health, in education. Dealing with the decade of neglect when it comes to climate change and the decade of neglect when it comes to building housing and increasing housing supply. We put forward a positive agenda in the election campaign. Our job is to go through every single one of our commitments and deliver on them. And that's what I expect Ministers to do over the coming three years.
We have an incredible honour of dealing with, representing, the best country on earth. And tomorrow, I will travel to Indonesia to meet with our friend the President and to renew that acquaintance. We've received well wishes from all over the world. It is important, our engagement internationally as well. We know that international trade and economic circumstances are difficult and are turbulent, and our job is to navigate those seas whilst keeping our eye on the horizon of how do we create jobs, how do we lift living standards, how do we transition our economy with the opportunities that are there with the clean energy economy. No one held back, no one left behind, as we have said very clearly going forward. So, I congratulate all of you. This morning was quite lovely and it was fantastic to have all of your families there as well. Cherish it and honour it through the hard work and the commitment and diligence to implement our agenda in this term.
We've got our first item today. The first submission is from Amanda and it is about the minimum wage. And Amanda and Jim, we did this in our last term. Indeed, it was the first item that came forward at that stage from Tony and Jim. Labor will always stand for improving people's wages and conditions, and we know that part of our agenda in dealing with cost of living pressures isn't just getting inflation down, it's getting wages up and maintaining strong employment. And we think that people on the minimum wage deserve a wage increase. And that will be the submission that we'll consider, that I've just pre-empted a little bit. Don't take that as something that we do around this table in general, but I know that it's so core to Labor values. It really is. It's why we're here – to make a difference. And that's why our focus has to be always not on what happens in this room and not on what happens within our great party, as much as we're proud of it.
Each and every day is about the people who we represent and who we seek to represent going forward. So, congratulations to all of you and thank you for the loyalty, for the support that you showed. I went during the election campaign with a great deal of confidence that the entire team was working in one direction with a very clear focus. After I go to Indonesia, I will have the great honour of representing Australia at the inaugural Mass that will take place in St. Peter's in Rome. And that will be, personally, for me, a great honour to be able to represent Australia there as well. So, thank you very much.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, Your Excellency, it is wonderful to see you again. And so soon after my re-election, which means that we're in position to continue to engage constructively as we have during the first three years of my prime ministership. And you as well have been successful in being re-elected and congratulations to you. Look, we have so much in common as Australia and Europe. We have common support for market-based systems, but also common views about human rights. We stand together with the people of Ukraine in the struggle against Russian aggression and we stand together on so many issues, including on the potential for us to further entrench our, or extend, our economic relationship through trade. We have common values as well, which in today's uncertain world, the fact that we share those values, including our commitment to democratic principles and human rights, is so important as we go forward. So I welcome very much the opportunity to meet with you again here in Rome this summer, for the first time. We have met all around the world now, over the last few years, but I look forward to this term being really an extension of the constructive relationship that we have between Australia and Europe, and of course it's our people-to-people links that helps cement that, of course, the diaspora in Australia. You have a Prime Minister called Albanese meeting with you in Rome and certainly the populations from all of the European countries are very significant and that provides opportunities for those relationships to be further developed. So, welcome and thank you for taking the opportunity of having this meeting today.
URSULA VON DER LEYEN, PRESIDENT OF THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Pleasure to see you again. Congratulations with your electoral win. This is amazing, it’s historic, so really congratulations from our part and very happy about that. And yes, we meet here in Rome to celebrate the new era in the Vatican. So perhaps you could say we also are looking forward to a new era between Europe and Australia. Because, as you said last time when we met, I think it was in G20 in Brazil, since then the geopolitical tensions have massively increased. The good thing is Australia and Europe are reliable partners. We are predictable, we share the same values as you just said. So we can offer to each other stability and we're very grateful for that. And this is the reason also that we do not only see you as a trading partner, but we see you as a strategic partner, and we would very much like to broaden this strategic partnership. For example, we have signed security and defence agreements with South Korea and with Japan, soon with the UK. We would be very pleased if we could develop such a security and defence partnership too, just to broaden the strategic partnership in many topics that we have in common. So thank you very much for making the time here and again congratulations on the second term.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, it’s a great honour for me to be here I’ve got to say. But good to also take the opportunity for us to once again meet. As you know, I thank you for your warm wishes on my re-election as well.
VOLODYMYR ZELENSKYY, PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE: Our congratulations, it’s a successful victory and yes, we were supportive of you and your people, your country, and we are thankful for your support. Our congratulations to you, it's historical. A chance for all the people.
PRIME MINISTER ALBANESE: Well, during our campaign, I made it clear that the Australian Government position that I lead is very supportive of your struggle and we see your struggle as being about your national sovereignty, your right to determine your own future. The Russian illegal aggression needs to be resisted and we stand with Ukraine very clearly and unequivocally. And we also have, of course, called for peace, though Ukraine has to be able to determine your future and not to have something imposed on you. We have been participants in the discussions that have been convened by Prime Minister Starmer and President Macron. It's always at strange hours in Australia, some very late night meetings that I have participated in. We've said that if a peace process emerges, we would consider being involved in a coalition of the willing. Until then we'll continue to provide support. We have, as you know, we have tanks that are on their way at the moment, which is a very positive initiative. We've provided now around about 1.5 billion dollars in support, primarily military and defence support. Because the struggle, the courage that your people are showing is quite remarkable and your leadership as President as well, has been so steadfast and quite inspirational.
PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY: Thank you very much for your military support, for your strong words and supporting the coalition of the willing. I think that it’s not strange we are both allies. I think it's great that we have so many allies in different continents. Together, we can really move this situation to closer to peace, with pressure on Russia. And we are very thankful for sanctions. I wanted to raise with you also this topic which is very important, to put more pressure, more sanctions on Russia. And I hope that we can have a real just peace, what we need for our people. And thank you for the news of the tanks.
PRIME MINISTER ALBANESE: And thank you as well, just for the final comment, for what you have said with Mr Jenkins. We continue to, the Russian so-called courts have brought down an outrageous ruling, and we continue to seek his freedom and his return to Australia, and we thank you for the assistance in that.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Good afternoon everyone and welcome to the first meeting of the new Cabinet of this Parliament. We had a full Ministry meeting after the inauguration there at Government House and this Cabinet has a big job to do. Last Friday, I was there on the upper Hunter, looking and talking with some of the heroes. Our SES volunteers, people from marine rescue, other places, helping their fellow Australians. And it was a reminder of what really matters, it was a reminder as well of Australian values, the values that we put forward in the election campaign, which were no one left behind and no one held back. In this case, we need to pitch in to make sure that no one is left behind. There's been communities that have been uprooted. For some of them, it's not the first time, and we're reminded as well of the need to look at the impact and cost of climate change. Whilst Australia has always had extreme weather events, the science told us that they would be more frequent and they would be more intense. And that's precisely what, tragically, is playing out. Dealing with the cyclone off the coast of southeast Queensland and northern New South Wales just a short time ago, dealing with flood but also dealing with drought in parts of South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia at the same time tells us how vulnerable we are to these events, to climate change. So that's a challenge. It's one of the challenges of not just this term. It obviously is a long term challenge, but it's also an opportunity that we can seize. We will travel up again on tomorrow morning, I'll be with Kristy McBain, who's there in Port Macquarie and Kempsey this afternoon. We’ll be in Taree and other communities tomorrow, making sure that we make a positive difference to the people who are really doing it tough. And today with Richard at NEMA, down at the headquarters where we committed to – there'll be additional Defence personnel on the ground tomorrow, making a difference, helping with the recovery as well. So that will be obviously a priority for us over coming days and weeks, making sure that those communities not just feel that they're cared for by the rest of Australia, but that we are seen to deliver on that issue as well.
It is a reminder to us that as a Government, we always should not be focused on ourselves and on internal shenanigans in this building. We should be focused on them and what their concerns are, and that's the platform that we have to implement – the one we were elected on. We need to make sure that we deliver on the commitments, whether it be increased housing, whether it be the Free TAFE, strengthening Medicare, Cheaper Child Care, making sure that we deliver on the commitments that we took to the election. It was an ambitious platform, as our economy transitions to a clean energy economy, the opportunities that we need to create in new jobs and new industries in our regions and in our suburbs as well. Next week, the Cabinet will go to Perth, Western Australia again, a reminder of the importance that we place on the whole nation, not just the East Coast, and that will be an important opportunity.
So we're down, back down to work again. I know that people have been working. Everyone has been to their departments over the last couple of weeks and engaging with them. We'll be convening the Parliament back on July 22nd but between now and then, will be an opportunity for us to develop the legislation that we need to implement our agenda. So, I look forward to the discussion today, and thank you for the way that the Government has begun. I know all of you have been already working with the interest that you have in your specific portfolios, making sure that those relationships are important, because we need to bring people with us on the journey of change and make sure that we continue to be a representative Government that delivers on our commitments. Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge all my colleagues who are joining me here today.
I say on behalf of every single Labor member and senator, we are humbled and honoured by the trust that the Australian people have placed in our Government.
Each and every day, we are working to prove worthy of that trust.
To stand up for Australia in a time of global uncertainty.
To act on the immediate challenges confronting us.
To seize the opportunities ahead of us.
And to deliver the positive and ambitious agenda that we took to the Australian people.
Back in May 2022, Australians voted for change.
To change the government, to change the country, to change the way we engaged with the world and the way our economy worked at home.
In May 2025, Australians voted to make that change last.
To build on the foundations we had laid.
To carry forward the reforms we had begun.
And to see the rewards of their hard work, reflected in their daily lives.
With an economy that nourishes their aspiration and repays their efforts.
And a society where everyone has the opportunity to fulfil their potential.
Before the election, my colleagues and I were clear about our commitments and our approach.
And the democratic verdict rendered by Australians was every bit as clear.
On the 3rd of May, the Australian people voted for Australian values.
For fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
For a progressive patriotism where we are proud to do things our own way.
Where we recognise that our democracy, our commitment to fair wages and conditions, universal Medicare and universal superannuation are things that bring us together as Australians and set us apart from the world.
And where we embrace the fact that one of the characteristics that makes this the best nation on earth, is that all of us are driven by a determination to make it even better.
To face global challenges, shape economic change and engage with our region in the Australian way.
And to build a future where no-one is held back and no-one is left behind.
On the 3rd of May, Australians voted for a Government with the plans and policies to uphold and fulfil these values.
Australians voted to strengthen Medicare and protect our world-leading Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
Australians voted to build more homes and to make it possible for people to buy their first home with just a 5 per cent deposit.
Australians voted to embrace the opportunities of cleaner, cheaper renewable energy and the new generation of jobs and industries it can power.
Australians voted to strengthen our defence capability and strengthen our relationships in our region.
Australians voted for new investment and new reform in every stage of education from early childhood, to schools, to TAFE and university.
Australians voted for greater opportunity for women, not as an add-on or an afterthought, but as a fundamental priority for our economy and society.
And Australians voted for a Labor Government to keep delivering real and lasting help with their cost of living.
Keeping inflation down.
Keeping unemployment low.
Getting real wages up.
Taking new action to make sure consumers don’t get ripped off.
Delivering more direct assistance to families and small business, including energy bill relief.
And helping people earn more and keep more of what they earn.
With top-up tax cuts next year, and the year after.
A new $1000 Instant Tax Deduction.
And a continuing focus on lifting productivity and boosting real wages.
Including for nearly 3 million Australians on award wages who will receive another real pay rise on the 1st of July.
Our Government has secured a mandate to act.
Our tax cuts are already legislated, despite the Liberals and Nationals voting against them.
And when the new Parliament sits next month, the first piece of legislation we will introduce will cut student debt by 20 per cent.
This will save around 3 million Australians an average of $5,500 each.
And as promised it will be backdated, so that it applies from the 1st of June this year, before indexation.
By next year, the Five Per Cent Deposit Plan we took to the election will be open to every Australian looking to buy their first home.
It will be available for homes valued all the way up to the average price in every city and region.
And if you buy your first home through this plan, you won’t have to pay a single dollar in mortgage insurance - our government will cover it.
This will make a real difference for so many Australians. Instead of being stuck trying to save while their rent pays someone else’s mortgage, they will be paying off their own home.
From the 1st of January, medicines on the PBS will cost no more than $25 per script.
The lowest price since 2004.
For pensioners and concession card holders, the price of a script will be frozen at $7.70 until the end of the decade.
And at the same time, 1800 MEDICARE will be up and running.
Free, 24/7, expert health advice, only a phone call away.
I want to start opening the 50 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics we promised, this year.
And we want them all open by the middle of next year.
Combined with the 87 we have already opened, this will mean four out of every five Australians will live within 20 minutes of a clinic.
Already, 1.5 million Australians have visited one of these clinics and all they have needed is their Medicare card.
Our Government is focused on delivery.
We know that delivery matters for all those Australians who voted Labor for lower taxes, stronger Medicare, better education and new help with the cost of living.
Delivering these commitments matters for every Australian, regardless of who they voted for.
It matters for our economy for the jobs, skills, technology, infrastructure and energy we need to grow and thrive in the years ahead.
It also matters for our democracy.
We are living in a time of significant global uncertainty - and that reaches beyond just economic instability.
It is the more corrosive proposition that politics and government and democratic institutions, including a free media, are incapable of meeting the demands of this moment.
Some simply dismiss such sentiment.
Others cynically seek to harvest it.
Our responsibility is to disprove it.
To recognise that some of this frustration is drawn from people’s real experiences the feeling that government isn’t working for them.
To counter this, we have to offer the practical and positive alternative.
To prove that a good, focused, reforming Labor government can make a real and positive difference to people’s lives.
And that we can do this while building for the future too.
A future which delivers on our vision for a stronger, fairer Australia. Indeed an Australia that is stronger, because it is fairer.
A future where we realise our potential as a renewable energy superpower.
A future where we have a thriving advanced manufacturing industry.
Where education enriches our human potential from universal affordable early learning, through properly funded schools and a dynamic tertiary sector.
Our vision is for a society that is a microcosm for the world where all are respected and valued and our diversity is recognised as a strength.
Where our international relationships in the fastest growing region of the world in human history benefit us, but also provide a platform for us to play a positive and stabilising global role in uncertain times.
Our Government’s vision and ambition for Australia’s future was never dependent on the size of our majority.
But you can only build for that future vision if you build confidence that you can deliver on urgent necessities.
How you do that is important too - ensuring that the actions of today, anticipate and create conditions for further reform tomorrow.
That is why so many of our election commitments for our second term, built on reforms we had introduced and were implementing in our first term.
Our agenda has been shaped by the lives and priorities of the Australian people.
And it is built on Australian values.
It is the mission and the measure of a Labor Government to give those enduring ideals of fairness, aspiration and opportunity renewed and deeper meaning, for more Australians.
To deliver reforms that hold no-one back and drive progress that leaves no-one behind.
This is no small task.
It demands we aim high and requires us to build big.
That’s why the very heart of our campaign was the biggest-ever investment in Medicare.
Driving to a target of 9 out of every 10 visits to the GP being fully bulk-billed by 2030.
Because we understand that for Medicare to remain a profound expression of the fair go, for it to be a continuing source of national pride for decades to come, it must rise to meet the new challenges in health and primary care, and it must deliver for people in every part of our country.
Through an entire decade in Government, the Liberals and Nationals invested less than $5 billion in housing.
Our $43 billion Homes for Australia plan sets the goal of building 1.2 million new homes before the end of the decade.
Because we know that boosting supply is the key.
And we also understand that for the aspiration of home ownership to remain the great Australian dream, it must be achievable for this generation of Australians.
This same sense of responsibility to future generations is why we are working to meet the environmental challenges of climate change and seize the economic opportunities of the energy transition.
We have legislated our 43 per cent emissions reduction target by 2030 and our commitment to Net Zero by 2050.
We are delivering our energy policy, renewables, backed by gas, batteries and hydro.
And we are investing in our economic sovereignty, our capacity to make more things here, with our plan for a Future Made in Australia.
As I said on election night, this is a time of profound opportunity for our nation.
Because when you consider the resources and energy and technology that a world moving to Net Zero needs.
When you look at our world-leading universities and researchers and TAFEs and start-ups.
When you think about the change in comparative advantage that is occurring.
Where having the space to co-locate extraction, refining and processing and manufacturing is of increasing significance as a proportion of the cost of production, compared to the cost of labour.
When you think about what global investors in data centres and green metals and clean energy are looking for.
Truly, there is nowhere else you would rather be than right here in Australia.
But for all our national strengths and natural advantages, our success is not guaranteed.
Nothing is going to be given to us - and the world is not waiting for us.
To realise this opportunity, shape it and make it our own we have to move quickly to build an economy that is more dynamic, more productive and more resilient.
This does not mean dismissing the policies or the values we took to the last election.
It means working together to fulfil them and build on them.
The commitments the Australian people voted for in May are the foundation of our mandate, they are not the limits of our responsibilities or our vision.
The way we deal with big challenges and opportunities from our first term, from economic growth and productivity to the energy transition will continue to evolve.
And there will be new challenges to meet, at home and overseas.
In December 2022, we responded to the worst global energy crisis since the 1970s by bringing together what was then the New South Wales Liberal Government and the Queensland Labor Government to impose price caps on gas and coal.
None of us had taken that commitment to an election, but all of us recognised we had a responsibility to act in the interests of Australians.
Or take our world-leading legislation creating an age limit for social media.
That arose from a courageous campaign led by parents and backed by the Australian media.
Our Government answered those calls and this was passed with bipartisan support.
This is about government creating a community standard, as well as a legal one.
Making it clear that social media companies have a social responsibility.
And giving parents and teachers a signal they can point to when they’re talking with children about how to engage with technology safely.
This matters, and we won’t be taking a backward step on it.
Being in Government also means you can pursue unexpected opportunities.
It has been 14 years since the Gonski Review identified the Schooling Resource Standard.
Now, for the first time ever, we have agreement between every state and territory and the Commonwealth on the funding and reforms to get us there.
To ensure that every Australian student in every Australian school will get the funding they need to reach their full potential.
This goes above and beyond what we promised at the 2022 election.
And delivering it wasn’t a matter of issuing public demands or waving around a blank cheque.
It took patient, constructive and direct engagement with the states and territories and the education sector to ensure that every Commonwealth dollar spent on schools would be linked to real reform.
I look at this breakthrough as a model for our future engagement with the states and territories on other areas of shared responsibility.
A chance to secure lasting, meaningful agreement on funding for public hospitals and ensuring the National Disability Insurance Scheme is on a sustainable footing.
Just as co-operation between different levels of government is vital to securing the services and support that Australians expect and deserve, co-operation between government, business and unions is essential to securing our future growth and prosperity.
Over the last three years we have all worked together to put the worst of global inflation behind us.
To bring inflation down, without sacrificing people’s jobs or cutting the wages and services Australians rely on.
With two interest rate cuts already this year, there is a growing sense that our economy is turning the corner.
Making our way forward depends on what all of us can work together to achieve.
That’s why I have asked the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, to convene a roundtable to support and shape our government’s growth and productivity agenda.
At Parliament House in August, we will bring together a group of leaders from the business community, the union movement and civil society.
This will be a more streamlined dialogue than the Jobs and Skills Summit, dealing with a more targeted set of issues.
We want to build the broadest possible base of support for further economic reform.
To drive growth.
Boost productivity.
Strengthen the budget.
And secure the resilience of our economy, in a time of global uncertainty.
What we want is a focused dialogue and constructive debate that leads to concrete and tangible actions.
The starting point for our Government is clear.
Our plan for economic growth and productivity is about Australians earning more and keeping more of what they earn.
We want to build an economy where growth, wages and productivity rise together.
This work is already underway - including our National Productivity Fund, incentivising state and territory governments to drive efficiencies in construction.
Or the new measures in the Budget in March, including reform of Non-Compete Clauses and new action on national standards for Occupational Licensing.
In the next three years, we want to expand on this approach.
I am optimistic about the progress we can make, because there is substantial agreement on so many of the key priorities.
Driving faster approvals for housing, energy and infrastructure projects, while ensuring sustainability.
Making it easier for Australian innovators to commercialise their breakthroughs and create jobs in Australia.
Investing in the skills our nation needs and making sure those qualifications are recognised, nationwide.
Ensuring all Australians are better prepared to capitalise on the opportunities of Artificial Intelligence while making sure we secure ourselves against its risks.
And continuing the work we’ve done through Services Australia to make it easier for people to access and navigate the government services they rely on.
Some of this is about government doing the basics better, targeting duplication, removing barriers to investment and reducing the cost of doing business.
But not every challenge can be solved by government stepping back.
This is a time when government has to step up, to invest in education and skills and research and innovation.
To build and upgrade the infrastructure that supports growth and drives productivity.
To combine our Future Made in Australia plan, our Critical Minerals Strategic Reserve and our new investment framework with a deeper and more diversified trade agenda, especially in our region.
And to provide business and industry with the certainty to invest in all their assets, technology, energy and their people most of all.
Again, this is where the way we make change, the ‘how’ matters.
Because change that is imposed unilaterally by government rarely endures.
Key to lasting change is reform that Australians own and understand.
Reform that clearly serves a national purpose and the national interest.
Change that empowers and engages people, with a sense of choice and agency.
Change that generates its own momentum and builds its own staying power.
That’s the long-term, lasting change our Government wants to deliver.
And we respect the vital role the Australian Public Service has to play in this.
Today, I am pleased to confirm the appointment of Dr Steven Kennedy as Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
And Jenny Wilkinson as Secretary to the Treasury, the first woman to be appointed to the role.
These outstanding public servants will continue to excel in their service to our nation.
I am delighted that Dr Kennedy and Ms Wilkinson accepted my invitations.
I want to take this opportunity to publicly thank Glyn Davis, the outgoing Secretary, for his service and his contribution to our country.
Over the next three years, we are focused on delivering what Australians voted for on May the 3rd.
And in the conversation about future economic reform, we should also remember what Australians voted against.
Because Australians overwhelmingly rejected policies designed to drive down wages, undermine job security and take flexibility away from working families.
Australians voted against mass sackings in the public service and the damage that would do to our social safety net.
Australians rejected nuclear power, not just because of its staggering cost.
But because people recognised the Liberals and Nationals’ plan for what it was.
A last desperate attempt to delay action on climate change and derail the transition to renewable energy.
And Australians voted against importing conflicts and ideologies that have no basis in our national culture or character.
They rejected policies copied from overseas that would only leave us a smaller, narrower, less generous and more divided country.
Instead, our people chose to face global challenges in the Australian way.
And that is precisely the way for us to compete and succeed in the world and grow and prosper at home.
Our own way. On our terms. In our interests.
Not seeking to imitate low-wage economies, not leaving people behind in the scramble for some perceived advantage.
Not trading away the things that make us the best country on earth.
Trusting in our national values. Building on our national strengths.
And backing our people, rewarding their hard work, investing in their talent and nourishing their aspiration.
My colleagues and I understand that every day in Government is a privilege.
And with optimism, urgency, purpose and determination, we intend to make every single day count.


It’s great to be here in Seattle.
Around the world, this is a city that stands for innovation and aspiration.
The genius to unlock discovery - and the determination and drive that turns a breakthrough idea, into a breakout commercial success.
Seattle is home to a powerful combination of co-operation and competition, people working with each other and spurring each other on.
This room tells that story.
We have representation here from the whole business pipeline – from start-ups to global household names.
Australian companies with a strong and growing presence here in the United States, including on the West Coast.
And US companies who recognise the extraordinary potential that investing in Australia represents.
Whether it is quantum and AI.
Defence, health or agriculture.
Software or space technology.
All of you are bringing your optimism and determination to some of the great challenges facing our world.
And in doing so, you are changing people’s lives for the better.
This room – and indeed this city - also reflects of the strength of the economic relationship between Australia and the United States.
Australia sent its first trade commissioner to the United States back in 1918.
The US has had an annual trade surplus with Australia since the early 1950s.
And it was here in Seattle, in 1993 that the leaders of the economies of the Asia-Pacific came together for the first APEC leaders’ meeting.
An historic commitment to “openness and partnership”, speeding the flow of goods, capital and investment across borders and throughout our region.
My last visit to Seattle was in January 2019 for the West Coast session of the Australian American Leadership Dialogue, bringing together political, business and academic leaders to engage constructively to shape change in the interests of our countries and common humanity.
Free and fair trade has transformed the economies of our region.
And it underpins economic partnership between our two nations, including through the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement, signed twenty years ago.
Today, the United States is Australia’s largest foreign investment destination and our largest two-way investment partner.
Our task is to build on this strength – and diversify beyond it.
To seek out new sources for growth and investment, particularly in the sectors you represent.
My Government recognises that research and development, technology and innovation are critical to driving economic growth and boosting productivity.
We want a culture that encourages businesses and industry to embrace new technology and incorporate it into the way they work.
Where Australian innovators back themselves to commercialise their breakthroughs.
And where global investors are clear about everything our nation has to offer: our democracy and stability, our space and energy, our connections to the fastest region of the world in human history and our greatest asset – our people, their smarts and skills and get-up-and-go.
On that note, it was fantastic to visit Amazon’s headquarters here in Seattle to highlight their new investment in Australia’s strong and growing digital economy.
$20 billion to expand the Australian network of data centres.
This sends a signal to the world – and it’s a powerful symbol of Australia and the United States co-operating to seize and shape a new era of prosperity.
Over the coming days at the G7 in Alberta, we’ll be focusing on the significant security and economic challenges facing the world.
But we should not lose sight of the profound opportunities that can be realised by closer and deeper co-operation.
The businesses in this room are proof of that.
In a time of global uncertainty, all of you represent cause for optimism.
This same sense of optimism and shared purpose should drive our approach to matters such as energy security – including critical minerals.
And underpin the way we boost our technological capabilities, from advanced manufacturing and clean energy technology to cutting-edge AI and biotechnology.
It is important for Australia to be part of this dialogue - because we bring a lot to the table.
We will engage respectfully and constructively, in our national interest.
We will continue to advocate for free and fair trade, for the jobs it creates and the investment it drives.
We will hold true to the principles of shared opportunity and collective responsibility that are vital to building a more secure, prosperous and stable region – and world.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
Can I join in welcoming the many leaders from across the business community here today.
Every morning, when we look at The Australian or turn on Sky News, we are reminded this is a time of significant global uncertainty.
Conflict in the Middle East and Europe.
Upheaval in the world economy.
Strategic competition in our region.
Technology rewriting the way we live and work.
Yet the defining test Australia faces in this decade is not whether we can manage this period of uncertainty.
It’s whether we can work together to seize this moment of opportunity.
To build a more secure and prosperous future, the Australian way - with no-one held back and no-one left behind.
In 2025, there is every reason to be optimistic about Australia’s economic outlook.
Think about where we are: the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
Think about what we have: the resources and critical minerals every nation needs to power its future growth and meet its net zero commitments. 
More than that, the space for refining and processing, the energy to power a new generation of manufacturing and industry.
A world-class university and TAFE sector to train and prepare our future workforce.
A superannuation system that facilitates nation building and makes us a significant global investor.
And a multicultural society that gives us a family connection to every nation on earth.
Then consider what we can do, if we work together to make the most of these advantages.
If we invest in the potential and capacity of our people.
If we make ourselves a clean energy superpower.
An exporter of energy and – and a manufacturer of generation and storage technology.
A stand-out destination for international investment from data centres to green metals.
And a partner and provider of choice to the Indo-Pacific: in everything from food and fibre to education and services.
All of this adds up to a time of profound opportunity for Australia.
But none of it will come knocking on our door, or be gifted to us by anyone else.
We have to back ourselves to go out and seize it.
This means doing more with our traditional economic strengths – and building beyond them.
That’s the strategic focus of our Government’s plan for a Future Made in Australia.
And our support for buying Australian, from making it easier for families doing their weekly shop to choose Australian made products, to ensuring that government procurement backs local business.
We want to make more things here, in a more competitive and diversified economy. 
Boosting our resilience and our self-reliance, so we are not always the last link in the global supply chain.
This is a safeguard against future global volatility.
And it is an investment in our regional engagement.
Because adding value here means we bring more value to our trade partnerships.
This is crucial, especially at a time when free and fair trade is under challenge.
Making more things in Australia, doesn’t mean doing less with the Indo-Pacific.
It means creating opportunities to do more.
It was no accident that my first bilateral visit of this term was to Indonesia.
Indonesia was where we launched Nicholas Moore’s Invested, our strategy to drive a new generation of business engagement across South East Asia, the 4th largest economy in the world by 2040.
So many of you in this room are helping bring that plan to life with your direct links to these growing economies.
Just as you have played a key part in our Government’s patient, deliberate and calibrated stabilisation of the relationship with China.
Clearing away over $20 billion in trade impediments – and now seeing our farmers, growers and producers set new records for their exports.
All this underlines the fact that our Government’s support for making things here in Australia is not driven by nostalgia for an old economic model, it is shaped by our recognition of the new model that is emerging.
The world is moving beyond the old equation which held that high-wage, open economies like Australia could not sustain manufacturing locally, because we could not compete on price internationally.
Instead in the years ahead, comparative advantage in manufacturing will not be defined by minimising the cost of labour.
It will be secured by the most productive use of technology, by cutting transport costs and by cheaper, cleaner energy.
For Australia, the ability to co-locate extraction and refining and processing and manufacturing, powered by renewables, gives us an edge over so much of the world.
Building these links in our national value chain also makes it easier for Australian research and innovation to be commercialised and developed here.
And as a Labor Government, we are determined to create the right framework and make the right investments in skills and training to ensure Artificial Intelligence is a contributor, not a competitor.
An enabler of secure and fulfilling jobs, not a threat to them.
In all of this, our nation does not need to go looking overseas for an economic model to copy.
There is nothing for us to gain from a race to the bottom on wages and conditions.
Or the economic self-harm of tariffs.
We want to do this the Australian way.
Not talking Australia down.
Holding true to our values of fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
Investing in our people, their ability to adapt to new technology and to develop it.
And drawing out the potential of our whole country.
Because building a more diversified economy is how we create a more decentralised one.
Bringing new jobs and industries from remote communities, to the regions and to growing suburbs as well as our capital cities.  This is the model we have the opportunity to build, an economy that is more resilient and more competitive, more dynamic and more productive.
An Australia that is stronger and fairer. Indeed stronger because we are fairer.
But in order to bring people and business and civil society with us in the pursuit of that vision.
To mobilise all the talent and resources of our nation to meet this moment.
We have to deliver here and now.
To prove the practical value of a reforming government.
To demonstrate that people’s democratic choice makes a positive difference.
This means ensuring our economy is rewarding Australians for their hard work.
Nourishing their aspiration and providing the security that enables people to build a good life for themselves and their families.
This is why our Government is focused on repaying the trust Australians have placed in us, by delivering the policies that people voted for.
Stronger Medicare.
Cheaper medicines.
Building more homes.
Lower taxes and higher wages, so Australians earn more and keep more of what they earn.
And meaningful, lasting help with cost of living.
This Tuesday, the 1st of July, marked an important day of delivery.
Another round of energy bill relief for every household and for small business.
The beginning of our Cheaper Home Batteries program.
Cutting 30 per cent off the cost of installing a typical battery. Permanently lowering power bills – and reducing peak demand across the network for everyone.
From Tuesday, nearly 3 million Australians on award wages received a real pay increase.
And the superannuation guarantee for all working Australians was raised to 12 per cent.
We are extending the Instant Asset Write Off for small business.
And our new $10,000 incentive payment for apprentices in construction is now open, helping train more tradies so we can build more homes.
We are expanding government Paid Parental Leave by another two weeks.
And, for the first time ever, adding superannuation to it.
So if you take time away from work to be with your new baby, you don’t pay a penalty in retirement.
These measures, together with cheaper child care and historic pay rises for female-dominated industries like aged care and early education reflect the fact that for our Government, equality for women is not an add-on, or an afterthought.
It is a central economic priority.
And it is a source of pride that over the last three years:
Women’s economic participation has reached record highs.
The gender pay gap has fallen to record lows.
And Australia has risen from being ranked 50th in the world for gender equality under the Morrison Government.
To 13th – our best ever result.          
And whenever we talk about economic growth and productivity, we should all be mindful that equality for women is a powerful driver of both.
Not just the right thing to do a fairer society – the smart thing to do for a stronger economy.  At this forum last year, I said our Government’s focus was winning the fight against inflation.
Back then, many economists and our opponents said that the only way to bring inflation down was to drive unemployment up.
And to withdraw the cost of living support we were providing for people under pressure.
We held to our course – and last week proved how much progress Australia has made.
Headline inflation is down to 2.1 per cent.
In the Reserve Bank’s target band, 10 months in a row. 
There have already been two cuts to interest rates this year.
And over the past three years 1.1 million new jobs have been created, with the lowest average unemployment rate of any government for 50 years.
Like every other advanced economy, Australia has had to deal with the worst global inflation since the 1980s and the biggest international energy crisis since the 1970s, but no other advanced economy has navigated this period like Australia.
Working together, we have brought inflation down without sacrificing people’s jobs.
Without cutting essential investments in skills, education, infrastructure and energy.
And without cutting the services Australians count on and deserve.
With the worst of inflation behind us, our economy is turning the corner.
And our primary focus is shifting as a result: from bringing inflation down, to getting growth and productivity up.
The challenges we face in productivity have been more than a decade in the making.
Turning things around will take time – making lasting change always does.
It will require co-operation as well.
Because this is not a task Government can, or should, tackle alone.
In a strong, dynamic and productive economy, government should be a driver of growth – but not the driver of growth.
Facilitating private sector investment and job creation, not seeking to replace it.
That’s where we look to the businesses represented in this room.
From big employers to the millions of small businesses right around Australia.
Our Government wants you to be able to resume your rightful place as the primary source of growth in our economy.
That is the essential purpose of the roundtable we are convening in Canberra in August.
We are seeking a broad range of views, so we can build broad agreement for action.
Tax reform will be an important part of this conversation, but not the whole of it.
Because this is also an opportunity to build consensus around practical measures that can be implemented quickly. 
Dealing with urgent challenges, in a way that builds for the future.
This is how we deliver and fulfil the agenda we took to the Australian people.
A plan defined by Australian values, built on valuing every Australian. 
This includes making it easier for business to create jobs, start and finish projects, invest in new technology and build new facilities.
Some of this involves government doing less.
Clearing away unnecessary or outdated regulation.
Eliminating frustrating overlap between local, state and federal laws.
Yet value also lies in areas where Government can do better.
Better aligning our investments in TAFE and vocational education, to deliver the skilled workforce employers need.
And making sure those vital skills can cross state borders in real time.
Working to our ambitious goals in housing and renewables, by getting projects approved and built faster, while maintaining our commitment to sustainability and safety.
Continuing our reform of government services by setting new standards for access, quality and privacy.
And ensuring that business has the workforce, the skills and the confidence to embrace new technology and embed its productivity benefits in their workplaces.
We are convening this roundtable to help deliver on the commitments Australians voted for.
And because we recognise that the agenda we took to the election is the foundation of our mandate, not the limit of our responsibilities or our vision.
Every government should be in the ideas business.
And no government should imagine it has a monopoly on good ideas.
Whether or not you are a formal participant at the roundtable, we want you involved in the conversation.
More importantly, we want you to help drive the progress that comes from it and to share in the benefits.
And that’s the point I will conclude on.
The way all of us – politicians, media, business, civil society – participate in this conversation matters.
Because very often the public debate about change in our economy is conducted only in terms of dire warnings about what the consequences for Australia will be if we get it wrong.
In order to build the broadest possible support for substantive economic reform, we should focus on what we can achieve by getting it right.
By working together to anticipate change and shape it in our national interest.
By empowering people and workforces and communities with a sense of choice and agency.
Creating the fundamental security here and now that enables people to plan and save and build for their future.
And demonstrating that we are determined for new technologies and new industries and new ways of doing business to keep faith with Australia’s enduring values. 
To serve that oldest and deepest Australian aspiration, the determination to pass on a better life and greater opportunity to your children.
These are uncertain times and, as ever, much of that uncertainty is dictated by events overseas.
We cannot determine the challenges that will confront us – but we can decide how we respond.
Let us continue to invest in our people.
Back our businesses - and back ourselves.
So, we seize and share the opportunities ahead, the Australian way.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Eighty years ago acting Prime Minister Frank Forde rose in the House of Representatives and told a still and sombre chamber:
“The Captain has been stricken in sight of the shore.” 
Through the dark days of conflict, Curtin had urged the men and women of Australia forward to:
“Victory in war, victory for the peace”.
He would not live to see either, yet no Australian did more to achieve both.
It is an honour to be with you tonight to reflect on the extraordinary and enduring achievements of a Labor icon and a great Australian.
Through 124 years of our Federation and 31 Prime Ministers of Australia, John Curtin stands apart.
No leader of our nation has faced a sterner test.
No-one has known a darker hour.
And no Prime Minister has carried more on their shoulders, alone.
During the collapse of the Menzies and Fadden Governments, John Curtin did not push to seize power.
Instead, power came to him. The Parliament and the nation turned to Labor.
And within four months of being sworn in as Prime Minister, Curtin found himself leading the ‘Battle for Australia’.
Singapore had fallen, Darwin had been bombed.
And he was locked in a battle of wills with the British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill as well as the President of the United States, Franklin Roosevelt.
John Curtin, a person so mindful of his flaws and limitations, pushing back against two of the most powerful men in the world and two of the most forceful personalities of 20th Century politics.
This moment is the core of the Curtin legend.
Two divisions of the Australian Imperial Force, returning from the Middle East.
Curtin wanted those troops for the defence of Australia.
Churchill wanted them in Burma – and Roosevelt backed him.
Barely two months after Curtin had said that Australia ‘looked to America’, America was telling us to listen to Britain. 
It says a great deal about the nature of our relationship with Britain up to that point and indeed the character of Curtin’s predecessors that Churchill had assumed Australia would roll over.
We know this because he had already given orders for the admiralty troopships carrying Australian soldiers to change course and steam to Rangoon.
Diplomatic cables between leaders can be wrapped in all kinds of formalities and flattery.
Curtin’s message to Churchill on learning this news is a study in the power of plain speaking.
Language sanded back so you can see the grain.
First, he rebukes Churchill for treating Australia’s agreement to the diversion of Australian soldiers: ‘merely as a matter of form’.
And he goes on, speaking not just for his party or his government but for his country:
“We feel a primary obligation to save Australia”. 
Some historians downplay the military significance of that moment.
They argue the threat of invasion was always exaggerated.
But consider the counterfactual.
If Churchill and FDR had got their way, Australian forces would have arrived in Burma barely a week before it fell to the Japanese.
Hundreds if not thousands of Australians would have been killed, or taken prisoner.
It would have been a disaster every bit as crushing to national morale as the fall of Singapore.
Instead, Curtin prevailed.
And he paid for that victory with the hardest and loneliest weeks of his life.
Knowing those transports, those Australian troops, were out on the Indian Ocean on his orders.
This was the solitary burden he bore on his long walks, around the base of Mount Ainslie.
And back and forth in the grounds of The Lodge, under the moonlight. His mind a thousand miles away, fearful of the very worst.
No-one could truly know the weight he carried in those days.  
But all could see the toll it took.
Even when the 7th Division docked safely in Adelaide, that pattern of mental and physical strain had been set.
Today, at the safe distance of eight decades, the story of the Second World War is set in our memory.
The Allied victory over tyranny has, in retrospect, taken on a feel of inevitability.
Part of the debt we owe to Curtin, together with all the men and women who served Australia in that terrible conflict, is to remind ourselves how close history came to taking a different path.
Curtin grasped that.
And he never pretended to the people, or to himself, that dealing with these choices came easily.
John Curtin dedicated his life to our country – and he gave his life for Australia.
His colleagues saw him as a casualty of the war, as much as any fallen soldier.
And that self-sacrifice has shaped every reflection on his legacy.
When Prime Minister Gough Whitlam laid the foundation stone for John Curtin House in Canberra in 1974.
He paid moving tribute to a man ‘enslaved by the times’ for whom ‘time was a cruel master’.
That is a fundamental, inescapable part of the John Curtin story.
But it is not the whole.
His leadership has earned a bigger place in history than that.
And his legacy runs deeper than that, for our party and for our country.
Because Curtin restored in Labor what he revived in Australia:
Unity and purpose in times of crisis and uncertainty.
Ambition and co-operation in pursuit of opportunity.
And, above all, the confidence and determination to think and act for ourselves.
To follow our own course and shape our own future.
Curtin once said that the greatness of the Australian labour movement lay in the fact that it:“had never followed the flags of other lands, or patterned itself on the movements which originated in other places.” 
This was the country John Curtin was born into.
The ‘social laboratory’, ‘the workers’ paradise’.
A nation that led the world in creating a fair minimum wage, independently set.
A pension when you grew old, support if you got sick.
Protections – and respect – for the right of workers to organise and bargain and demand better for themselves.
And a democracy that was stronger because women could vote in elections and run for parliament.
That spirit of social democratic creativity had ebbed away under conservative governments. 
Curtin, together with Chifley, gave it new life and meaning.
Curtin empowered Chifley to lead the Department of Reconstruction in 1942. Think about that.
As John Edwards wrote: 
“Roosevelt remade the US economy before the war. 
Atlee remade the British economy after the war. 
Curtin remade the Australian economy during the war.” 
Because his vision, even in the darkest hour of conflict, was for a peace worth the winning.
A nation that honoured the courage and sacrifice of its citizens, with more than monuments and memorials.
Where the bravery of Australians had won them the right to build a good life for themselves and their families. 
With new opportunities in education.
Secure, well-paid jobs in manufacturing.
Affordable medicines through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
And a society where, to quote that Government’s housing policy, a home was ‘not only the need but the right of every citizen’. 
I used those same words at our campaign launch in Perth this year.
Because while our nation has changed beyond the imagining of the Labor generations that have gone before us, respect for the aspirations of the Australian people still drives us.
And the spirit of progressive patriotism still moves us.
We understand that part of what makes this the best country on earth, is that all of us share a responsibility and a determination to make it even better and fairer.
That is why we are making the biggest ever investment in Medicare.
So more Australians than ever before can see a doctor for free.
It’s why we’ve made it clear that under our Labor Government, the PBS is not up for negotiation.
And it is why on Tuesday, we built on two great Labor reforms – and brought them together.
We lifted superannuation to 12 per cent.
We expanded Paid Parental Leave by a further two weeks.
And for the first time ever, we are adding superannuation to it.
So women who take time away from work to be with their new baby, don’t pay a penalty in retirement.
This is about building an economy and a society that upholds Australian values – and values every Australian. 
That is the Labor way.
And it is the Australian way, under Labor.
Because we do not seek our inspiration overseas. We find it right here in our people.
And we carry it with us, in the way we engage with the world.
John Curtin is rightly honoured as the founder of Australia’s alliance with the United States.
A pillar of our foreign policy.
Our most important defence and security partnership.
And a relationship that commands bipartisan support, respect and affection in both our nations.
Yet our Alliance with the US ought to be remembered as a product of Curtin’s leadership in defence and foreign policy, not the extent of it.
Because Curtin’s famous statement that Australia ‘looked to America’ was much more than the idea of trading one strategic guarantor for another.
Or swapping an alliance with the old world for one with the new.
It was a recognition that Australia’s fate would be decided in our region.
It followed the decision Curtin had made in 1941 that Australia would issue its own declaration of war with Japan.
Speaking for ourselves, as a sovereign nation.
Where Menzies had said that because Britain was at war with Germany, as a result Australia was also at war.
Under Labor, Curtin said Australia was at war:
“Because our vital interests are imperilled and because the rights of free people in the whole Pacific are assailed.”
That’s what Curtin recognised – this was a Pacific war.
It was its own conflict which demanded its own strategy.
Our security could not be outsourced to London, or trusted to vague assurances from Britain.
We needed an Australian foreign policy anchored in strategic reality, not bound by tradition.
Dealing with the world as it is, not as we would like it to be.
As Paul Keating put it, in his John Curtin Memorial Lecture.
“Curtin began us thinking in our own terms.” 
So we remember Curtin not just because he looked to America.
We honour him because he spoke for Australia.
For Australia and for Labor, that independence has never meant isolationism.
Choosing our own way, doesn’t mean going it alone.
It was the Curtin and Chifley Governments that brought Australia into the United Nations, the World Bank and the IMF, at the outset.
Australia did not just join the institutions which created the international rules based order, we helped shape them.
Because we did not want the future of our region to rest on what Doc Evatt called a ‘great power peace’.
Then – and now – we championed the rights and the role of middle powers and smaller nations.
Then – and now – we recognised that our region’s security depends on collective responsibility.
Then – and now – we strive for a world where the sovereignty of every nation is respected and the dignity of every individual is upheld.
Then – and now – Australia backs our words with deeds.
Eighty years ago, Australia under Chifley was one of the first countries in the world to publicly support the people of Indonesia in their struggle for independence.
And part of the first-ever UN peacekeeping mission to help secure Indonesian sovereignty.
Ever since, Labor Governments have understood that Australia’s security and our prosperity depend on engaging with our region, as ourselves.
Investing in our capabilities – and investing in our relationships.
In times of profound change in our region and against the backdrop of global uncertainty, Australia under Labor has always had the courage and imagination to play a constructive and creative role.
That’s the approach our Government has taken, from day one.
Rebuilding our standing as a leader and partner in the Pacific.
Patiently and deliberately working to stabilise our relationship with China.
Deepening our economic engagement across South East Asia.
Forging new defence and security co-operation with our nearest neighbours, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea.
And giving our security and trade and energy partnership with India the long overdue investment and attention it deserves.
The Australian Labor Party is Australia’s oldest political party – and the movement which gave it life is older still.
Anniversaries like this – along with the work of Nick Dyrenfurth and the John Curtin Research Centre – remind us of the fullness and richness of the story to which we belong.
Yet the great creative tension of Australian Labor is that while we love our history, we are not hostages to it.
We are links in a long chain – but we are not shackled to our past.
We draw from it, we build on it and we learn from it.
As a junior member of the Scullin Government, Curtin had watched, in dismay and frustration, as the hopes invested in that Labor Government fell victim to events.
Its ambitions crushed by the Great Depression.
Its fate sealed by foreign banks and the state premiers.
For Curtin, who lost his seat in the landslide defeat that followed, a hard lesson of those years was that Labor could never again allow itself to be seen as ineffectual in times of economic crisis.
That’s part of what drove Curtin and Chifley to put the Commonwealth at the centre of tax and revenue. 
They understood that Australia could not meet the twin challenges of mobilisation and reconstruction as a disparate collection of states pulling in different directions.
And when you consider the big challenges and opportunities facing Australia today:
Building the new homes and infrastructure our suburbs and regions need. 
Securing the future of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Powering new jobs and industries through the energy transition.
Training our workforce and workplaces so that Artificial Intelligence is a creator of good jobs – not a threat to them.
None of that can be realised by one level of government on its own, or indeed by government alone.
It depends – as ever – on mobilising the talents and capacity of all Australians.
The world John Curtin knew and the nation he served belong to history now.
Yet the lessons of his life and legacy endure.
Because while the nature of global uncertainty evolves, this fundamental truth remains.
Australia cannot predict, or control the challenges we will face.
But we can determine how we respond.
We can choose the way we engage with our region and deal with the world.  
The stability and prosperity we build and defend with our partners, the peace and security we seek for ourselves.
And – above all – we can choose the nation we strive to build here at home.
An economy that rewards hard work and creates opportunity.
A society true to the values of fairness and aspiration that Australians voted for.
And a government worthy of the people we serve.
Repaying the trust that Australians have placed in us.
And living up to the example of courage and kindness that Australians set for us, every day.
That is the Labor way. That is the Australian way.
That is our way forward, for the future. 


CHEN JINING, SECRETARY OF SHANGHAI MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA: Welcome to Shanghai.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Thank you so much.
SECRETARY CHEN: Currently Shanghai is experiencing its rainy season, however this year’s rainy season seems to end a little bit early, the end of last month. So, you certainly claim some credit for the good weather, for bringing us a session. It is truly a great pleasure for me to meet with you, Honourable Prime Minister.
First of all, on behalf of the CPC Shanghai Municipal Committee, the Shanghai Municipal People’s Government, as well as the 24 [million] plus people in Shanghai, I would like to extend the warmest welcome to you and your delegation. Your return to the city after two years speaks volumes of the importance that you place on the exchanges and cooperation between Shanghai and Australia. China and Australia are important partners for each other; we are also key players in the Asia-Pacific region and significant forces in the multi-polarisation process of the world.
In recent years, under the strategic guidance of the two heads of states, the relationship between China and Australia have witnessed continuous improvement and strong momentum of development, a trend that is welcomed by both countries as well as the international community.
Over the past three years, President Xi Jinping has met Honourable Prime Minister three times. Both sides engaged in in-depth discussions on important issues of strategic as well as overarching importance to our bilateral relations. A lot of important consensuses have been reached. All of these have provided strategic guidance with continuous improvement and development of our bilateral ties.
Your forthcoming visit during your visit this time with President Xi Jinping will definitely further drive forward and enrich the bilateral relationships between the two countries. Shanghai stands as a very important city in overall cooperation and partnership between China and Australia. A very good example is that the trade between Shanghai and Australia actually accounts for one sixth of that of the bilateral trade between the two countries.
Over 1,400 companies from Australia have made investment, as well as set a presence and carried out operations here in this city. And vice-versa Shanghai has got more than 200 projects currently invested in Australia.
The city of Shanghai stands ready to play an even more significant role for the further development of the bilateral relations between the two countries under the strategic guidance of the two leaders. And I would also like to take this meeting as an excellent opportunity to first listen to you, Honourable Prime Minister, on your input and insights and ideas on how we can further deepen the collaboration between Shanghai and Australia.
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, Secretary Chen, it is indeed my great pleasure to be back here in Shanghai. This is my second visit to China as Prime Minister, but my eighth visit to China overall.  Shanghai is, of course, one of the world's great global cities. And when I first came here twice in the 1990s the area Pudong was very different, was very different indeed. There were farms where there are now a great metropolis.
SECRETARY CHEN: You can see the Pudong new area right across the river.
PRIME MINISTER: The development we can see across the river is symbolic of the extraordinary development that China has seen in recent decades, lifting literally hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and creating economic benefit for both the people of China, but also increased economic engagement with countries like Australia.
My last visit here was timed for the International Expo that was held here and Australia participated last year again with more than 250 exhibitors, 99 of which were here for the first time, showing the increased economic engagement between our two countries, and particularly here in the city of Shanghai. And my visit here will focus on furthering that economic relationship in trade in areas like climate change, steel decarbonisation, tourism, how we can improve the economic relationships even further from where we've come in the past few years.
My government very much values our relationship with China. We deal with each other in a calm and consistent manner, and we want to continue to pursue our national interests, and it is in our interest to have good relations with China. My visit here will enable us to have further frank and constructive dialogue, which is so important for relations between our two countries and to promote stability and prosperity in our region.
So, I thank you very much for your welcome. And it is, I think, extraordinary that when I arrived last night, one of the things that is very evident about this great city is the fact that this is a working river, and you can see the economic activity by just looking out the window.


I’m pleased to be here for an important discussion between Australian iron ore miners and Chinese steelmakers. I appreciate you taking the time to join me today.
Australia and China’s iron ore and steel sector partnership has contributed to both countries’ economic development for decades. 
Australian miners are reliable and stable suppliers of iron ore, responsible for almost 60 per cent of China’s iron ore imports. That iron ore goes into Chinese steel production which accounts for over 50 per cent of global supply. 
Trade remains a central pillar of our bilateral trading relationship, supporting jobs, investment and prosperity in both countries.
Steelmaking value chains are also responsible for 7 to 9 per cent of global emissions. Achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement will require the decarbonising of steel value chains, presenting an opportunity for Australia and China to progress our long-term economic interests.
Steel decarbonisation presents a range of challenges. What we need are enabling policy environments, extensive investments in research to develop new technologies and collaboration across academia, industry and government. 
Australia and China each have major stakes in how the decarbonisation efforts develop. As both countries cooperate to advance decarbonisation, we also need to work together to address global excess steel capacity. It is in both countries’ interests to ensure a sustainable and market-driven global steel sector.
I want to acknowledge the significant work underway in Australia and China to develop technologies and policies to achieve these goals. Some of which are already showing promising results.
Fortescue is progressing its ambitious green metals projects, including the hydrogen-based green iron pilot at its green energy hub at Christmas Creek in the Pilbara.
And Hancock is a core partner in research projects at the Australian Heavy Industry Low-carbon Transition Cooperative Research Centre on developing low-carbon processing technologies suitable for Pilbara ores.
But just as vital are efforts being progressed by Australian and Chinese partners.
Such as Rio Tinto’s partnership with Shougang to optimise its steelmaking processes.
And BHP’s initiatives with HBIS and Baowu, including the successful commercial scale direct reduced iron trial using Pilbara iron ores.
While Government has an important role to play, we know it will be industry that drives the major developments to decarbonise the sector.  
The Australian Government is committed to supporting these industry-led efforts.
I look forward to hearing your observations today.


It is such a pleasure to be with you in Shanghai today.
An event like this helps put not just a face on a profoundly important international relationship – but many.
I would like to thank all the hardworking staff of the Fairmont Peace Hotel – ably led by Australian general manager George Wee – for looking after us so well.
This hotel is an auspicious venue for Labor leaders. It was here in 1971, the year before he became Prime Minister, that Gough Whitlam marked his 55th birthday.
The celebration was, of course, part of an even bigger milestone – the historic first visit that laid the foundations for Australia’s relationship with the People’s Republic of China.
More than half a century on, it is a relationship that continues to evolve and grow, a relationship with a maturity that helps us overcome any challenges and seize the opportunities before us.
It is a relationship whose health and strength rests in no small part on your shoulders.
I’ve been delighted to have the opportunity to speak to so many of Australia’s business leaders here in China, and your Chinese counterparts.
Thank you for your leadership in driving such impressive growth in two-way business ties.
And for your contribution to a more stable and productive relationship between our two nations.
One of my Government’s priorities has been working hard with counterparts in China to stabilise ties and to build dialogue.
We are guided by a straightforward ethos: Co-operating where we can, disagreeing where we must, and at every step engaging in our national interest.
It is a policy framework that has enabled us to manage our differences wisely, and build on all the areas where we can and should work together, in the shared interest of both our nations.
That includes finding areas for co-operation as we decarbonise our economies and work with countries around the world to meet our Paris Agreement targets.
This is a task that will sometimes challenge us, but crucially, one that holds out such an extraordinary range of opportunities for us.
Australia has a long and proud story of providing energy to our region and the world. Now is our chance to continue that story with a new chapter, one in which our country takes its place as a renewable energy superpower.
I look forward to further discussions on these issues with China’s leaders tomorrow in Beijing.
The removal of impediments to Australian exports to China and the resumption of trade has already delivered significant benefits to communities in both countries – the result of a great deal of patient and deliberate work.
It was gratifying earlier this year to know that Australian produce was part of the enjoyment of Chinese New Year celebrations.
There were families in Shanghai and Beijing and beyond enjoying Australian beef together, friends exchanging gifts of Australian cherries, and toasting the Year of the Snake with the best wine in the world.
It is a success story that benefits everyone, from producers to consumers. So I am delighted that we have Australian beef and seafood on our tables today – and, thanks to Treasury Wine Estates and Penfolds, proudly Australian wine.
This is just part of the bigger success story that Australia can tell. It’s a story of a dependable trade partner backed by a strong, reliable economy.
It’s a story built not just on our abundance of natural resources, but on the strength of our greatest resource of all: our people in all their diversity of skill, talent and drive, including the many who are rightly proud of their Chinese heritage.
Put it all together and you have not just the strength right now, but the exciting prospects of our potential. A nation with the resources and the skill for a stronger, greener Future Made in Australia.
This brings benefits at home, and it brings benefits to our trade partners.
What is central is the dialogue of which you are all part. Dialogue leads to understanding and trade drives prosperity.
What really helps to deepen connection is the movement of people.
China is Australia’s largest market by spend, and second largest inbound tourism market by visitor numbers.
In the 12 months to March 2025 there were 860,000 trips to Australia by visitors from China, with a total spend in Australia of $9.2 billion.
Inbound travel from China has recently been growing at a faster pace than other markets.
And every Chinese traveller who visits our shores goes home with a better picture of who we are. We shouldn’t underestimate how much that matters in what we are building together.
And we have much to build upon – in terms of trade, finance, culture, history, and of course the international language of sport.
Yesterday, I had the pleasure of walking on the Bund with former Socceroos Kevin Muscat and Ross Aloisi, and a player from their team – Shanghai Port Football Club.
In his first year as club manager, Kevin led Shanghai Port FC to victory in the Chinese Super League.
A partnership producing real results.
What I feel when I look across this room is even greater hope for the future.
And if we’re looking for compelling place to talk about the future, we’re in it. Shanghai epitomises what is one of the truly remarkable stories of our time: the economic development of China.
It is a story that continues to be written, and you are helping to write it.
Shanghai’s importance as a hub cannot be overstated.
Crucially, many Australian businesses have selected Shanghai as their headquarters in China, including Rio Tinto, BHP, Fortescue, BlueScope, Macquarie, ANZ, CBA and NAB.
Last year, bilateral trade in goods between Australia and Shanghai was around $42 billion.
In terms of two-way goods, Shanghai would be our fifth largest trading partner – just behind South Korea and ahead of India.
It’s part of an important bigger picture of the high degree of complementarity our two economies enjoy.
Next Thursday will mark 52 years since our first trade agreement.
Last year, Australia’s two-way goods and services trade with China reached $312 billion, accounting for almost a third of Australia’s exports and representing 25 per cent of Australia’s total goods and services trade.
That is larger than our next three trade partners combined.
There is no fixed model for a stabilised relationship. Our job is to make sure that we manage our relationship so that we can contribute to regional and global peace and prosperity.
Dialogue advances co-operation and addressing our differences without allowing them to define us.
And none of this happens without you.
That is what so much of this comes down to. Amid the broad brushstrokes of trade negotiations and diplomacy.
It’s about the people-to-people connections and the networks that grow out of those connections.
It’s about your drive, your initiative, your ambition, and your vision.
It’s about the difference you make – and keep on making every single day.
Thank you.


XI JINPING, PRESIDENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: Prime Minister Albanese, welcome to China again and congratulations again on your re-election. Over the past three years, you and I have met three times. During these meetings we had in-depth discussions on the strategic, overarching issues critical to the direction of China-Australia relations, and we reached many common understandings. With joint efforts from both sides, the China-Australia relationship has rose from the setback and turned around, bringing tangible benefits to the Chinese and Australian peoples. The most important thing we can learn from this is that a commitment to equal treatment, to seeking common ground while sharing differences, pursuing mutually beneficial cooperation, serves the fundamental interests of our two countries and two peoples. No matter how the international landscape may evolve, we should uphold this overall direction unswervingly. In 2014 I paid a state visit to Australia, during that visit our two countries announced the establishment of a comprehensive strategic partnership. Now this partnership has entered the second decade. The Chinese side is ready to work with the Australian side to push the bilateral relationship further and make greater progress so as to bring better benefits to our two peoples. I will stop here first, now over to you.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well thank you, Mr President, and it is my pleasure to meet with you again here today. This is my eight visit to China, but my second as Prime Minister, and I appreciate very much your hospitality. When Premier Li visited Australia last year for our Annual Leaders’ Meeting, I was pleased he visited not only Canberra, but also Adelaide and Perth. And I know, President Xi, that you have visited every state and territory of Australia. I’m happy to be able to reciprocate Premier Li’s visit by visiting three cities here in China this week - Shanghai where I have been, Beijing here, and Chengdu, where I will travel tomorrow afternoon. In Shanghai yesterday, I was very pleased to meet with leading businesses from Australia and China, including important discussions on how we can tackle steel decarbonisation together. In Chengdu tomorrow I will look at where Australia has growing ties, particularly on medical technology and sports. Tomorrow I’ll also visit the Great Wall, where Australia’s Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, who of course, initiated the recognition of the People’s Republic of China when he came as Labor Party Leader in 1971. In Beijing today, I look forward to a constructive Annual Leaders’ Meeting with Premier Li, identifying opportunities for further practical cooperation in areas of shared interests, including steel decarbonisation. I note your comments in your opening remarks about seeking common ground while sharing differences, that approach has indeed produced very positive benefits for both Australia and for China. The Australian Government welcomes progress on cooperation under the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement, which has its 10th anniversary year.  As a direct result, trade is now flowing freely to the benefit of both countries and to people and businesses on both sides, and Australia will remain a strong supporter of free and fair trade. Today also, we will have after this the Australia-China CEO Roundtable. What that will do is provide a practical example of the benefit of business engagement. Australia values our relationship with China and will continue to approach it in a calm and consistent manner, guided by our national interest, which we regard very much as the relationship being positive, which is just that. It is in our national interest, and indeed in the interest of the region as well. It’s important we have the direct discussions on the issues that matter to us, and to the stability and prosperity of our region. As you and I have agreed previously, dialogue needs to be at the centre of our relationship, and I welcome the opportunity to set out Australia’s views and interests and our thinking on how we can maintain peace, security, stability, and prosperity in our region. And I look forward very much to another productive conversation with you today, both at this meeting, and I thank you as well for the honour that you have given myself and Ms Haydon, my fiancé, in the lunch that we will share afterwards as well. Xiè xie.


LI QIANG, PREMIER OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: Honourable Prime Minister Albanese, it is a great pleasure to meet with you in Beijing. Welcome to China. Please allow me to once again congratulate you on your successful reelection as Prime Minister. In the past three years, thanks to your personal efforts and the joint efforts of both sides, China-Australia relations have moved beyond a low point and returned to the right track of stability and development. Our pragmatic cooperation is brimming with renewed vitality and bringing real benefits to our two peoples. Mr Prime Minister, you have come to China at the start of your second term, I'm sure this will provide new momentum for our two country's cooperation and relations. Since we last met in October last year, a lot has happened in the world. The world economy sees growing instability and uncertainty. The development of all countries is faced with new challenges. Given such circumstances, China and Australia, as important trade partners, should strengthen dialogue and cooperation. The significance of us doing so is becoming more notable. This morning, President Xi Jinping met with you and you reached important understandings on deepening China-Australia relations. China would like to continue to work with Australia for more outcomes in cooperation across the board to deliver more benefits to our two peoples. I would like to exchange views with you on issues of common interests in an in-depth and candid manner. Thank you.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well, thank you very much, Premier Li, for warmly welcoming me back to your country. And the friendship which we have developed I think was shown by the fact that we caught up, some of our officials, waiting for us, to engage informally as well - and I very much appreciate that. Your visit to Australia last year was warmly welcomed and this is the third now Annual Leaders' Dialogue that we have had together and I look forward to welcoming you to Australia next year as well. During that visit, you came not just to our national capital of Canberra, but to Adelaide and to Perth as well, which was very warmly received. And I'm pleased that I am reciprocating by being able to visit, not just Shanghai and Beijing, but Chengdu tomorrow, which is important, to go to Western China as well. Since our last Annual Leaders' Meeting, we have continued to make very good progress together, stabilising our bilateral relations and developing our relationship. Trade is flowing freely. Our officials are engaging regularly on shared priorities, including on climate change and steel decarbonisation, where I hosted a very good meeting yesterday, and maintaining dialogue on areas where we disagree, but we won't allow those to define our relationship. Preparations are underway for ministers from both countries to hold our eighth Australia-China Foreign and Strategic Dialogue, and our fifth Strategic Economic Dialogue, as well as many more engagements of all levels of our governments. Mr Premier, today I look forward to exploring new opportunities for cooperation, including in areas of climate change, trade, tourism, and culture. Our people-to-people links are so important, as you will have seen when you were so warmly welcomed in Australia by the many -- some 1.4 million Australians trace their ancestry and their heritage proudly back to China. And that is a benefit to both of our countries because they provide a very real personal link between us. We'll also have opportunity to have frank and open dialogue, and that enables us to navigate issues that need to be discussed wisely. Australia remains committed to a stable and constructive relationship between our two nations. We value this relationship and my presence here so early in my second term, our Parliament will assume, it's meeting for the first time next Tuesday, one week away. and so I'm here before Parliament has been scheduled. I think that can be taken as a sign of the importance of the relationship. So, I thank you very much to you as host for the arrangements for what has been already a splendid visit to China, and I look forward to another constructive dialogue with you.


Well, thank you very much, Minister Wang, and to Premier Li, my friend, it is great to be here following up from the meeting that we had in Perth one year ago.
I want to also thank our co-chairs, Bran Black of the Business Council of Australia and Zhao Huan of the China Development Bank, for your leadership of what is a very important and distinguished group of businesspeople from our respective countries.
Thank you for bringing us together today and for sharing your valuable insights.
This roundtable is a symbol of co-operation – it is also a sign of ambition.
The co-operation that has delivered profound economic benefits for the people of both our nations and the ambition to build on those complementary strengths – and go beyond them.
To deepen and diversify our trade and business links.
To ensure our partnership takes in the full suite of our smart and skilled workforces and the innovation and technology that powers our modern economies.
For many years, the businesses represented here have been at the forefront of our two nations’ co-operation.
Building and strengthening connections, seeking out new markets and investing in relationships.
In your constructive engagement, you are ambassadors for Australia in China, and for China in Australia.
And all of you are ambassadors for this partnership as a whole.
For what our businesses and industries can achieve, working together.
The ten-year anniversary of the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement is an opportunity to reflect on the progress that we’ve made.
And in the leaders' dialogue that we've just had, we spoke about commemorating the 10 years on 20 December this year, and perhaps the business leaders can think about the best way in which we can do that in both venues in just a few months' time.
Since 2015, Australian goods and services exports to China have more than doubled.
And Chinese exports to Australia have increased by 80 per cent.
Australia is a great trading nation and China is Australia’s largest trading partner by far.
This is where the removal of trade impediments on Australian cotton, copper, coal, timber, hay, barley, wine, red meat and rock lobster has been such a boost for our farmers, growers and exporters.
Of course, it has also benefited China.
The industries that use Australian resources to build and power their growth.
Yesterday, at the Steel Decarbonisation Forum that was held, we had four very significant Australian companies speaking about the export of iron ore, meeting together with the world's largest steel producers here in China and speaking about how we in a practical way make a difference in lowering global emissions for the development of green metals. That is so important as we go forward.
The food manufacturers who count on high quality Australian produce.
And Chinese citizens who could sit down and celebrate the Year of the Snake with the best beef and wine that the world has to offer.
The resumption and the continued growth of trade in these areas is a reflection of the patient, deliberate and calibrated approach my Government has taken to stabilising the relationship between Australia and China.
That work continues, including today, with the first CEO Roundtable held in China since 2016.
A practical demonstration of the benefits of stabilisation generating greater engagement where it is in the interests of both of our nations.
It is an ongoing process with dialogue at its core, but the fact that you have education, finance, resources, different businesses, all represented here around this table, shows the extent to which it can grow going forward.
This dialogue is so important.
Government to government.
Business to business.
Dialogue builds understanding.
It enables us to express our differences and to manage them, without our relationship being defined by them.
Co-operating where we can, disagreeing where we must – and engaging in our national interest.
And that has been our Government’s approach.
Those opportunities for co-operation were a key part of the warm and productive discussions I had with President Xi, Premier Li and Chairman Zhao earlier today.
This is about building stronger ties where our national interests are aligned.
From trade and tourism, education and culture, to action on climate change.
For many sectors, China is Australia’s largest market:
Our largest source of overseas students.
A growing driver of our tourism industry.
Our largest export destination for iron ore.
And critical source of foreign investment, across the board.
It is important that in forums such as this, we can learn from shared success but also plan for common challenges:
The structural imbalances of global steel supply that we need to work together to address.
What we need do to maximise the economic opportunities of the global shift to net zero.
And how we can ensure the businesses represented in this room – from agriculture, resources, education, services, and beyond – have the confidence and certainty to invest in the new skills and technology that will underpin your future growth and productivity.
Getting this right – here and in Australia – will depend on policies that are shaped by your experience and your insights.
But my government believes unequivocally in free and fair trade as a driver of global growth, and I know the discussions that we've had today have been very constructive.
To that end, one of the great privileges of representing our nation on international visits is meeting with Australians who are achieving extraordinary things overseas.
People with the drive to commercialise a new idea, create a new market or build a new market.
Australians who have backed themselves to compete and succeed in the world.
People whose talent and capacity has benefited both our nations.
That thread runs from this room, all the way to Chengdu, where tomorrow we’ll be reflecting on the proud history and exciting future of Australia and China’s collaboration in medtech.
The company is a proud Australian company that is making a difference around the world and is an example of a great cooperation in technology and new industries that we can promote here to the benefit of both of our nations.
I do want thank the business community in Australia and acknowledge their support for an optimistic approach to global engagement and the determination to provide support for the government's agenda in prompting that optimistic vision.
And thank you for what you do to strengthen the bonds between our two great nations. So, the businesses from China. I thank you very much for your engagement and I think that this gathering will send a very important message back to Australia about the significance that we place as a government in this engagement and collaboration in the interest of both our nations, but also I think it's fair to say, in today's turbulent world, in the interest of global economic activity as well.
Thank you.


WANG XIAOHUI, SECRETARY OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA SICHUAN PROVINCIAL COMMITTEE: The Honourable Anthony Albanese MP, Prime Minister of Australia. And here, I would like to, together with the Governor, Shi Xiaolin, welcome you to pay a visit to Chengdu city. And first of all, on behalf of the Provincial CPC Committee as well as the Provincial People's Government, together with the Governor, Shi Xiaolin, I would like to express our warmest welcome to you and to your delegation. I understand that your flight just landed in this city, and here we are located in the Chengdu Municipality, which is the capital city, which is the fourth biggest metropolitan area and municipality in terms of population in China. Chengdu city has more than [Inaudible]. For the last fifteen years consecutively, Chengdu city has been ranked as the 12th in the list of the happiest cities to live in consecutively. Chengdu city is also a unique city in China, which has got the biggest number in terms of restaurants, cafe, tea houses, and also the mahjong houses. The city is also known as the city once you come, you always feel hesitated to say goodbye to. And your excellency, i sincerely wish you have a pleasant stay here. So your excellency, I just want to ask how do you feel about this city?
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Firstly, can I say Secretary Wang, thank you so much for the very warm welcome in all ways that we have had out here in Chengdu. I am the first Australian Prime Minister to visit since Bob Hawke, the Labor Prime Minister came here in 1986. So I'm the second Prime Minister to visit Sichuan and Chengdu. Sichuan Province, I know, has a state-to-state relationship with the state of Victoria in Australia. And I wanted to make sure on this visit to China that I came to Western China, to this province, to see the economic development and the exciting prospects of building our relationship between this state and Australia. This is a relationship with trade, education, tourism, medical technology that we'll look at tomorrow, as well as a relationship of people to people that we see through the familiar Australian Open signs that we saw on the way here for the tennis. The two-way trade between Sichuan and Australia is now worth over $5 billion, which is more than many countries that Australia has trading relationships with. And tomorrow when I visit Cochlear's facility here, it will be a great honour to me to see the benefit of the exchange and cooperation, making a difference to people's lives here in China, just as it's made a difference to people's lives in Australia. Yesterday, I had very productive and constructive meetings with President Xi, with Premier Li and with Chairman Zhao. And it was a way of us once again reaffirming that we've stabilised the relationship and we're developing new relations as well. When I hosted Premier Li in Australia last year for our Annual Leaders' Dialogue, Premier Li graciously agreed to the request that we have made to have two of your ambassadors, known as pandas, visit Adelaide and to replace the pandas who have been such an important, positive feature of building the relationship between Australia and this province in particular. And I thank this province for the arrival of our two newest guests in Adelaide, who have been so well received. I hope that my visit here encourages more Australian visitors to Chengdu, as well as to the province and to Western China. And I look forward to a productive discussion with you today, but conclude by saying thank you once again for the warm welcome.


VICKI REID, TENNIS AUSTRALIA: Good afternoon everyone. What an absolute pleasure it is to welcome you here today. My name is Vicki Reid and I will be your MC this afternoon. To begin, I would like to acknowledge the special guests who have joined us this afternoon. Their presence here today signifies the importance of this announcement. Please join me in extending a warm welcome to the Honourable Anthony Albanese MP, Prime Minister of Australia, and Ms Jodie Haydon. His Excellency, Mr Wang Xiaohui, Party Secretary of Sichuan. Her Excellency, Ms Shi Xiaolin, Governor of Sichuan. His Excellency, Mr Scott Dewar, Australian Ambassador to China. And His Excellency, Mr Xiao Qian, Chinese Ambassador to Australia. I'm so very proud to represent Tennis Australia here today. For many years, we have collaborated with the China Tennis Association and great partners in China to grow tennis within the region. To signify our continued collaboration, we have a special announcement and to make it, it is my pleasure to welcome Australian tennis legend, nine-time Grand Slam champion, John Fitzgerald.
JOHN FITZGERALD, FORMER AUSTRALIAN OPEN CHAMPION: Thank you, Vicki. Prime Minister Albanese, thank you for your continued support of our great sport. I can assure you it is very much appreciated. Party Secretary Wang, it's so nice to see you again. We met in Melbourne a few years ago and it's a great honour to be here with you today. Governor Shi, thank you for making us so welcome in Chengdu. The Asia-Pacific Wildcard Playoff is such an important, integral part of the Australian Open in January. We know that China's interest in tennis is growing and it is obvious that the future here is very great when a Chinese player succeeds at the AO, broadcast numbers go through the roof. It is so good to see some of your best young players here with us today. The Wildcard Playoffs have provided young talent like yourselves with a direct pathway to the Australian Open. It is my great pleasure now to announce that the AO Asia-Pacific Wildcard Playoffs will return to Chengdu on the 24th to the 29th of November this year in preparation for the 2026 Australian Open.
REID: Thank you, John. I would now like to welcome Party Secretary, Wang Xiaohui to say a few remarks.
WANG XIAOHUI , SECRETARY OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA SICHUAN PROVINCIAL COMMITTEE:The Honourable Anthony Albanese MP, Prime Minister of Australia, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. It is a great pleasure to gather here in the beautiful city of Chengdu and witness the 2026 Australian Open Asia-Pacific Wildcard Playoffs come back to Chengdu. First of all, on behalf of the [Inaudible] Committee and Provincial Sichuan Government, I would like to extend a warm welcome to Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and all of the distinguished guests and express our sincere gratitude to your long-term efforts and promoting exchanges of cooperation between Sichuan and Australia. President Xi Jinping has pointed out that sports are an indicator of social development and human progress and emphasise the core development of mass sports, competitive sports and the sports industry. Over the years, Sichuan has witnessed the vigorous development of these forces. In particular, we have successfully hosted major international events such as the 31st World University Games, the World Table Tennis Championships and the [Inaudible] Badminton Championships. Next year, and next month Sichuan will have hosted the [Inaudible]. These events have not only provided us experiments in hosting such events, but also showcased Sichuan's positive image worldwide. Tennis is sport that is loved by the people of Sichuan. We are happy to see that in Sichuan numerous internationally and domestically renowned tennis players have emerged, such as the 2006 Australian Open and Wimbledon Women's Double Champions, both of whom are from Sichuan. The 2024 Paris Games Women's Singles Champion once lived and trained in Chengdu. The 2025 Wimbledon Wheelchair Tennis Women's Singles and Doubles champion is also a Sichuan native. The achievements boosted Sichuan's presence on the global tennis stage. Today, Sichuan has more their 4500 tennis halls, over 170 tennis clubs and more within 2.2 million tennis enthusiasts. With the support and the influential power of the Australian Open, Sichuan will solidify its position on the global tennis map. In May 2023, during my visit to Australia with the Sichuan delegation, I had indepth discussions with Mr Craig Tiley, CEO of Tennis Australia on strengthening the training of your tennis players in Sichuan, holding Australian Open Wildcard Playoffs in Sichuan and also deepening the collaborations between the Australian Open and Chinese enterprises. The Australian friends responded to positively to these proposals. We believe that the hosting of this event will undoubtedly help the Australian Open gain a stronger foothold in China and showcase its unique drama. We're also [Inaudible] Sichuan to better reach the world and showcase the multifaceted manifestations of the Chinese path to modernisation. We will earnestly implement the important consensus reached between Xi Jinping and Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese, comprehensively deepening exchanges and cooperation between Sichuan and Australia, and promote mutual links between civilisations and mutual understanding between peoples through multiple channels while making every effort to organise the Wildcard Playoffs. We will use the playoff as a medium and bridge to promote more practical results. Here we cordially invite every Australian friend to explore Sichuan province during your visit this time, immersing yourself in the picturesque landscapes, to experience the splendour of the land of the province and savouring the vibrant daily life to appreciate the laid-back charm of Sichuan. Thank you.
REID: Thank you Mr Wang for your remarks. I would now like to welcome the Prime Minister of Australia to say a few words.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you so much Vicki. And it is great to be with nine-time Grand Slam Doubles and Mixed Doubles champion, Fitzy, John Fitzgerald, Australian legend, to announce that Chengdu will again host the Asia-Pacific Wildcard Playoffs for the Australian Open. And can I thank Party Secretary Wang for the very warm welcome, in all ways, that we have received here the afternoon and for the friendship between Sichuan Province, between Chengdu, this great city, and Australia. Can I thank also Governor Shi for her work in positioning Chengdu for this amazing opportunity. And I also want to acknowledge Mr Liu Miao for the Luzhou Laojiao sponsorship of the Australian Open. It is very important going forward, and it is such a presence now for a number of years, and that is a part of building the success. When I had the honour of meeting with President Xi yesterday, one of the themes of our discussions was improving people-to-people and cultural links between Australia and China, and I can think of no better way than through this sporting engagement, at what is the iconic sporting event in Australia, our Australian Open. The last Australian Prime Minister to visit Sichuan was Bob Hawke in 1986, and at that time he launched an annual Australia-China Tennis Challenge, a gesture of goodwill between our nations. Such relations continued through the Australia-China Exchange Tennis Program, a National Foundation of Australia-China Relations partnership with Victoria University and supported by Tennis Australia. And also the recent Australia-China Youth Tennis Festival held here in Chengdu by Kooyong International Tennis Academy. And so I'm looking forward very much to seeing the winners of the playoffs at next year's Australian Open and I thank very much the young players who are here - the stars of tomorrow. I know that my dear friend Glenn Busby from Kooyong comes here and coaches and spends a lot of time here each year, and he tells me that China will dominate the sport in the years to come - so I wish you all the very best. I am sure the young players here who've been coached, I saw a couple of nods before by Glenn Busby, my very bad backhand volley is not his fault.
REID: Thank you, Prime Minister, and thank you to all of our special guests for your remarks.


It is indeed a pleasure to be here with all of you in Chengdu to celebrate a partnership which is defined by innovation and co-operation.
And can I particularly acknowledge Professor Barry Marshall, who has made such an extraordinary contribution to Australia, to China and to the people of both of our nations.
And anyone who can just bring out casually a Nobel prize is not something that has happened to me before, standing next to someone.
It is an acknowledgement of the contribution that you have made, Professor, and I am very proud as Australian Prime Minister to be with you here today.
Australia is a world leader in medical research.
We take pride in the fact that breakthroughs made in Australia bring new hope and better health to people all over the world.
That’s why our Government invests in science and research – and we invest in the next steps as well.
Because it is medtech and medical manufacturing that enables us to turn the miracle of discovery into treatments and technology that change – and save – lives.
Australian and Chinese researchers, hospitals and universities are driving remarkable progress in every field of medical technology.
From the development of new vaccines, to prevention and early detection technology, to the work Cochlear are doing through the delivery of bionic ears. People in their millions, literally, are benefiting from Australia and China working together and learning from each other.
This is my 8th visit to China but my first visit to Western China. And I was determined to come here.
I was interested to learn that through more than fifty years of diplomatic relations, only one other Prime Minister of Australia has visited Chengdu and Sichuan.
It was back in 1986 when the great Bob Hawke visited a factory owned and operated by the Australian company Printonics.
It specialised in the assembly of printed circuit boards.
Technology that would prove pivotal to so much of the change and transformation we see here in modern China, at home in Australia and indeed around the world.
Four decades later, Chengdu remains central to our two nations’ sophisticated and evolving economic partnership.
A relationship where the exchange of services, knowledge, technology and science is every bit as important and valuable as our booming trade in food, fibre and resources.
A partnership that trusts in the talent and genius of our people.
Chengdu is home to inspiring examples of world-leading Australian and Chinese co-operation in science, technology, research and education.
And the governments of both our nations have a role to play in the success of this collaboration.
A responsibility to invest in our research and university partnerships.
And an opportunity to deepen our co-operation in medical manufacturing.
This also depends on continuing to break down barriers by supporting the free and fair trade that enables Australian medtech companies to access the market here in China.
Governments can build and expand this architecture of co-operation.
Yet ultimately it is people, who give it strength and life.  
Our partnership works because you work together.
You engage, share and shape ideas.
And the personal connections you create become generational and cultural links between institutions, enduring partnerships that grow and evolve to take on new challenges and seize new opportunities.
The success stories represented in this room are a source of tremendous pride for all Australians.
They also give us cause for optimism.
The positive difference all of you have made to people’s lives is powerful proof of what can be achieved when Australia and China work together in the best interests of all our citizens.
I should add as well that that is in the interest of the global community as well as our two nations.
Let us continue to build a healthier and more prosperous future, for the people of Australia and the people of the People's Republic of China.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, thanks very much. I'll begin by thanking you very much for the Acknowledgement of Country. And I also acknowledge something that I didn't have to do way back in 1996, which is acknowledge the First Nations people who now are not unusual [INDISTINCT] in our House of Representatives and the Senate and their families as well. A sign of the progress. I was elected in 1996. In 1996, there were – basically, a lot of blokes from similar backgrounds made up most of the House of Representatives and the Senate. As I look out here today, we are far more representative of the people that we represent and that is a very good thing. I do want to acknowledge Her Excellency, the Governor-General, not just for having us here today but for the extraordinary work that she's doing around the country, promoting inclusion, [INDISTINCT], explaining in detail what is behind the important institutions and protocols that a foundation of democratic traditions. It is important. It matters, these things. And it matters that people understand what the processes are. And Her Excellency is I think far beyond – with due respect to all of her predecessors, I haven't seen that before, someone going out of their way to explain exactly what these institutions are and why they're important.
To all the MPs and Senators elected to the 48th Parliament, firstly, congratulations across the board. It is such a privilege to sit either in the House of Representatives or the Senate. And something that none of us should ever take for granted. There are always far more people wanting to be in this position than can fulfil it, and it is an honour each and every day and we must always understand that whether it's 140,000 people in our electorate, voters, or whether it be in our respective State or Territory Senate ballots, we are really privileged and honoured. And we need to take that responsibility seriously as well, as I know all of you will. And overwhelmingly, regardless of who you represent, people put themselves forward for public office overwhelmingly for all of the right reasons, because they want to make a difference to this country.
Lastly, but certainly not least, most importantly, the families of those people who are here. Indeed, I acknowledge Jodie and Nathan for the sacrifices that they have made for me during what seemed like a lot longer than 37 days, the campaign. I've been going since 5 January. I will have a day off at some stage, not withstanding some of the commentary made from time to time. But at some stage, maybe before the end of the year, I will have some time off. But they give up a lot. As do all of the families of your representatives. Whether you're elected for the first time or on multiple occasions, your families won't see as much of you as they would like and you won't see as much of them as you would like. You come back – for the little ones, you come back home after a week sitting and there will be changes in your sons or daughters or the children that you care for and missing out on those moments is a big deal. It's a big sacrifice for them as well as for you, and today is about acknowledging the families and saying thank you to them as we go forward.
We have, I think, the privilege of loving and serving the best country on earth. Politicians are supposed to say that, I think, but I truly believe it. If you look right around the world, there's nowhere you'd rather be than right here in Australia and there's no democracy that is stronger than the democracy that we have here in Australia as well. And yet we are a nation of contradictions. We're a young nation, celebrating Federation in 1901, but we're an ancient continent. We have new communities who've come to Australia to make a better life for themselves and their families, and yet we're also privileged to live with the oldest continuous culture on earth, something that we celebrate and cherish. We are a country with youthful energy, but we actually are one of the oldest democracies on earth. Our institutions have served us well since the colonies came together in 1901 to serve the first Parliament, 48 parliaments ago now. And our democracy is incredibly strong. When I look at the various systems around the world, one of the things about compulsory voting, about the universal franchise, about the way that our electoral system functions, there is no controversy about any of the outcomes of our elections. We have - whether it's a resumption, a transfer from the 47th to the 48th Parliament, or whether government changes such as it did between the 46th and 47th Parliament - we have peaceful and respectful recognition of outcomes of our democratic elections, and that's pretty incredible. The work that the Australian Electoral Commission do and the work that our Parliament does in putting together the way that our electoral system works is something that is the envy of the world. It means that everyone gets the same vote. One voter, even if for excellency is chosen not to exercise hers, every citizen above the age of 18 gets to do that. That doesn't happen in a whole lot of countries, if you hit 50 per cent of people participating in a democracy, that's seen as a good outcome. And we should cherish that absolutely.
Our country continues to evolve. And over this term of Parliament, because of the changes that are there in the world, the new technology, artificial intelligence – what will the impact be on the nature of work, on the way that we function as a society? The changes that have occurred since I've been elected to the national Parliament. When I was elected, there wasn't an internet. There wasn't people flicking social medias, there weren't selfies. It was a lot easier in many ways. People actually wrote you letters, used pens, believe it or not, and put stamps on envelopes. It is very different today and we'll continue to engage and evolve in new ways, but the way in which we can engage with our constituents has never been more possible than it is right today with social media, with emails, with the instant connections that we can get with 24-hour news cycles, that is possibly showing this live. That did not happen. It should not be taken for granted. I remember when Sky News opened up in Parliament House. That was seen to be this absolute revolution, and it was. We shouldn't take it for granted, but we should make sure – just as our Parliament across the board took a decision at the end of last year to engage in a way that wouldn't have been envisaged before, of placing restrictions on social media access in order to keep people safe. That is an example of us responding to changes in society in order to reflect what are social needs.
I conclude with this point, and not just because my friend Katy Gallagher is sitting front and centre here. Canberra is a great city. It is not just our national capital. Enjoy it, enjoy it. Don't look down on it. It's the home to many public servants, but it's also the home to a thriving private sector. There is much to do here on a weekend. There are fantastic walks and fantastic institutions including the National Gallery, the National Museum, the National Arboretum. You can sleep at the zoo, all sorts of critters waking you up at night. There's fantastic restaurants and engagement here. Yes, music does come to Canberra. That didn't happen as much 30 years ago. It's a good thing. I encourage you to – if I can give a bit of advice – having the family here for two weeks over a sitting and enjoying the weekend here is something that will make things more explainable for your youngsters as well of what it is that you are doing. Don't hide from that. Let them experience it, let them serve. It's really important. And finally, to balance up that Canberra spiel, I can promise you it will get warmer. It'll get warmer, and they have real seasons here in Canberra and I wish you all the very best.
I look forward to seeing – I’m quite excited about Parliament resuming. I am a nerd when it comes to Parliament. I actually enjoy the institution of Parliament. It's important we all respect it, and it's important that we make the most of it on behalf of the people that we've been sent here to represent, and on behalf of the nation that we all want to cherish and serve. Thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I also acknowledge the Leader of the Opposition, and all my colleagues from across the Parliament;
Admiral David Johnston, Chief of the Defence Force;
Brigadier Philip Winter, representing the National President of the RSL;
Sharon Bown, representing the Chair of the Council of the Australian War Memorial;
Matt Anderson, Director of the Australian War Memorial;
Vice Admiral Mark Hammond, Chief of Navy;
Lieutenant General Simon Stuart, Chief of Army; and
Air Vice Marshal Harvey Reynolds, representing Chief of Air Force.
If only these walls could speak.
It’s a familiar figure of speech, one that holds within it the strength of our yearning to touch the past, to know all that has gone into building the present.
Close your eyes for a moment and let these walls speak to you.
Let them speak to you through the constellations of names arrayed upon them.
Let them tell you about generations of Australian sacrifice.
Of courage. Of resilience.
Of suffering and fear.
Not some lofty ideal, but stories of flesh and blood.
Of ordinary people facing the extraordinary.
Of victory and loss.
Of mateship tempered in the fire of combat.
And the light of humanity refusing to be dimmed even in the most pitiless darkness.
Like every cenotaph and war memorial across Australia, from the biggest city to the smallest country town and so many military cemeteries around the world, these walls tell us the strength of the Australian character and how it has been tested – and proven – time and time again.
Here we feel the weight of history, yet our hearts are lifted by all that Australians have stood against – and the difference they have made in the world.
Every name recorded at the Australian War Memorial reminds us of all we owe to every Australian who has served in our name.
Every Australian who fell.
Every Australian who came home, but never fully left the battle.
And every Australian who serves now.
Every military family that has shouldered the weight.
Every family that has known the pride of a loved one who has taken on the responsibility of the uniform.
And every family that has known that grief which has no ending, only a beginning.
Not every final resting place is mapped out in this atlas of loss.
It is a gulf we acknowledge with the extraordinary grave we are gathered before.
The tomb that is the final resting place for one of our fallen, brought home from the Western Front to stand for every Australian cast into the ranks of the unknown soldier.
We gather here on the eve of the new parliament for the same reason Parliament House and the Australian War Memorial face each other across our capital.
It is because the spirit of democracy that our national Parliament embodies is built upon the spirit that permeates these very walls.
A spirit that, even in the face of the fiercest challenge, never relinquishes what it means to be Australian.
A spirit that holds within it the determination that the power of the ballot – our collective voice as a people – must never yield to the power of the bullet.
Even in the depths of World War II, Australians in uniform voted.
Whether they were in besieged Britain, or in the jungles of Papua New Guinea, where ballot papers were airdropped to remote units, our soldiers, sailors and aviators kept the heartbeat of our democracy strong, a beacon of hope held high to a world darkened by tyranny.
Each day delivers a stark reminder of just how elusive peace can be.
Yet, as the walls around us remind us, peace is a cause we can never resile from.
Look to the constellations of names above us. Like the stars in the night sky, so many of those names – and the lives they stood for – are so distant from us now, yet their light touches us still.
Even as the late afternoon gathers our land in shadows, it is a light upon which no darkness will fall.
Like an eternal flame of the heart, we tend the fire of memory so that its glow touches generations to come.
And we keep returning to three words as perfect in their simplicity as they are profound in their power:
Lest we forget.


I acknowledge the people of the Yolngu nation, their elders, leaders and families who have made such an extraordinary contribution to Australia.
In particular, I acknowledge the Gumatj clan whose lands we are meeting on today.
It is an honour to be back here at Garma for a fourth time as Prime Minister and to join so many of my colleagues and all of you in celebrating ‘25 years of Success’.
From humble beginnings, Garma has grown and transformed beyond even the extraordinary vision and imagination of its founders.
But the generous, egalitarian and welcoming spirit of those early days is as strong and proud and warm as ever.
I grew up in a part of Australia different in almost every way to where we stand.
Yet like so many others here, when I come to Garma, I feel at home.
There is something universal in the joy of children performing their first bunggul.
The pride of their families watching on.
And people from all backgrounds and walks of life, gathered to learn, side by side.
Celebrating the unique privilege we have as Australians to share this continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
Each of us enriched by the presence of 60,000 years of art, ceremony, knowledge and unbroken love of country.
Garma teaches us, it inspires us and it challenges us.
Because this is a place for ideas, ambition – and accountability.
Where we learn from the past, are honest about the present and ‘look up to the future’.
This gathering was brought forth in hope – and that hope endures.
Because the hope Garma draws on - and offers - is not a passive emotion.
It is not the hope that waits for something to turn up, or someone else to fix it.
The hope Garma gives us is deeper and stronger than any of that.  
It is light and heat.
It is the fire of purpose and urgency.
An optimism and determination driven by the understanding that real and lasting change is not just possible, it is vital.
That is why, when I came here last year, I outlined our Government’s commitment to a new way forward.
Putting a new focus on economic empowerment.
Recognising – as Djawa says – that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are ‘economic beings’.
Workers and small business owners and entrepreneurs who make a significant contribution to Australia’s national economy – and our international trade.
We want to build on this strength – and grow beyond it. 
This is why Minister McCarthy and Senators Jana Stewart and Dorinda Cox are consulting with First Nations businesses to help inform the discussions at the roundtable we’re convening in Canberra later this month.
Our Government also wants to work with communities as economic decision-makers, to unlock the true potential of their land and their endeavour.
Beyond passing transactions to lasting partnerships that create and share wealth.
This depends on seizing and owning the opportunities of clean energy and critical minerals, in this decade.
Embracing projects and industries that can power long term prosperity.
Delivering the economic sovereignty that is fundamental to self-determination.
And securing the future of community controlled organisations.
This new approach requires new partnership.
Today, we bring it into being.
Today, I announce the First Nations Economic Empowerment Alliance, the Coalition of Peaks and our Government have established a new Economic Partnership.
This builds on our commitment to the Closing the Gap Agreement, to its call for a new way of doing business and to the principle of shared decision-making.
Working with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people right around our nation to boost skills and education, create jobs and back businesses. 
Empowering traditional owners to advocate for infrastructure, housing and energy projects on their land to strengthen their communities and to build up their equity beyond the land itself.
Having the confidence and the capability to deal with state and territory governments.
And - critically – to engage with business and the private sector as well. 
Partnering with private capital and institutional investors from the outset.
So companies and communities can come to government as partners, putting forward projects that are ready to go.
These principles of community benefit are at the centre of our Future Made in Australia agenda and our energy policy.
Today, we are opening-up $70 million in funding to help get First Nations clean energy projects up and running.
This is about renewable energy generating good jobs in regional and remote Australia.
And making sure that people in some of the sunniest places on this continent don’t have to rely on diesel generators to light and power their homes.
We have made a start - but there is more to do.
We must end the stalemate that arises when Native Title Organisations with little in the way of back of house, or legal and commercial expertise and are expected to negotiate with multinational firms.
This is why the first priority for our new economic partnership will be to reform the funding model for Prescribed Bodies Corporate, so that it delivers meaningful participation for communities and timely decision-making for investors.
Today I announce our Government will provide $75 million in additional funding to support Native Title Holders to secure better deals, drive faster approvals and deliver a real and lasting economic legacy for communities.
This is the tone and the standard we want this partnership to set, from the very start.
Pragmatic action that brings economic development, ownership and equity to communities.
Not doubling-up on advice, or getting in the way of processes that are working.
But cutting through confusion and delay with new focus and new momentum.
This partnership is also about government making better use of the capital and equity in special investment vehicles, such as the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund and the Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
As well as enhancing the work of Indigenous Business Australia and the Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation.
So communities across Australia, whether native title holders or not, can draw on their knowledge and aspiration to create jobs and build equity.
All of this, driving to delivery.
Delivery is our Government’s defining priority.
Repaying the trust people have placed in us, by delivering the commitments Australians voted for.
This is what Australians expect and deserve from their Government.
That accountability, that duty of delivery is every bit as important and relevant here in East Arnhem as it is in Western Sydney.
Because the policy agenda our Government took to the election was for all Australians, including Indigenous Australians.
Boosting wages, cutting taxes and protecting penalty rates means Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people earn more and keep more of what they earn.
We are investing in bulk-billing, expanding mental health services, opening new urgent care clinics and cutting the cost of medicines to strengthen Medicare, everywhere.   
We are building new child care centres where they are needed most.
Delivering fair funding for every government school in every state and territory.
Making Free TAFE permanent, nationwide.
Cutting student debt by 20 per cent and opening new university hubs in the regions and outer suburbs.
Because we know education opens the doors of opportunity for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students.
Of course, there are other areas that demand a different, dedicated approach.
This week’s report from the Productivity Commission underlined that.
The challenges may be different – but few of them are new, or unknown.
Most are old and far too familiar.
Yet too many years and too many words have been spent seeking new ways to describe old difficulties.
Or worse, looking to manage expectations and moderate ambitions.
So at the beginning of our second term, let me make this crystal clear:
Reports and reviews have their place – but they are not a substitute for results.
Creating a process matters – but it is not the same thing as making progress.
Delivery is the standard by which all of us must measure ourselves.
Across every level of government.
In the public service.
And in organisations and services entrusted by community.
This is what drives me, Minister McCarthy, our Special Envoy for Remote Communities Marion Scrymgour, and each and every one of our colleagues:
Investing in what works.
Ownership.
Partnership.
Empowerment.
Building trust.
Working together to close the gap.
So more children are born healthy.
More young people grow up with opportunity.
More women live in security.
And Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people everywhere have a foundation on which they can build a good life for themselves and their families.
That is why we promised to abolish the failed CDP and replace it with real jobs, proper wages and decent conditions.
And on the 31st of October, the CDP will be gone for good, nationwide.
Already, the first round of our Remote Jobs and Economic Development program has delivered 650 new jobs.
Today I announce the second round will deliver another 800 jobs, in 160 projects.
We promised to train an additional 500 First Nations health workers.
All 500 are now enrolled - and 140 have already graduated.
The next generation of Indigenous Health Workers and Community Care Officers.
Last year, our Government made a generational investment in remote housing in the Northern Territory.
Since 2022, 685 new homes have been completed.
And our 10 year agreement is delivering up to 2,700 homes in the NT.
Tackling overcrowding and creating local jobs.
And in the years ahead, we can pick up the pace of construction.
In February this year, we promised new action to cut the cost of 30 household staples for families in remote communities.
And to strengthen the supply chains that bring these essential goods to community stores.
Today, in Wilcannia and Kintore.
On Croker Island.
In 76 community stores across Australia, the price of everything from flour and tea to tinned fruit and toothpaste is down, significantly.
In the year ahead, we will expand this program to 152 stores.
As long as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have loved and cared for this continent, they have known that water is life.
Yet when we came to government in 2022, so many people in remote communities across Australia did not have access to safe, clean or reliable drinking water.
We have been working side by side with locals to change this.
33 remote water projects are on track to bring clean and reliable water to 25,000 people.  
Three years ago, in places like Warburton and Jigalong the water was unfit to drink.
Soon it will be clean enough to deliver dialysis on country.
This is transformative for communities and homelands.
Which is why we will be funding another 6 remote water projects, delivering for a further 9,000 people.
Including right here on the Gove Peninsula, with overdue upgrades at Gunyangara.
Across our cities and regions, more than 40,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students have enrolled in Free TAFE.
Our Government wants people in remote communities around our nation to have access to the life-changing benefits of vocational education and training.
Today I announce we will fund and deliver Mobile TAFE.
Utes and trailers that will enable teachers to take skills on the road and train the next generation of mechanics, carpenters, plumbers and workers in the Aboriginal community controlled sector.
We will provide $31 million to deliver this mobile training.
In partnership with community controlled organisations, states and territories.
So that instead of communities relying on drive-in, drive-out workers to build and maintain the new homes we are delivering.
Or to deliver vital health care in the 95 centres we are upgrading.
Locals get that training.
And instead of people having to move away from home to prepare for a career in mining or agriculture, construction or the care economy.   
We will bring skills and jobs to communities.
Hands-on training, on country.
This all about tangible, meaningful change in remote communities.
So people can have a secure roof over their head.
Put food on the table.
Trust water from the tap.
Get help if their child is sick.
Learn a trade, gain a qualification.
Know the dignity of hard work for fair pay.
Back themselves to start a small business or build wealth from a lasting stake in a big project.
The positive impact of these programs reaches far beyond the families and communities whose lives they change.
Every example of delivery, every one of these success stories, reminds us that progress is possible.
Delivery is about repaying trust – and building it.
Pushing back against those who only ever talk in terms of cost or waste or problems without solutions.
Those who choose the cheap politics of division over the patient work of lasting change.
Or who seek to turn the grace and generosity of a welcome to country into a political weapon.  
Culture wars are a dry gully. They offer us nothing, they lead us nowhere.
The way forward is to invest in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, trust in their aspirations and draw from their knowledge.
Because when we lay these strong foundations together, there is no limit to what we can build.
I know there are members of the Yoorrook Justice Commission here at Garma this weekend.
Their Commission has spent the last four years recording the testimony of thousands of people across Victoria.
Reflecting on the wrongs of the past, sharing the pain their families and ancestors suffered, as a result of dispossession and discrimination. 
Policies and practices built on exclusion.
By neglect and by design, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were cut off from the nourishment of culture and country.
From the fullness of their history, the wealth of their land and waters.
From their rightful, equal place in our economy and society.
From the justice and opportunity that every Australian deserves.
And from the dreams and aspirations that every parent holds for their child.
As a nation, we are still coming to terms with the full truth and toll of this exclusion.
Even as we continue on the long journey of understanding our past, we must meet our responsibility to the future.
We must seize and harness the power of inclusion.
The sense of belonging that comes from having a stake in the economy, being embraced by society and equal in the law of the land.
Yunupingu once said, the key to any Yolngu’s person future is finding a part to play.
“To be dedicated to that work, to feed a child’s brain with knowledge, to arm that child with the tools for life, to make a home, to feed your family.”
That is a universal and enduring truth – a rock that stands against time. 
For Yolngu, for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and for all Australians.
Serving as your Prime Minister is the great honour of my life.
The privilege of Government is the chance to serve this nation – and to change it, for the better.
This is a privilege that belongs to every Australian.
Because part of what makes this the best nation on earth is that each and every one of us recognise our collective responsibility to make it even better.
Our collective responsibility - and our shared opportunity.
Because when we broaden the circle of Australian fairness and deepen the meaning of Australian social justice, we are stronger for it.
When we include more people in the opportunities of our economy and the promise of our society, we are better for it.
When we embrace the fullness of our history and culture, we are richer for it.
When we draw on the genius and creativity, the courage and resilience, the compassion and love of country that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people live every day, we are smarter and braver for it.
That is why closing the gap is a challenge all of us must meet.
And economic empowerment is an opportunity all of must seize.
This is a chance to mobilise the talent and wisdom and vision of every part of our country.
To fulfil our national potential by ensuring every citizen has a real and equal chance to realise their potential.
For Australia to be our best by ensuring every Australian has the opportunity to be their best.
I said earlier that coming to Garma feels like coming home.
Every year, when the time comes to leave, I always go with my determination renewed.
After a while the red dirt comes off your shoes - but the inspiration this place provides never leaves you.
This year Garma is dedicated to ‘standing firm’.
The Government I lead, is proud to stand with you.
To work with you.
And to walk with you, side by side, to a better future.


Eighty years ago, Prime Minister Ben Chifley began his address to the nation with a sentence of perfect simplicity – and infinite power:
Fellow citizens, the war is over.
The signing of the surrender was some weeks off, but the darkness that had engulfed the world – and made its last stand in the Pacific – was at last lifted.
Here in Sydney – as they did in towns and cities across Australia – crowds poured into the streets. They sang and danced amid a joyous blizzard of paper.
Chifley, who had seen his friend and predecessor John Curtin worn down by the gravity of war leadership, turned his words to all who had fought the darkness – but not lived to see the light.
"Let us remember those whose lives were given that we may enjoy this glorious moment and may look forward to a peace which they have won for us.
Let us remember those whose thoughts, with proud sorrow, turn towards gallant, loved ones who will not come back. …  Nothing can fully repay the debt we owe them nor can history record in adequate terms their deeds".
Chifley spoke, too, of the home front, the men and women who had “performed miracles of production … so that the battle of supply could be won”.  
Between us and that extraordinary day, eight decades now stretch. At this distance, the story of World War II has become set in our memories.
The Allied victory over tyranny has, in retrospect, taken on a feel of inevitability.
Part of the debt we owe to all who served our nation is to remind ourselves how close history came to taking a different path.
And to remember and honour every Australian – and every friend and every ally – who gave everything to ensure it did not.
Across Europe and North Africa.
Across Asia and the Pacific, and even across our own shores.
We think of all the stories of courage. Of resilience and exhaustion, of fear and elation, and an endless longing for the home that so many never saw again.
These are not stories rendered in bronze or marble, but written in flesh and blood.
Stories of ordinary people facing the extraordinary.
Facing loss, securing victory.
Stories of mateship tempered in the fire of combat.
We think of all we owe to every Australian who served in our name.
Every Australian who fell, and every Australian who came home but could never leave the battle.
Every family that felt the pride and weight of a loved one who put on the uniform. Every family that knew the grief that had no ending, only a beginning.
As we gather in the very place so many Australians celebrated that day, we reflect on what victory meant – and what it cost.
Every life and dream and future swallowed in that vortex of madness and cruelty, from every battlefield and every burning city, from the prisoner of war camps to the unprecedented horror of the concentration camps.
These were nightmares made real – not by monsters but by human beings in a grotesque perversion of humanity.
Yet, as we feel that weight, our hearts are lifted by every Australian who stood against it.
Amid the shadows of war, the power of their courage and the strength of their character is a light that is a beacon to us still.
They showed us what it is to remain true to ourselves, no matter what.
They showed us what it means to stand shoulder to shoulder with friends and allies.
And together, they turned the tide.
As we stand here today, think of everyone who gathered 80 years ago.
Think of the noise of their elation.
And, hanging in the air just beyond the sound of their happiness, the silence of those who never came home.
A silence that touched every corner of our continent, from the biggest city to the smallest country town.
As we do, we return to another sentence whose simplicity is matched only by its power:
Lest we forget.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Well, I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting and pay my respect to Elders past, present, and emerging. And I thank all of you for not just participating today, but for the work – I actually watched you yesterday, Danielle, the questions, welcome to our world. And the fact that many of you have participated either in the forums that we've had, and we've had more than 40, we've had more than 900 submissions. And what that shows is that there's an appetite for ideas. And we all know here in this room that the job of reform is never done. So, this is an opportunity over the next three days to have your input, have your dialogue with each other as well, as well as with the Government.
And I want to acknowledge the work that Jim's done in putting this together. This was a lot of hard work, I've got to say, has occurred between him. And I want to also acknowledge our officials who work so hard, in PM&amp;C and Treasury and Finance in particular for the work that's been undertaken over the past weeks. We, of course, had a result that we found acceptable on May the 3rd. We have an agenda that we were elected on. It's not the limit of our ambition. And one of the things that I hope defines the Government that I'm so proud to lead is that we're an inclusive government, we are open to ideas from business, from unions, from civil society, from academics, right across the board. The other thing that I hope defines our Government is a newfound respect for the public service, and that we actually want to encourage ideas to come forward. And that is something that will be important as well.
My Government is also, I think, defined by our optimism. I think there's nowhere in the world you'd rather be than Australia with the natural advantages that we have, the access to the best solar resources in the world and one of the best wind resources. The fact that we have everything under the ground that will power the global economy in the 21st century is so important as well. Our greatest asset, of course, is our people. The fact that we have diaspora from everywhere in the world that connects us up in a human way is something that is an enormous asset for us, and something that I find right around the world, wherever I am, there's someone where the connection to Australia. And we shouldn't take that for granted. We should see that as an asset that we can seize. The fact that we're located in the fastest growing region in the world in human history is another great asset. We think about the changes that are really shaping the world today. We have the biggest revolution since the Industrial Revolution with clean energy. We have a revolution that is less certain as well, artificial intelligence and new technology, the impact of that on the nature of work, on the economy and the way that we function as a society as well. The transformation in our region is obviously really critical as well. We did the report, the Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040, that really identified how undercooked we are in places like Indonesia and India and other nations to our north as well. And that's one of the reasons why the business community have played such an important role with the forums. Most recently, the delegation that Bran led to China as well. It was so important for us, our major trading nation, but one in which there enormous opportunity going forward.
So, these three days are going to be really important. It's about recognising challenges, but more importantly it's about grasping opportunity. And that is a big part of our agenda though, is how does our economy become more productive, more resilient as the changes that inevitably occur. So, a big focus, of course, of our Government is on delivery. And this is part – one of the things that you'll focus on, no doubt, over the coming three days is on delivery and how we, for example, in areas like housing, the Government has a big objective, 1.2 million. You don't have a target if you're not going to be trying to get there. We think we can get there. And we can get there by making sure that we remove some of the impediments which are there. How do we identify them, – those impediments aren't just planning, of course, they're skills, they're labour impediments as well – as we go forward. There'll be proposals that – what I've said is three parts, is the way that I'd like to look at the outcomes over the next three days. There'll be things that we can do immediately that Jim and Katy can take to the Cabinet processes in coming days, literally, and say, 'righto, this is a good idea, we can get this done.' There'll be things that feed into our Budget process, including MYEFO at the end of the year, but then the Budget next year. One of the advantages that we had in the timetable – I must say, it was a bit of a relief, I'm sure to Jim and Katy as well as myself, that post May 3, we weren't sitting down and doing a Budget, which is the advantage of doing it on March 25th. But there'll be things that need to feed into that process and then there'll be other agendas. Artificial intelligence, I don't expect that you will solve all of those issues in the next three days, but what you will have is ideas and input that will shape that agenda and shape that public discourse as well. Even though this won't be broadcast live, the nature of the Cabinet room, the ideas that have been generated already will be the subject of discussion. So, one of the things that I've said is that we are focused on delivery and getting things done, but how things are done is also important. I think that political change, whether it's in the economy, social policy or the environment, is likely to be more successful and more entrenched and more lasting when people come with us on that journey. And that's why this engagement is important as well. Seeing as well that obviously – I would be shocked if everyone in this room agreed with each other. In fact, it would be – we may as well not have it, if that was the case. Because then you wouldn't, by definition, have a contest of ideas, which is what we're interested in. But there are a range of things where clearly the national interest should override sectional interest. And that's the other thing we're looking for, for people to, if you like, take off your hat that you're wearing specifically and to look at, okay, what's the national interest here? How do we progress economic growth in a way, as well, that is not the end in itself, it's about lifting living standards of Australians.
That's what it's about, lifting people up. We are quite proud of the effort and I think that Jim and Katy in particular deserve extraordinary credit for the fact that we meet a time where our economy is growing, where unemployment fell last week down to 4.2, where inflation has been got under control, where we've had three interest rate decreases so far this year and where real wages have grown. That's the objective here. There are some economists, perhaps some in this room, who thought that you couldn't get any inflation down without getting unemployment up. Well, that's not my Government's way. My Government is focused on looking after people on the economic journey. And with that, I thank all of you very much for your participation over the next three days. I'll welcome you all to The Lodge tomorrow night for a less formal gathering and hopefully you can come along there. Pretty informal dress by the way, and all that, informal activity, expect a social occasion and hopefully by then you're even friendlier and more engaged than you are at this time at the beginning of this process. And I'll hand to Jim.
JIM CHALMERS, TREASURER: For the Queenslanders here, informal dress means thongs to us. Don't kick us out.
PRIME MINISTER: It's a bit cold here, just to point that out.
TREASURER: I want to add my thanks to the Prime Minister’s. You’re all contributing your experience and your expertise in the service of the national economic interest, and we are very grateful to you for that. I also want to thank the PM – for his introduction and for his support for this effort since he first announced this Roundtable ten weeks ago today. If there’s a defining characteristic of the Government he leads it’s that it is considered and consultative. We share his belief that the best progress we can make, is the progress we make together. From the outset, he’s been clear that this is about writing the next chapter on economic reform, and I want to acknowledge the leadership he’s shown in getting us here. Already there’s been a very intensive period of consultation. A ‘boardroom blitz’ with dozens of business leaders, union leaders, over forty ministerial roundtables, almost 900 submissions from across the country, discussions with everyone here.
The appetite and ambition have been really encouraging. Again, I couldn’t be more grateful for that, because it’s helped put us in a good position for the coming days. Some of you have been in this cabinet room before, for others it’s your first time. I wanted to tell you why we chose this room, not because we want to usurp the role of cabinet and ministers. Not to take decisions for them, but to inform them. We chose it to keep the numbers focused and the conversation flowing. We chose it because we want you to grapple with the same sorts of issues and trade-offs and opportunity costs, we grapple with almost every week, as a group. And because it was in this room in one of the first cabinet meetings after the election that we decided to put productivity at the very core of our second term agenda.
The timing for this gathering couldn’t be better, the responsibility couldn’t be bigger. In fact, it’s hard to recall a time when the balance between opportunity and uncertainty was so finely poised as it seems now. Between the progress we’ve made and the productivity we need to sustain it in uncertain times. We’ve had four major economic shocks in less than two decades. What used to be punctuation points marking the end and beginning of long periods of calm has become a near permanent state of upheaval. At the same time as the bigger backdrop is being shaped by big challenges and uncertainty on the horizon in areas like energy, demography, industry, technology and geopolitics that were sketched out so starkly in our Intergenerational Report. We are realistic about the impact of all of this but optimistic too. In this world of churn and change we like Australia’s chances. We’re not complacent by any means, but the progress we’ve made together in the past few years does give us confidence.
Last week was the perfect illustration: On Tuesday, a third interest rate cut in six months because of the progress that’s been made on inflation. On Wednesday annual real wages growing for the seventh consecutive quarter, the strongest growth in five years. On Thursday, unemployment ticked down and 25,000 new jobs. Australia’s performance sets us apart, but we’re not satisfied, we need to do more and we need to do better and we will. That’s why the discussions here matter, over the next three days. It’s why the decisions taken here matter, over the next three budgets. But it’s the efforts and enterprise of people outside this room that have played and will continue to play the decisive role. It’s for them that we need to make the most of this defining decade – to build for them a new generation of prosperity.
Our progress in the near term, our ability to get on top of the cyclical issues in our economy, gives us the time and space and platform to attend to the bigger more persistent structural issues. As the PM and I both said at the National Press Club: We are proud of the progress we’ve made, we are focused primarily on delivering what we took to the election, but that’s not the limit of our ambitions that is the foundation of our ambitions. We have three clear objectives. Most importantly, to make our economy more productive over time, because that’s the best way to lift living standards and make people better off. To make our nation more resilient in a more contested world. And thirdly, to build on the budget repair we’ve begun, to make it more sustainable.
We have filled this room with experience and expertise. We have opened that door to you and opened our minds to your ideas. Twenty-three core attendees, and twenty-five session-specific attendees, from business, government, economics and academia, the union movement and civil society. As I said: please consider this as three days to inform three budgets – and beyond. To make the most of this opportunity we need your concrete ideas, we need you to be specific. We need to be able to pay for them. We need you to be willing to test them with others in this room. We need you to be willing to compromise and find common ground. This is all about building consensus and building momentum. Which means going beyond our own narrow, sectional or commercial interests and serving the national economic interest. This is an ambitious group, an ambitious government, an ambitious agenda.
Global uncertainty surrounds us, big economic challenges confront us, and our ambitions must meet this moment. Broadly, we’re looking to build consensus around three types of outcomes: Clear reform directions – areas where there’s momentum and broad agreement on the direction of travel even if unanimity isn’t there yet. Specific reforms – the handful of changes we could all agree on now. And ongoing priorities – where there’s appetite in the room for further work. Over these three days I’ll try to keep it focused, keep it constructive, and keep it flowing.
I’ll provide some opening remarks for each session which will help to set up our conversation before inviting contributions from around the table. Michele is kicking us off today. Danielle tomorrow. Jenny on Thursday. After hearing and testing your ideas, I’ll try to draw the main threads together. As we move through the next three days, I would appreciate it if you could keep one thing front of mind. We don’t just want to know what you’d do if you were us. We want to know what we can do together, and what your contribution will be to that bigger more ambitious effort. If there are solutions to the big challenges we face, I’m confident all the people in this room can help us find them. With that, I’ll thank the Prime Minister, I’ll thank the media, and shortly we’ll go to Governor Bullock.


When it comes to talking about Building Regional Australia’s Future, it’s hard to find a more fitting place than Wagga Wagga.
It has a history of ambition and bold vision. In the lead-up to Federation, the people of Wagga put their city forward to be the capital of our new nation.
It remains a place of energy and ambition, a city that plays a key role in the security of our nation – from the paddocks to the barracks.
A city infused with the spirit with which we must look ahead, knowing that while success is never guaranteed, we have what we need to achieve it.
We come together in a time of significant global economic uncertainty, but also what – for our nation – is a moment of profound opportunity.
And so much of that opportunity begins in regional Australia.
I thank News Corp for bringing us together to continue the ongoing conversation that is Bush Summit.
The communities that make up regional Australia are as diverse as our landscapes.
Each with its own challenges and opportunities, each one powered by the greatest resource possible – its people.
Everything I talk about today is a reflection of our Government’s commitment to all Australians, regardless of where they live.
And it is informed by one incontestable fact: When regional Australia does well, the Australia does well.
To build Regional Australia’s Future, we need to make it easier for younger generations to stay and to build their lives in the communities they grew up in.
That's something that I'm very conscious of.
I had and aunt and uncle at Halfway Creek in between Coffs and Grafton, and every one of their children would come down to Sydney when they finished school to undertake work and would stay where I lived as a young boy with my mum and our grandparents.
Wherever I go in Regional Australia, one of the things that is a recurring theme is that they want people to be able to stay there, for families to be able to stay in the communities that they grew up in.
One of the reasons why we are so committed to our $43 billion Homes for Australia plan is to make it easier for people to buy their own home. And that's why just this week we brought forward the start date for the 5 per cent First Homeowner Deposit Scheme from 1st of January to the 1st of October
This will open doors metaphorically and literally.
The scheme will make it possible for the average first home buyer in Wagga to save the deposit in a couple of years, rather than the nine years it would take to save a 20 per cent deposit.
They will save $27,000 in mortgage insurance, and pay up to $170,000 towards their own home rather than sending it out the door as rent.
We're helping people get into their own home sooner.
Since coming to office, the Government has helped over 38,000 first home buyers in regional areas to buy a home.
Current income caps will be removed and price caps will be increased in nearly all regional areas across the country, making it even easier for regional Australians to buy a home in their area.
We’re also building a brighter energy future for households, businesses and community organisations with our Cheaper Home Batteries Program.
Not only do batteries reduce electricity bills permanently for those people who then use that to store energy from the solar panels in their home, they also reduce costs for everyone because they reduce peak demand -making an enormous difference and making our electricity grid more stable.
And this region is spearheading the way.
Indeed, the Riverina is in the top 10 per cent nationally, with households in and around Wagga installing batteries at a rate five times more than the electorate of Wentworth.
When you look at the electorates around Australia, it is regional Australia that are all in the top 10.
In NSW, Gilmore is first, Richmond is second on the far north coast, and Page is third around Grafton, Casino and Lismore.
It is regional Australia that are leading this change because it makes an enormous difference and makes economic sense. It's as simple as that to them.
We have also committed to progressively double funding of the Roads to Recovery program to $1 billion annually.
The funding increase will allow local governments to plan for the long-term maintenance and upgrade of their road network, shielding critical road safety measures from the uncertainty of budget cycles.
New South Wales councils will receive $1.2 billion over five years. This is an increase of $461 million.
We are improving access to healthcare through our record investment in Medicare, slashing the price of medicines on the PBS, to just $25 - the same price that they were in 2004.
You often hear people say nothing ever goes down, well the price of medicines so essential for people is certainly going down, to be the same price that they were more than two decades ago.
And we're prioritising mental health. Here in Wagga we've provided a million dollars for the youth mental health centre here to be able to move into more appropriate facilities, as just one example.
The other issue which is so important, was keeping Australians better connected.
This month, NBN Co – a proud Labor creation – signed a deal with Amazon to bring quality broadband to the bush.
It will deliver faster and more reliable broadband to up to 300,000 homes and businesses through the new Low Earth Orbit satellite technology deployed 600km above Australia.
And as communications technology continues to erode the tyranny of distance, making the move to the regions is becoming an increasingly logical choice for people and businesses alike.
We have also prioritised keeping communities connected in emergencies, strengthening local radio broadcast services across the country through the $20 million Broadcasting Resilience Program.
These services are critical. All 131 projects have now been completed and delivered.
We are also investing significantly in telecommunications infrastructure through the Mobile Black Spot Program, delivering up to 1,400 new mobile base stations across Australia.
And under the Mobile Network Hardening Program, we are upgrading and boosting the resilience of mobile telecommunications, including permanent generators, transmission upgrades and greater battery back-up.
For much of regional Australia, the viability of communities is tied in no small part to the strength of our exports.
One of the good news stories of the past couple of years is that we are back in business with our biggest trade partner.
China has removed all trade impediments, without Australia compromising on our interests or values.
Every loaded ship leaving an Australian port for China is a victory for a regional community.
Last year, Australia exported $19.5 billion of previously affected products to China – from coal to rock lobsters, from cotton to wine.
Barley exports alone reached $1.8 billion in 2024.
Now, before impediments were put in place, that was $600 million in 2019.
So a range of these products, absence makes the heart grow fonder, as the saying goes, have not just bounced back to where they are, they've bounced back much stronger as well.
Exports of red meat hit $3.1 billion in 2024. Wine exports are bouncing back stronger than they were before as well.
The relationship is extremely valuable to regional Australia and is one that I worked to strengthen when I went to China last month, and importantly, took a delegation of business leaders, as I have, to Indonesia, to Lao, to the ASEAN Conference, as I have consistently as well to India.
We are a trading nation and regional Australia jobs are created because of our trade. One in four of Australian jobs is trade dependent and the relationships that were put in place have been so important.
The new arrangement that we've put in place, the Free Trade Agreement with the United Arab Emirates will open up that Middle East market enormously as well because Dubai and Abu Dhabi are so important for that region.
To underpin the farming sector on which the nation depends, the Government is also committed to ensuring Australia’s long-term agricultural productivity and food and fibre security.
We’re providing funds to state and territory governments to drive the implementation of the National Soil Action Plan and to the National Farmers’ Federation to develop and implement the Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework.
We are supporting emissions reduction efforts in the agriculture and land sectors and providing funding to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Science to give the agricultural sector better access to climate, economic and market insights.
This all builds on our other investments, including: $470 million in matched funding delivered to our 15 Rural Research &amp; Development Corporations, and $519 million allocated in this next phase of the Future Drought Fund.
I have seen firsthand the toll that natural disasters take on regional communities.
I have stood with locals and heard their stories, most recently on the Mid-North Coast with the devastating floods.
While we can always be proud that the worst of circumstances brings out the best in Australians, no community should ever have to stand alone
That is why the Government has been supporting farmers experiencing hardship through the Regional Investment Corporation.
And that is why our Government and the Minns Labor Government are announcing that we are jointly investing $43.2 million to help farmers strengthen their drought resilience and climate adaptation, as drought continues to affect communities across NSW.
As we look to the future, we are working to make it easier to get ahead and stay ahead.
Our legislation to cut student debt by 20 per cent was the first bill since the election to pass the Parliament.
My government has been laser focused on cost of living measures over the last four years following the hardship that Australians have experienced, first because of COVID and then secondly because of the global inflation spike. In part coming from the biggest energy crisis that the world's seen since the 1970s.
And since the advent of Free TAFE in 2023, nearly a third of the 650,000 enrolments have been in regional Australia.
We have also more than doubled the number of University Study Hubs across the country. There are now 49 Regional University Study Hubs up and running, with another seven expected to open by year’s end.
And a child born this year, who goes on to attend regional and remote Government schools, will attract an average of nearly $32,000 Commonwealth funding due to the agreements that we put in place in New South Wales, but the last state to sign up was Queensland just the day before our budget. They signed up on the 24th of March.
These agreements, $32,000 for every child on average across the board, just means that the Gonski vision that was there of every child receiving appropriate funding that they need will be delivered. And that's been done in partnership with state and territory governments right across the country, Labor and Coalition. And it's something that will make an enormous difference and something that I'm very proud of.
Our Government is focused on delivering for all Australians, repaying and building the trust they again placed in us at the election.
Where a majority of seats now in regional New South Wales are held by the Labor Party, more than any other particular party.
We are ambitious for Australia and we look to the future with optimism and vision. The same optimism that I see when I go to regional communities.
It is a future we will build together – and it begins in the bush.


Well, thank you very much for that warm Ballarat welcome.
And I do want to begin though on a sad note. Of course, here in Victoria, Victorians are mourning the loss of Detective Thompson and Senior Constable De Waart.
This is a tragedy that has impacted particularly people in, in the local community, but it's also, of course, impacted people in the police family as well.
It's a reminder that the men and women who put on the blue uniform to protect our local communities take a risk each and every day. We thank them for their service and we pay our respect to them at this difficult time.
The Australian Federal Police have joined the work that's being undertaken to hunt down the perpetrator of this crime because we do want to see this issue resolved so that people who are traumatised in that local community can once again feel comfortable as they should be in their day to day lives.
I also want to give a shout out to three people who last night at the dinner that was held here in Ballarat, I had the privilege of hearing their stories, the Bush Champions.
A young fellow, Jarib Branfield-Bradshaw from Cunnamullah in Queensland. Amazing young man doing incredible things to help his fellow young Australians. And he gave a powerful speech about it being not so much him helping them, but putting them in a position where they feel better about themselves as being the key as well. And an extraordinary mature 21 year old, I've got to say.
Grace Larson doing incredible work as well in the community.
And the person who won the big prize was Ben Wundersitz. He's formed an organisation in South Australia called Fat Farmers, which was about his experience as someone who was perhaps not as fit as he should be, going to the local gym and discovering that all 30 members of the local gym were women. There were no blokes, it was across the road from the pub.
So, he, in that most Australian of ways, had a barbecue, got people out of the pub and got them talking to each other about joining the gym. They joined up and it was a real, I guess a different equivalent of a men's shed and the role of that they play as well.
And Ben was fantastic last night and all three of them were very worthy winners and it was a pleasure to be there last night.
I'm glad also to be in Ballarat at a time that coincides with the Ballarat International Photo Biennale, which has grown into a big part of the cultural life of this great city.
I do want to acknowledge the local member firstly here as well, Catherine King, the fantastic part of my Ministerial team, but a great local member and advocate for this local community and someone who's brought me to this local community on a regular basis.
Julie Collins, the Minister for Agriculture as well.
I know that the Leader of the Opposition will be here today and other members of Parliament will be here today participating as well.
And you'll hear from the Premier soon, who I think, I've had more conversations over the last few days due to this tragic incident with the Premier, and we continue to cooperate in the interests of this community.
Ballarat is central to the story of our modern nation.
Through the Eureka Stockade, it gave us the first flowering of the democratic instinct that remains a deeply ingrained part of the Australian spirit.
Ben Chifley described Eureka as “the first real affirmation of our determination to be masters of our own political destiny”. Mark Twain called it “the finest thing in Australian history”.
It took place amid something that was no less extraordinary – the gold rush that transformed Victoria, and ultimately transformed our continent.
It was a magnet that drew in people from across the colonies and across the world, from China to Europe to the Americas. And its great dam burst of wealth made so much possible.
It turned Melbourne into a true global metropolis and transformed Victoria’s goldfields towns into beacons of opportunity.
With their proud and substantial histories, Ballarat, Bendigo and Castlemaine stand as proud testament to a pivotal moment in our history when, given the chance and the means, Victorians chose foresight.
They didn’t just build, they built to last.
That is the living legacy that surrounds today in Ballarat, every part of its beauty and opportunity a reminder of the importance of building for the future.
We come together in a time of significant global economic uncertainty, but also what – for our nation – is a moment of profound opportunity.
And so much of that opportunity begins in regional Australia.
I thank News Corp for bringing us together to continue the ongoing conversation that is Bush Summit. The Bush Summit that I've participated in each and every year since the first one was held in Dubbo in 2019. And to which, this is my second Bush Summit in the last three days, having been in Wagga Wagga just a couple of days ago.
The communities that make up regional Australia are as diverse as our landscapes. Each with its own challenges and opportunities, each one powered by the greatest resource possible – its people.
Everything I talk about today is a reflection of our Government’s commitment to all Australians, wherever they live.
And it is informed by one incontestable fact: When regional Australia does well, the whole nation does well.
To build Regional Australia’s Future, we need to make it easier for younger generations to stay and build their lives in the communities they grew up in.
So many times when I've been around our regions over the years, one of the regrets that people have, as they say, ‘my children weren't able to stay here. They had to move to the cities for jobs and opportunities’.
We want to make sure that people can stay in local communities.
That is why Labor went to the election committed to building more homes and making it easier for young regional Australians to buy their first home. And we are delivering.
On Monday, we announced that we are bringing forward the start date for the 5 per cent first home owner deposit scheme from 1 January to 1 October.
This will open doors metaphorically and literally.
The scheme will make it possible for the average first home buyer in Ballarat to save the deposit in a couple of years, rather than the eight years it would take to save a 20 per cent deposit.
The scheme will also save them the nearly $25,000 they would have had in Lenders Mortgage Insurance.
Since coming to office, the Government has helped more than 38,000 first home buyers in regional areas to buy a home.
Current income caps will be removed and price caps will be increased in nearly all regional areas across the country, making it even easier for regional Australians to buy a home in their area.
Ensuring regional communities aren’t just viable but desirable as places to call home is an ongoing project of many parts.
It means keeping people safe and connected, which is we’re investing $1.1 billion to upgrade Victoria’s Western Freeway, bringing our total investment in the Western Freeway corridor to $2.1 billion.
We’re delivering $325 million towards the Melton line upgrade, to increase the rail capacity by 50 per cent
And in just over a fortnight, trains will begin rolling on the Gippsland Rail Line upgrade.
We’ve doubled funding for road upgrades under our Roads to Recovery program to every council.
In Victoria alone, $900 million is allocated for the current five-year period under Roads to Recovery for current projects – a 67 per cent increase for regional local roads in Victoria that goes directly to local councils to determine where it’s needed most.
In the Ballarat region, over $45 million has been made available, an increase of nearly $20 million. This is allowing the delivery of projects such as the upgrade of Gilles Road in Bald Hills and Ascot.
We have increased funding for blackspots, local bridges and heavy vehicle routes, too.
Meanwhile, as communications technology continues to erode the tyranny of distance, making the move to the regions is becoming an increasingly logical choice for people and businesses alike.
This month, NBN Co – a proud Labor creation – signed a deal with Amazon to bring quality broadband to the bush.
It will deliver faster and more reliable broadband to up to 300,000 homes and businesses through the new Low Earth Orbit satellite technology deployed 600km above Australia.
We have also prioritised keeping communities connected in emergencies, strengthening local radio broadcast services across the country through the $20 million Broadcasting Resilience Program.
All 131 projects have now been completed and delivered.
These services are critical.
We are also investing significantly in telecommunications infrastructure through the Mobile Black Spot Program, delivering up to 1,400 new mobile base stations across Australia.
And under the Mobile Network Hardening Program, we are upgrading and boosting the resilience of mobile telecommunications, including permanent generators, transmission upgrades and greater battery back-up.
For much of regional Australia, the viability of communities is tied in no small part to the strength of our exports.
One of the good news stories of the past couple of years is that we are back in business with our biggest trade partner.
China has removed all trade impediments without Australia compromising on our interests or values.
Every loaded ship leaving an Australian port for China is a victory for a regional community.
Last year, Australia exported $19.5 billion of previously affected products to China – from coal to rock lobsters, from wine to wool.
China is also far and away our biggest purchaser of wool.
Later today, I’ll be visiting Lal Lal Estate, home to a lot of very fine merinos and owned by Mr Wen, the owner of China-based Tianyu Wool Industries.
Tianyu is one of Australia’s biggest purchasers of Australian wool, buying 11 per cent of the national clip in the 2024/25 season alone.
The Australia-China trade relationship is extremely valuable to regional Australia, and it is one I worked to strengthen when I went to China last month with a delegation of representatives from government and business.
To underpin the farming sector on which the nation depends, the Government is also committed to ensuring Australia’s long-term agricultural productivity and food and fibre security.
We’re providing funds to state and territory governments to drive the implementation of the National Soil Action Plan and to the National Farmers’ Federation to develop and implement the Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework.
We are supporting emissions reduction efforts in the agriculture and land sectors and providing funding to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Science to give the agricultural sector better access to climate, economic and market insights.
This all builds on our other investments, including: $470 million in matched funding delivered to our 15 Rural Research &amp; Development Corporations, and $519 million allocated in this next phase of the Future Drought Fund.
I have seen firsthand the toll that natural disasters take on regional communities.
That is why the Government is providing ongoing support to farmers experiencing hardship by continuing the Regional Investment Corporation.
Today I announce our Government will commit to the future of the RIC with an additional $1 billion in funding, and expand its focus to include climate adaptation and resilience.
This will ensure the RIC can continue to support farm businesses in hardship, including those managing through and recovering from current drought conditions.
This $1 billion in loan funding demonstrates the Australian Government’s continued commitment to the RIC beyond what the previous government had slated as the end of this financial year.
I have stood with locals affected by natural disasters and extreme weather events, and I have listened their stories. And I thank the farmers who this morning over breakfast I was able to have a chat with them. I thank them for producing the breakfast as well.
While we can always be proud that the worst of circumstances brings out the best in Australians, no community should ever have to stand alone.
As we look to the future, we are working to make it easier for Australians to have good access to healthcare.
We’re doing it through our record investment in Medicare, slashing the price of medicines on the PBS, which just yesterday passed the Parliament in the House of Representatives, bringing the price of medicines down to just $25 that are listed on the PBS.
We often say that things don't ever fall in price. Well, this is a fall in price down to the same price it was in 2004. And we're frozen the cost for concession cardholders to just $7.70 for the rest of this decade.
In addition to that, we're prioritising mental health, including in our regional communities, with the opening of Medicare mental health centres, and also the work we're doing through headspace and its expansion, aimed particularly at young people.
We’ve opened the first of our 50 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics, adding to the network of 87 we opened in our first term.
We now have 31 up and running in remote, rural and regional Australia – including one here on Sturt Street – with another 17 to come.
And we are working to make easier to get ahead and stay ahead.
Our legislation to cut student debt by 20 per cent was the first bill since the election to pass the Parliament.
And since the advent of Free TAFE in 2023, nearly a third of the 650,000 enrolments have been in regional Australia.
We have also more than doubled the number of University Study Hubs across the country. There are now 49 Regional University Study Hubs up and running, with another seven expected to open by year’s end.
And a child born this year, who goes on to attend regional and remote Government schools will attract an average of nearly $32,000 more Commonwealth funding due to our new agreements with states and territories, fulfilling the Gonski education reforms.
At the end of last year, when the fires were raging through the Grampians, I visited the control centre there. And I had the honour of meeting everyone from local volunteers to professional firefighters.
People had come from all over Australia, giving up their summer holidays because they wanted to help. It’s what Australians do.
I saw the same thing on the mid north coast of NSW during the recent floods. And I've seen it whenever there have been fires or floods, natural disasters, cyclonic activity in Queensland. We see Australians standing together, better together, stronger together because of that.
That is what drives my team.
Our Government is focused on delivering for all Australians, repaying and building the trust they again placed in us at the election.
We are ambitious for Australia and we look to the future in the way Ballarat has so famously shown us – with optimism and vision.
It is a future we will build together – and it begins in regional Australia. Thank you very much.


It’s a great pleasure to join you tonight and to welcome our distinguished Kiwi guests to our national capital.
This forum has always been defined by a spirit of mutual respect and shared affection. 
It draws its enduring strength from the fact that the friendship between Australia and New Zealand feels so natural, and so comfortable.
That is true right across our parliaments, our business communities and our people.
One of the reasons so many of our citizens go across the Tasman and vice versa is because on either side of the ditch we feel at home.
All of this means that gatherings such as this one have a bigger task beyond promoting understanding, or fostering ties, or celebrating them.
This forum carries a responsibility to ensure that comfort doesn’t slide into complacency.
Australia and New Zealand have an extraordinary foundation of shared history and shared values and on that we have a built a thriving framework for economic co-operation, with our Single Economic Market.
When you look at everything happening in the world today, when you think about the global economic uncertainty confronting us all, these ties have never been more valuable or more important.
The best way for us to continue to maximise the value of our economic partnership, is to keep modernising it.
This was a central theme of the discussions Prime Minister Luxon and I had in Queenstown last month.
Business leaders from both sides of the Tasman made the point that the Single Economic Market cannot be treated as a ‘set and forget’.
Breaking down barriers for business and workers, building trade bridges and integrating our economies is a constant and evolving process.
It means anticipating and shaping the economic change that is ahead, in the interests of both our nations.
Making seamless co-operation the starting point and the default setting in growing sectors like the digital economy.
Better aligning our work on meeting new challenges – from cyber security to climate reporting.
And learning from each other when it comes to the shared priorities of our people and our economies.
Everything from boosting housing construction and streamlining approvals, to making sure our children can navigate social media safely.
In business – and in government – there is no finish line.
No moment when you sit back and say the job is done.
There are always new pressures to manage, new challenges to meet, new uncertainties to confront.
Most importantly, there are always new opportunities to seize and to share.
That is particularly true for New Zealand and Australia in this decade.
Here, in the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
At a time when our greatest strengths – our skills, our smarts, our high-value and high-quality products – are in global demand.
We have every reason to be optimistic for what we can achieve, together.
Just across from here - on the other side of the lake - is the New Zealand Memorial.
Fittingly, it stands on either side of Anzac Parade.
Two curved bronze sculptures, each more than 11 metres tall, representing the two handles of a traditional Maori flax basket.
The paving at the base records the names of the battlefields in which Australian and New Zealand troops have served and sacrificed together.
The inscription for this memorial is a single line:
“Each of us at the handle of the basket”
That is what Australia and New Zealand mean to each other.
We are there for each other.
We carry the weight together.
And we go forward together.
Thank you all for adding to the strength of our bond.
Have a lovely evening.


I acknowledge all our distinguished guests, including Her Excellency the Governor of New South Wales and former Prime Minister Scott Morrison.
It is a pleasure to be here with you to celebrate the work and the success of the people who make up Street Side Medics.
The volunteer doctors, nurses and social workers – the heartbeat of this great organisation.
I’d also like to acknowledge my remarkable friend, Dr Daniel Nour.
As a young man he had a vision to make a difference for people experiencing homelessness.
In 2020, that vision became the reality of Street Side Medics, and since then it has grown into something very much worth celebrating.
Making sure the most vulnerable in our community don’t fall through the cracks and miss out on the healthcare they need and deserve, as our fellow Australians.
Because one of the most challenging aspects of homelessness is addressing the question of health care and access to it.
There are barriers for people on the street that span a lack of health education, distrust of the system and what must feel like endless practical troubles.
And while we all work towards the day when Street Side Medics is no longer required, it is this organisation that makes a world of difference in breaking down those barriers to a healthier life for those who are doing it tough.
Tackling issues like homelessness needs to be an all-in effort.
And I’m proud that my Government took a commitment to the last election to provide $2.6 million over four years to support Street Side Medics in their work.
The daily medical care that you provide – immunisations, pathology, nutritional advice and minor surgeries – literally saves lives.
But on top of that vital work, what is so valuable about Street Side Medics is that as an organisation, it acts as a social touchstone for those who need it most.
A beacon of kindness and community for Australians in need.
It is a reality that too many Australians experience homelessness.
For those who end up with no choice but sleeping rough, life is uncertain and often unsafe.
Street Side Medics provides real help, and the financial support from everyone here will assist their work.
As Prime Minister I want to see a reduction in homelessness.
We are implementing our $9.3 billion, 5-year National Agreement on Social Housing and Homelessness, supporting states and territories to deliver homelessness services and social housing.
And we’re building 55,000 social and affordable homes – because the key to addressing our housing crisis is increasing supply.
We need to build more homes, more quickly – especially social and affordable homes.
Over the last five years Street Side Medics has gone from strength to strength.
This time last year I spoke at the Melbourne launch, celebrating an expansion of your work into Victoria, servicing St. Kilda and the Melbourne CBD.
Tonight we mark the beginning of the next chapter of Street Side Medics, taking the mission nationwide.
This is a tribute to the hard work of a dedicated organisation focused on lifting people up, and should be a source of immense pride.
The work you do together is one of the greatest example of the Australian tradition of giving back, and it is one that I am proud to support tonight – and into the future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
It is a pleasure to be back at the BCA’s Annual Dinner and to be joined by so many of my colleagues.
We take pride in the fact that we are a Cabinet Government – and that is reflected in the way we engage with the business community, across portfolios.
Thank you to Geoff Culbert and to Bran Black for hosting us this evening.
Back in February this year, Bran and I were at the launch of the new Roadmap for Australia’s Economic Engagement with India, at Deakin University in Melbourne.
Less than a week earlier, the Reserve Bank had cut interest rates for the first time since 2020.
We spoke about that significant milestone, a sign that the Australian economy was turning the corner.
Our nation has made substantial progress since then.
Interest rates have been cut three times this year already. 
Inflation has now been in the RBA target band for four quarters in a row.
And unlike other countries, we have brought inflation down without sacrificing people’s jobs.
Unemployment has held steady at near 50-year lows.
Real wages have grown, seven quarters in a row.
The gender pay gap is at an all-time low – and women’s workforce participation is at a record high.
And last week’s National Accounts showed that economic growth is gathering strength.
In a time of ongoing global economic uncertainty, there is no major advanced economy growing faster than Australia.
And – importantly – this is being led by the private sector.
The private sector is resuming its rightful place as the driver of growth in our economy.
Over the past few years, like every advanced economy in the world, Australia has been grappling with the worst global inflation since the 1980s and the biggest international energy crisis since the 1970s.
No country has come through this global storm in better shape than we have.
In the years ahead, our challenge – and our responsibility – is to secure and repay the progress that the Australian people have made.
To reward the hard work we have done together in getting inflation down by working together to get growth and productivity up.
This is what Bran and I were talking about in February.
Back then, we agreed that the beginning of a second term would be a good time to bring together government, business, unions and civil society to build agreement on reforms to boost productivity.
This was the spirit and the purpose of the Economic Reform Roundtable that I announced at the National Press Club in June and that the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, convened at Parliament House last month.
Over 40 Ministerial forums and more than 900 individual submissions fed into those conversations.
I know Jim did an extraordinary amount of work to bring all of that together –and we are already seeing real progress as a result.
I do want to make the point that for our Government, engaging constructively with business is not a one-off event in Canberra.
We do it every week of the year, in every part of the country.
Because we value the insights you offer, as drivers of economic growth, creators of jobs and leaders in innovation.
And we respect the vital role you play in Australia’s engagement with the world.
In all the work our Government is doing to deepen and diversify our economic partnerships with India and South East Asia.
To boost our two-way investment with the United States.
And to continue to strengthen our trade with China.
Business leaders have been at the forefront of these efforts – and key to their success.
We know that when you take your ideas, products, food and fibre and resources and services to the world, that creates jobs in Australia.
Your work enhances Australia’s global reputation as a leading destination for investment.
It reinforces that we are a great country to do business with.
And a key priority for our Government is making sure that Australia remains a great place for you to do business.
That is why we’re investing in the skills, education and technology that will enable workers and businesses to compete and succeed in a changing global economy.
It is why we are working to deliver more affordable and reliable energy and provide the foundation of certainty and clarity in energy policy.
In Opposition, my colleagues and I consulted closely with business and industry ahead of announcing our climate and energy plans.  
This was about more than laying out the target we were setting for 2030, more than a figure – it was about the framework we would build and use to get there.
The leadership and advocacy of the BCA and your members was critical to the success of this process.   
Business has seen, firsthand, the damage done to Australia’s international relationships and to our economy by the ideological conflict of the climate wars.
A decade in which energy policy became untethered from reality.
Where, even as 24 out of 28 Australia’s coal-fired power stations were announcing their timeline for closure, there was no coherent plan to replace them.
Business and industry don’t have that luxury of pretending change is not occurring.
You have to deal with the real world – and you have to be able to plan for the long term.
That’s what the framework we have built is all about.
We have one energy policy – and we are delivering it.
Renewables, backed by gas and storage through batteries.
Our Capacity Investment Scheme is unlocking more than $70 billion of investment in new generation.
Our Safeguard Mechanism is helping business and industry invest in technology that cuts their emissions.
And they are working alongside the significant contribution that Australian homes and small businesses are making, with their embrace of rooftop solar – and now batteries.
Households, business and industry are just getting on with it.
In a typically Australian way, focused on the practical, with a minimum of fuss.
This is the foundation we have to keep building on.
Because the global shift to clean energy is the biggest economic transformation since the industrial revolution.
And it is a profound economic opportunity for Australia.
I note the BCA climate report published last week, was entitled: “Maximising our Potential”.
That’s what this is all about.
Because if we act now, if we get it right, we can set our nation up for a new era of growth and prosperity.
One built on our strengths as a high-skill, fair wage economy.
And one true to our values of fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
Australia has everything that a world economy moving to clean energy needs.
The critical minerals and the traditional resources.
The sunlight and the space which enables us to co-locate extraction and refining, with processing and manufacturing, powered by renewables.
And if we combine that with the right infrastructure and skills and research, we can be a destination of choice for data centres and the new jobs of the digital economy as well.   
This is Australia’s best opportunity to build an economy that is more resilient, more diversified – and more decentralised, because regional Australia has so much to gain.
All of this is within reach – but only if we back ourselves.
Only if we invest in our people and their capacity, our businesses and their ideas.
And only if we move together, with ambition and urgency.
Because the world is not waiting for us.
And we know what will happen if we hang back or hesitate or lower our sights, we’ve seen it before.
Every solar panel in the world contains Australian genius and Australian research.
So much of it originating in universities right here in Sydney.
But the government of the day failed to recognise the potential of those breakthroughs.
Or to encourage their commercialisation here in Australia.
We cannot miss a chance like that again.
The new investments and incentives and production tax credits in our Government’s Future Made in Australia plan reflects our determination to make this moment count.
To make the most of our unparalleled national advantages.
And to make more things here, bringing a new generation of good jobs to our regions and suburbs.
This task is bigger than any one sector, or program.
For Australia to fully grasp this generational opportunity, we need to build a more dynamic, resilient and productive economy across the board.
By breaking down barriers to investment and job creation.
By clearing away unnecessary regulation that has accumulated over decades.
By making it easier for business to hire workers with the right skills, when and where they’re needed.
And making it easier to deal with government, at every level – so you get a clear answer, sooner. 
Whether you are a small business looking to expand, or a big firm advocating for a major project.
Last month’s Economic Reform Roundtable created a focal point for these issues.
And it has already delivered important progress on many of them, driven by the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers. 
Of course, we were not seeking – or expecting – agreement on every question.
There will always be a diversity of views, even within the business community itself.
Yet what was notable was the extent of the common ground.
Not just across business – but between business, unions and the government.
As a result, in a number of important areas, we have been able to pick up that consensus and run with it.
In housing, we are fast-tracking assessment of more than 26,000 homes that have been awaiting approval for far too long.  
We are freezing the National Construction Code for four years – while we work to streamline it.
Because at the moment, it runs over 1,500 pages.
We will be bringing forward action on national environmental law reforms.
Our Government aims to introduce legislation before the end of the year: for stronger environmental protection, more efficient assessments and greater transparency in decision-making.
And we are abolishing around another 500 nuisance tariffs, which will mean we have eliminated nearly 1,000 tariffs in the past two years.
These are tariffs that cost more to collect than they raise in revenue.
At the same time the hassle and the compliance costs they impose on Australian business are real.  
And just as our Government consistently advocates for free and fair trade and its benefits in our dealings with the world, we back that up here at home.
Beyond these immediate actions, we made valuable progress in other areas.
And we want to keep that dialogue going, leading into future Budgets.
In skills and training, so Australian workers in high demand can have their qualifications recognised across state borders.
In tax reform, looking at fair and affordable ways to incentivise greater business investment and capital deepening.
And in Artificial Intelligence.
Ensuring we get the balance right, so that our people and our businesses have the skills and confidence to unlock the productivity benefits of AI, while safeguarding themselves against its risks.
Our Government is not pretending to have discovered all of these issues.  
I am sure there are shelves full of BCA reports calling for the abolition of nuisance tariffs.
An archive of pre-budget submissions advocating for national licensing reform, going back to the Howard Government.
And many business leaders in this room have been longstanding supporters of a better, clearer and more efficient approvals process.
The issues are not new. What is new – and what matters – is that, together, we are doing something about them.
We are working together to get things done, to deliver, in the national interest.
That focus on delivery is what drives our Government.
Repaying trust by fulfilling the commitments Australians voted for in May.
And building trust by demonstrating that a focused, reforming government can make a practical and positive difference to people’s lives.
This is how we make the case for future economic reform, by showing people where they fit in.
By giving people that sense of agency and ownership – and importantly, optimism.
We have to prove that measures which boost productivity, drive business investment and cut red tape, bring real and lasting benefits to our nation as a whole.
Everyone in this room can take pride in what Australia has been able to achieve over the last three years, in the face of global economic uncertainty.
And by working together, by engaging with each other, by continuing to focus on practical change in the national interest, we can secure the progress we have made together, and push forward.
We can build a stronger, fairer, more productive and more resilient economy.
With greater opportunities for business, for workers – and for all Australians.
I look forward to continuing to work with all of you.


Thank you so much, Prime Minister, for not just that wonderful speech, but your very warm welcome here in Vanuatu.
To the Deputy Prime Minister, to the members of the Council of Ministers, to Members of Parliament who've joined us here as well
To members of the diplomatic corps, including my High Commissioner.
Distinguished guests, friends, one and all, it is indeed an absolute pleasure to be here in Vanuatu, and today I've had the pleasure of meeting with his Excellency, the President, with Prime Minister Napat and his Council of Ministers, to discuss ways in which we can keep strengthening the relationship between our two countries.
Over the past six months, our ministers and officials have had constructive discussions on how we can take our partnership up to the next level.
And one of those steps, I was rather envious I missed out on, the journey which our ministers took together to the top of Mount Yasur just last month.
But of course, this is not my first trip to Vanuatu. In 1986 I was obviously a very young man when I came and stayed at this wonderful resort for two weeks.
Life was simpler then, my only task was to swim in the lagoon and to enjoy the wonderful hospitality of Ni-Vanuatu. And I did, indeed.
Indeed, it is such a friendly place, and everyone I've met in this hotel this afternoon is an Australian - so there's still a very large tourism agenda here.
Now it did mean a great deal to my colleagues and to Australia that Vanuatu chose a place of such deep spirituality, custom and meaning.
When I went to that volcano myself in 1986 on a day trip from here around Tanna, it was a memorable experience on my first ever trip from Australia. One day, I'm going to pack my hiking boots and get up there again.
But for now, don't quite have time, and I and the Prime Minister will be travelling to the Solomon Islands tomorrow to participate in the Pacific Island forum that is so important.
That is like a family reunion, a family gathering of all the nations that make up this wonderful blue continent, our Pacific Ocean.
It is so important.
Pacific, of course, derives its name from peace, and one of the things that we all strive for and we will be working towards over the next days in the Solomons is for advancing peace and security in the region.
For now, I'm certainly thrilled to be here in Port Villa.
Today we have made progress towards the important vision of elevating our bilateral relationship to new heights in the spirit of a Nakamal - a place of deep significance in Vanuatu culture, a place to meet and come together.
The vision we've been working towards should encapsulate, one, of course, respect for one another, the values that we share and our deep connections of faith, family and community.
It is also coming together of our aspirations, importantly for the future, peace, stability and prosperity in the region. For our peoples, for our economies, for our region.
Here in the Pacific, of course, we look out for each other. We always have.
Australia will be here with Vanuatu in good times and in difficult times, as we were after the earthquake just last December.
We established a consulate here in 1978, two years before independence, anticipating it.
A sign of solidarity, a signal of belief in your people's forging of your own path, and our support for Vanuatu sovereignty has never wavered, not then and not now.
In the time since we've only grown closer.
Today, Australia is proud to be Vanuatu’s largest economic development, security and humanitarian partner.
We want to further elevate our partnership by committing to new actions that will lay fresh foundations, delivering practical people focused outcomes.
As the Prime Minister has said so eloquently, a change that's about transformation, not transaction. And I think that is a really clear way of advancing what both of our nations think about the agreement that we hope to finalise and which has already been initialled and agreed to in principle.
Delivering practical, people focused outcomes that are built to last.
Whether that means working together to drive the energy transition, helping the police and justice agencies expand in reach and capability, developing our labour mobility and visitor arrangements with Vanuatu or always standing by each other's side when disasters strike.
It also means facilitating linkages between our private sectors, bringing more investment and business opportunities to Vanuatu, while at the same time helping with the training that gives young Ni-Vanuatu the skills and experience they need to achieve their dreams.
We'll also continue to focus on the people and cultural links that are the heart and soul of our relationship.
And on that note, it's a pleasure to be sharing this stage with King Stingray, who you'll hear from soon as well - a great Australian band.
When we learned from our terrific first High Commissioner, Max, that King Stingray would be in town for the Fest'Napuan. We asked him if they'd accept another gig, and fortunately for us, they said yes, and I thank you for it.
Last time I saw this band was in the Enmore theatre. Now the Enmore theatre is close to my heart, it’s in my electorate, but I reckon this is a better view and a better location, I've got to say. You can't swim in the Enmore theatre.
Fortunately for us, we look forward to that – a wonderful celebration and a powerful symbol. Australia and Vanuatu in harmony together.
Tugeta yumi stanap. Thank you very much.


President Macron.
Your Royal Highness.
Secretary-General.
Colleagues.
Nearly 78 years ago, Australia was proud to be the first member of the United Nations to vote for the plan that made the modern state of Israel possible.
The international community’s vision for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, always encompassed two states.
A state of Israel and a state of Palestine.
Living side by side, within internationally-recognised borders.
And recognising each other’s right to live in peace and security.
Eight decades ago, those hopes for peace were consumed by conflict.
That has been the grim pattern of the years.
Opportunities not taken.
Compromises rejected.
Good faith, betrayed.
A cycle of violence and terror that has crushed generations.
We saw that in the horrific events of October 7, 2023.
Hamas terrorists descending on a music festival promoting ‘friends, love and infinite freedom’ to perpetrate atrocities that horrified the world.
One Australian, Galit Carbone, was among those killed.
Australia embraces all who carry the weight of grief.
We join with our allies and partners in calling for the hostages to be returned immediately and with dignity.
And we stand with Jewish people around the world, who feel the cold shadow of history’s darkest chapter in any act of antisemitism.
Throughout this conflict, Australia has added our voice to the global calls for a ceasefire.
We want the killing to stop.
Because every innocent life matters.
Every Israeli life.
Every Palestinian life.
Right now, Gaza is in the grip of a humanitarian catastrophe.
And for this, the Israeli Government must accept its share of responsibility.
Tens of thousands of civilians have been killed.
Desperate people, including children, have been denied vital aid.
Aid workers have been killed trying to deliver humanitarian assistance, including Australian Zomi Frankcom.
And journalists have been killed trying to bring the truth to light.
This comes alongside the continued illegal expansion of settlements on the West Bank - and an increase in settler violence.
Threats to annex parts of Palestine - and permanently displace the Palestinian people.
Such conduct risks putting a two state solution beyond reach.
That is where the current road will take us.
Which is why we must choose a different path.
We must break this cycle of violence and build something better.
Yesterday, Australia recognised the State of Palestine.
We have been clear: the terrorist organisation Hamas can have no role in Palestine’s future.
Australia’s act of recognition was predicated on commitments from the Palestinian Authority, including:
Reaffirming Israel’s right to exist in peace and security.
That Hamas would hand over its weapons to Palestinian security forces – and never control Gaza again.
And that the Palestinian Authority must demilitarise, hold democratic elections and undertake wholesale reform: to governance, finance and education.
The leadership of the Arab League has given added strength to these commitments.
Their demand for Hamas to end its rule in Gaza and surrender its weapons has helped create this moment of opportunity.
A chance to deliver self-determination for the people of Palestine in a way that permanently disarms and isolates Hamas - and drives them out of the region once and for all.
In recognising Palestine, Australia recognises the legitimate and long held aspirations of the Palestinian people.
That means more than a seat, a voice and a vote in the councils of the world.
It means real hope for a place they can call home.
This is the same hope that sustained generations of Jewish people.
The same hope that binds each of us to our countries and cultures, that drives all of us to want a better life for our children.
Working together, we can build a future where instead of children in Gaza dying in pain, living in fear, or being taught to hate - they can go to school, build a “life in larger freedom”, aspire to raise children of their own.
That future depends on recognition being followed by reconstruction and reform.
A credible, co-operative peace plan that supports recovery in Gaza and security for Israel.
One that establishes governance and excludes Hamas – from ‘the day after’ and for every day after that.
This is the next step we must take, together.
And Australia will join the international community in this endeavour.


Thank you all for being here this afternoon.
I thank our hosts Macquarie, a great Australian success story.
Among many distinguished guests, I acknowledge our Ambassador, Kevin Rudd and Australia’s Consul-General to New York, Heather Ridout.
When I had the privilege of serving in Kevin’s Cabinet as Minister for Infrastructure, we asked Heather to join the board of a new body we were establishing: Infrastructure Australia.
Its mission was to look beyond the short-term thinking that can sometimes capture planning and investment – and identify true, nation-building projects that would drive growth and boost productivity in our cities and regions.
The outstanding quality that Heather brought to that role is the same one she brings to her work here in the United States: a grasp of Australia’s true potential and ways to unlock it.
This is what today is all about.
For decades, the United States of America has been the proving ground for Australian entrepreneurs, innovators and creatives.
In tech, in finance, in medical research and the arts, Australians have taken the view that if you can make it here, you can make it anywhere.
And because this country’s founding spirit owes so much to people chasing their dreams and believing in themselves, because Americans are so generous with their enthusiasm, their mentoring and their support network, and because Americans know a game-changing idea or a world-leading product when they see one, so many Australians have achieved extraordinary success here.
Our cultures complement each other - both our similarities and our points of difference.
Our people have a knack for bringing out the best in each other.
Which is why skills and ideas and insights travel back the other way.
In tech and start-ups, in agriculture and medical science and resources.
And investment flows both ways as well.
Some of the biggest names in America, are expanding their footprint in Australia.
Google, Microsoft and Amazon in digital infrastructure, cloud computing and quantum.
Pfizer, Baxter Healthcare and Cardinal Health in medical manufacturing.
Chevron, Exxon.
Lockheed Martin and Anduril.
Along with your biggest investment and private equity funds.
All of this is a success story, worth celebrating.
All of it proves the enduring and evolving strength of our two countries’ economic co-operation.
I’m here today because I want us to add a new dimension to our partnership.
American capital and Australian manufacturing are a natural fit.
And if we move now, we can make them an unbeatable combination.
We can put our investment partnership at the centre of a defining global opportunity.
The world’s shift to clean energy represents the biggest change since the industrial revolution.
We are looking at ever increasing global demand for clean energy and the technology that generates and stores it.
And if you started with a blank piece of paper and wrote down every asset and resource you would need to thrive in that economic environment, at the end of it, you would hold in your hand a list of Australia’s strengths.
A mining sector that leads the world in innovation.
Along with the iron ore, copper and coal that have built and powered our region’s prosperity.
We are also the world’s largest producer of lithium.
We have the largest global reserves of zinc and nickel.
And we are home to some of most valuable deposits of critical minerals on earth, just about the whole periodic table.
Including the light and heavy rare earths essential for high-tech manufacturing and defence, the digital economy, artificial intelligence, data centres and clean energy.
And I should note – these are just the deposits that we know about.
The experts at GeoScience Australia are still mapping our continent, they classify 80 per cent of it, under-explored.
Our resources are more than what’s our under our soil or seabed.
Australia is the sunniest continent on earth.
And we have the space that makes it possible to co-locate extraction, refining, processing and manufacturing.
To build an entire, secure supply chain, end to end - and power it with clean energy.
And as energy and emissions and transport become more significant factors in the cost of production, compared to the cost of labour.
And as the alignment of economic and security interests becomes increasingly important.
Our Government sees this as an opportunity to create a new source of comparative advantage.
To make more things in Australia.
High-skill workers, making high-value products – with lower production costs and greater certainty.
Australia has the skilled and productive workforce to make this happen.
A world-class university and training sector, with a proud track record of innovation and research.
We have the capability – and we have the capital.
Our system of universal compulsory superannuation, means Australian funds continue to grow and invest.
Over the next decade, total investment in the US from Australian pension funds is expected to more than double.
That will mean more than $1 trillion invested here in the decade to 2035.
These same funds are investing in the drivers of growth in the Australian economy: infrastructure, energy, start-ups and private capital.
Investing in Australia is about what we have – and where we are.
Because when you build your business in Australia, you are building a platform and a presence in the fastest-growing region of the world in human history.
Our relationship with our region runs deeper than proximity.
We are more than neighbours, we’re partners.
Our bilateral – and multilateral – trade agreements give us priority access to every market in our region.
We are deepening our business to business engagement with India and South East Asia, on track to be the third and fourth largest economies in the world by the 2040s.
And Australia’s multicultural society, our diaspora communities and our status as an education and tourism destination means we are able to call on bonds of family and friendship with every nation in our region, indeed the world.
Australia knows the benefits of free and fair trade.
And our economy is geared for international investment, and for decades has been shaped by it.
We welcome it, we value it.
We know the vital role it plays in our national growth and success.
This why, in our first term, our Government streamlined the investment review process.
Making it work better – and faster - for parties that Australia knows and trusts.
We’re building on this with a new focus on clearing away unnecessary barriers to major projects – and accelerating approvals.
So that investment flows into generating new energy, exploring new opportunities and creating good jobs.
Every investment decision begins with a review of the fundamentals.
And Australia’s fundamentals are as good as anywhere in the world.
Low inflation, low unemployment, accelerating growth.
A Triple-A credit rating from all three agencies.
And we sit close to the top of every global ladder for the integrity of our legal and financial system, the security of transactions, timeliness of payments, smart use of technology.
Now, any Australian trade official can give you a compelling and detailed presentation on the strength of those fundamentals.
I’m here as Australia’s Prime Minister to make it clear that our Government isn’t resting on this record.
We’re not waiting for the world to come to us.
We’re going above and beyond.
Our Future Made in Australia Agenda invests in the full life-cycle of projects: upfront capital, innovation and research – and production incentives.
Including new production tax credits for processed critical minerals and renewable hydrogen.
Our plan facilitates new investment in battery and solar supply chains.
And in innovation, from green iron, aluminium and steel to low carbon fuels.
This fits together with our $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund.
Providing loans, guarantees and equity to help commercial projects, including value-adding in resources and renewable energy technology.
All of this is reinforced by our commitment to reducing emissions.
Our targets for 2030 and 2035 have us on track for Net Zero by 2050.
This provides certainty for business to build for the long term.
Put simply, our Government’s plan for a Future Made in Australia, is a ready-made opportunity for investment from America.
And we want to give you every chance to see that for yourself.
Which is why in November, our Minister for Energy, Chris Bowen and our Minister for Industry, Tim Ayres will be hosting an Investor Forum in Australia.
We see that as a focal point for working through the detail and getting deals done.
With targeted and tailored action - from fast-tracking approvals to direct incentives.
As I’ve made clear today, Australia is blessed with an abundance of natural resources.
For investors, we are also home to the most valuable of resources: trust.
Trust that has been earned and built, over generations.
You know who we are – and what doing business with us means.
You can trust in our laws and governance.
You can invest with confidence in our institutions.
You can build a secure supply chain, in our stable democracy.
You can grow and thrive in an economy that values your investment and rewards your enterprise and aspiration.
You can employ Australian workers, with confidence in their skills and smarts and productivity.
You can draw on Australian research and innovation and know that it’s world class.
You can take on the new challenges and opportunities of emerging markets – from a stable and familiar foundation.
In a time of global economic uncertainty – you can be certain about Australia.
Our Government wants to see Australia make this moment count.
We want to make the most of our nation’s strengths – and our people’s potential.
We want to make more things in Australia.
We want you to be part of seizing this opportunity – and sharing in it.
I look forward to continuing this conversation.


It is good to be here with you today to talk about this serious subject.
All of us appreciate the benefits the internet has brought us. Yet we are also aware that, within its transformative gift of connectivity, there are risks to our children.
The challenge we face is constantly evolving, and different countries are tackling it in different ways.
I want to talk about our way – and listen to the approaches being taken by others.
On the 10th of December, Australia will introduce social media age restrictions that go further than any country has before.
Not cutting access to publicly available content, but delaying the ability to set up social media accounts from the current age of 13, until the age of 16.
This is a sensible but overdue step to protect young Australians at a critical stage of their development, giving them three more years to build real world connections and online resilience.
Three more years to get better at spotting the fakes and the dangers.
At learning the difference between online followers and real friends.
And at becoming more adept at avoiding the pressures of measuring themselves against impossible standards.
Three more years of being shaped by real life experience, not algorithms.
And developing the increased maturity and the perspective that will allow them to shrug off what, a couple of years earlier, might have felt overwhelming.
It’s the right thing to do by children, and it is the right thing to do by parents.
It isn’t foolproof, but it is a crucial step in the right direction.
As social media evolves, and as the tug-of-war between real life and endless scrolling grows ever more uneven, the load is not one that should be borne by kids and their parents alone.
With this law, we are saying: You don’t have to.
Australia is proudly bipartisan when it comes to online safety.
As we tackle menaces ranging from deepfake pornography to violent extremist material, we work together across the political spectrum.
Indeed, Australia’s independent online regulator – the eSafety Commissioner – was established by the previous Government, and supported by my party.
Success, of course, is always most assured when government, business and civil society work together.
I would like to acknowledge grassroots campaigns including 36 Months and News Corp’s Let Them Be Kids.
Through them, I have had the solemn privilege of spending time with parents who have felt the full, devastating impact that social media can have.
Some remain on the long journey with their children towards mental and physical healing.
Others, devastatingly, have lost a child to suicide.
I have listened to their stories of girls and boys with bright futures, only to be so overwhelmed by what got to them through their social media accounts, they saw no other way out.
It is an experience that affected me deeply.
In what world should a 14-year-old be exposed to sexual extortion?
It is a wilderness no child should know.
It is a burden no parent should have to bear.
And yet, amid their grief, these mums and dads have found the most profound way to express their love for their children.
They are working to give other young Australians the chance of a future safe from online harm.
Their courage is a powerful reminder of why our Government is determined to back them and keep young Australians safe online.
We want children to have a childhood.
To be off their phones and on the sporting field, or playing music, or hanging out with friends.
To live a life lit up not by the glow of a screen but by all the wonderful ingredients that go into making the human experience.
We want them engaging with each other on a face-to-face basis, because when the focus is on social interaction rather than social media, society benefits.
We know from experience that schools banning phones in the classroom has produced real and positive results – both academically and socially.
In contrast, we know social media is causing social harm for some of our kids.
There is a clear link between the rise of social media and the harm to the mental health of young people across the world.
We need to give kids more time to develop the maturity and the skills to navigate the online world safely.
What we are doing isn’t easy. But the burden that social media can place on our young people is often far harder.
On the 10th of December, we will begin to lighten their load.
We know the world will be watching – and we are glad to have you with us.
It is now my honour to introduce a true inspiration.
Someone who has found the courage to channel her grief into the most profound and powerful call for change.
Her story personifies why we are here.
Please welcome, Emma Mason.


Secretary-General
Colleagues
This is the decisive decade for acting on the environmental challenge of climate change – and seizing the economic opportunities of clean energy.
We all grasp the scale and the urgency of our task.
We all understand the consequences of inaction: for our environment, for our economies, for our people’s way of life and for our children’s future.
Australians know the toll taken by extreme weather events becoming more frequent and more intense.
The devastation that cyclones, floods, bushfires and drought inflict on our communities.
And Australia knows we are not alone.
We are all involved.
An essential message that each of us can send to our citizens is this: it is not too late.
If we act now and move with common purpose, then we can do more than just guard against the very worst.
We can protect our environment and build a stronger and fairer economy for the next generation.
That is the optimism and determination Australia brings to this task.
Today, I present Australia’s next Nationally Determined Contribution.
Australia’s 2035 target is to reduce emissions by 62 to 70 per cent on 2005 levels.
This target is ambitious - importantly, it is achievable.
It is backed by the independent, scientific advice of our Climate Change Authority.
It will mean that over the next decade, we halve our current level of emissions.
And it will ensure Australia honours our commitment to the Paris Agreement – and its goal of keeping global temperatures below dangerous levels.
Setting targets and showing ambition matters.
It provides accountability for government – and certainty for investment.
What is most important is having the practical plan to reach our goal.
This is where Australian clean energy is the key.
Just as our traditional resources have helped power the extraordinary economic transformation of our region, our renewables can underpin new prosperity for the growing economies of the Indo-Pacific.
Our Pacific family is partnering with us in our bid to host COP 31.
We want to bring the world with us on climate change.
Not by asking any nation to forego the jobs or security its people deserve.
But by working with every nation to seize and share those opportunities.
None of us can succeed alone.
But together, we cannot fail.


Eighty years ago, the people of our nations came together and put their trust in each other’s humanity.
An act of faith all the more extraordinary when we recall the devastation that still gripped their world.
Yet out of the grief and ruin of war, that generation found the courage, the wisdom and the compassion to work together for a better peace.
To build a world governed by rights and rules, not fear or force.
Where the sovereignty of every nation is respected.
The essential dignity and equality of every man, woman and child upheld.
And where the shared mission and purpose of the United Nations is not merely to contain the threat of war, it is to create the conditions for peace.
To provide a framework for settling our disputes.
To foster the dialogue that enables us to manage our differences, and deepen our understanding.
And to nourish the opportunity, build the prosperity and deliver the economic justice on which true and enduring security always depends.
If, 80 years ago, this task had been entrusted to the great powers alone, then in all likelihood we would not be gathering here today.
Instead, history would note the United Nations as little more than a noble experiment.
The reason this institution has endured is because it belongs to all of us.
Because it has been built and shaped by all of us.
And it is up to all of us to bring new strength to the United Nations’ enduring mission.
To renew our commitment to the principle that peace is both our common cause and our collective responsibility.
The creation of the international rules based order owes much to the post-war leadership of the United States of America.
For the region Australia calls home, that stability has underpinned a generational economic transformation.
But we cannot ask – and should not expect - any one nation to uphold the rules or guarantee the security on which all of us depend.
We all have a role to play in making sure that the system which has enabled the rise of new powers, safeguards the rights and aspirations of every nation big and small.
For Australia, this means investing in our capabilities and investing in our relationships.
Investing in development, in defence and in diplomacy.
To strengthen the security of our region, to support the sovereignty of our neighbours and to contribute to the cause of peace beyond the Indo-Pacific.
We promote unity in the Pacific Islands Forum.
We are deepening our engagement with ASEAN, and elevating our partnerships with Indonesia, India, the Republic of Korea and Japan.
And we are breaking new ground with old friends: in the United Kingdom, the European Union and our principal ally, the United States.
Because we see mutual understanding, shared prosperity and economic co-operation as the most powerful counterpoints to confrontation, isolation or conflict.
Wars are often started by countries who imagine there is something to gain.  
The more we can do to reinforce the architecture of peace and prosperity, the more we remind nations of everything they stand to lose.
Colleagues
Whenever a head of government speaks to this Assembly about prosperity or security, they will always be met with calls for that work to begin at home.
Part of our job is demonstrating to the people we serve that what happens in the world, matters to them.
That when we co-operate to enhance security, contribute to alleviating poverty or commit to protecting the environment, when we support the agency of forums such as the G20, or APEC or invest in diplomatic partnerships like The Quad, none of this means setting our national interests or our people’s values aside, it means working to fulfil them.
The United Nations is much more than an arena for the great powers to veto each other’s ambitions.  
This is a platform for middle powers and small nations to voice – and achieve - our aspirations.  
That is why Australia is seeking a place on the UN Security Council in 2029-30.  
And it is why we are bidding to co-host the 31st Conference of the Parties, with our Pacific family, nations for whom climate change is more than an environmental challenge, it is an existential threat.  
This is a place for the global spotlight to shine on suffering and struggles that might otherwise be forgotten.
And for the international community to work together, to advance our shared interests – and to tackle challenges we cannot meet alone.
In 2025, we are confronted by all manner of these challenges in old forms and new. 
Dictators whose hold on power derives solely from their capacity for cruelty to their own citizens.
Tyrants who invade sovereign nations to further their own ambitions.
Regimes willing to crush their own people beneath the weight of oppression.
Autocracies deploying new technology to undermine our trust in democracy, institutions and each other.
Intimidation and coercion on the seas and in the skies, endangering lives and risking escalation.
Terrorists - and states which sponsor terrorism – spreading hatred.
And if ever we had the luxury of imagining that breaches of international law were not our concern, or that conflict and turmoil in another part of the world could not affect us, those days are long gone.
Just last month, Australian security agencies confirmed that the Iranian regime orchestrated the firebombing of a synagogue in Melbourne and a Jewish restaurant in Sydney.
Criminal acts of cowardice, aimed at spreading fear.
We expelled the Iranian Ambassador from Australia.
The first time since the Second World War our country has taken such a step.
And here at the United Nations we repeat to the world, there is no place for antisemitism.
Colleagues
It is not the Australian way to try and impose our values on other nations.
But when we deal with the world, we bring our values with us.
And we strive to back our words with actions.
Australia helped to draft the United Nations charter.
And we were part of the first peacekeeping operation under UN authority, supporting independence for Indonesia. 
As an economy engaged in the fastest growing region of the world in human history, Australia champions the benefits of free and fair trade.
And we work to strengthen it.
By advocating for working people to share in the prosperity trade creates: through better wages, safer workplaces and the elimination of exploitation and modern slavery.
And by supporting the security of communications and maritime travel that makes trade possible, through the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, including in our region and the South China Sea.   
And as a proud member of the Pacific Family, as a continent home to some of the greatest natural treasures on the planet, and as a nation blessed with the traditional resources, critical minerals, skills and sunlight and space to power the global shift to net zero.
Australia is acting to meet the environmental challenge of climate change while working to seize and share the economic opportunities of renewable energy.
We will meet our 2030 target of 43 per cent emissions reduction on 2005 levels.
And last week we set our target for 2035: cutting emissions by 62 to 70 per cent.
We are honouring our commitment to the Paris Agreement and its goal of keeping global temperatures below dangerous levels.
Our target is ambitious – importantly it is achievable.
And more than anything else, Australia’s embrace of clean renewable energy will get us there.
Clean energy can carry the world beyond the false choice between economic growth and environmental responsibility.
Because clean energy enables the rapidly growing economies of the Indo-Pacific to industrialise and decarbonise at the same time.
And to continue lifting their people’s living standards while lowering their nation’s emissions.
Colleagues
As one of the world’s oldest democracies – and one of the first where women could vote in elections and stand for Parliament, Australia knows societies and economies are stronger when they draw on the talents of all their citizens.
Indeed, it was a great Australian, Jessie Street, one of just eight women among the 850 delegates in San Francisco in 1945, who insisted that the UN Charter make specific mention of sexual discrimination.
Because, she said:
“Where the rules are silent, women are not usually considered.”
That is why Australia proudly works to promote education, economic opportunity and empowerment for women and girls around the world.
As the home of the world’s oldest continuous culture, we honour the knowledge and resilience of Indigenous people everywhere.
And as a country strengthened and enriched by the hard work and aspiration of people drawn from every faith and tradition on earth, we stand against discrimination and prejudice, everywhere.
As a people who believe that kindness is an act of courage, we want to see aid workers delivering food, water and medicine to conflict zones, protected.
This week, Australia and our partners launched the Declaration for the Protection of Humanitarian personnel.
I thank the more than 100 nations that have already endorsed the declaration.
And as a nation that knows security depends on sovereignty, Australia stands with the courageous people of Ukraine in their struggle against Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion.
We share the resolve of every member of the ‘Coalition of the Willing’ to secure peace on Ukraine’s terms.
It is the nature of the world the United Nations serves, that this institution is constantly tested.
In times of global uncertainty, there are no easy days. 
But there are clear choices.
If the United Nations steps back, we all lose ground.
If we give people reason to doubt the value of co-operation, then the risk of conflict becoming the default option grows.
If we allow any nation to imagine itself outside the rules, or above them, then the sovereignty of every nation is eroded.
If we resign ourselves to the idea that war is inevitable, or relegate ourselves to the status of disinterested bystanders, if our only response to every crisis is to insist that there is nothing we can do, then we risk being trusted with nothing.  
We risk a world where dialogue and diplomacy are viewed as a dead end, rather than the vital road to understanding.
Where co-operation to meet new challenges facing humanity, yields to old differences of race or faith or ethnicity.
And where people beset by conflict, poverty or inequality come to look on this Assembly as little more than a final resting place for good intentions.
All of us proud to belong to this institution, understand this is not the case.
But knowing that, or saying it, is not enough - we have to prove it.
Not by pointing to longevity, or appealing to history.
But by reforming the United Nations so that it can serve us better in the present.
And by working together to shape the future.
Because while eighty years is a significant milestone, the true value of the United Nations is not counted in decades, it is measured in deeds.
In actions that make a positive difference to people’s lives.
That is how the UN proves its worth – and makes its case:
By delivering food to villages in the grip of famine. 
By providing vaccines that spare families from disease.
By bringing clean water to a community on the brink.
By helping countries break the shackles of poverty.
By liberating children from exploitation or abuse.
By guarding against the spread of nuclear weapons – and working for a world free of nuclear weapons.
By demonstrating that the principles on which the United Nations was founded still hold life and weight and meaning and hope for the people who need them most.
And nowhere is that task more urgent than the Middle East.
For decades, leaders have come to this podium in search of new words and new ways to call the world to action on a two state solution.
Today, I look to words that Australia helped write, 80 years ago.
Australia is calling for a ceasefire.
For the immediate release of the hostages.
For aid to flow to those in desperate need.
And for the terrorists of Hamas to have no role in Gaza’s future.
And - this week - Australia recognised the State of Palestine.
Because, to quote from the Charter that forms the very foundations of this institution and reflects the very best of its idealism.
We are determined:
“To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
To reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights.
To promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
And for these ends: to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours.”
It was right eighty years ago, it is right today.
Every nation that takes a seat in this room has put its name to those principles.
Peacekeepers and aid workers from all over the world have risked and lost their lives in the service of those ideals.
So we must ask ourselves:
When can those words hold meaning, if not now?
Where can those words apply, if they do not apply to the Middle East?
And what can we, the members of the United Nations say we stand for, if we cannot say we stand for this.
There is a moment of opportunity here – let us seize it.
Colleagues
In the early days of this Assembly, Papua New Guinea was considered an Australian territory.
Last week, that proud nation celebrated the 50th anniversary of its independence.
And soon, Australia’s nearest neighbour will become our newest ally.
Times change, nations and regions change with them.
But the ideals and imperatives that built this place are timeless.
More than ever, we must trust in each other’s humanity.
More than ever, we must choose to succeed together rather than risk failing alone.  
More than ever, we must work to see the promises of this place deliver real progress for the people we serve.
More than ever, we must work to build a future true to the United Nations’ noble purpose and worthy of our people’s greatest qualities.
We all have a part to play - and Australia, just as we always have - will always play our part.



Thank you all, for that very warm Labour Party welcome.
Here in Liverpool we are 10,000 miles from where I joined the Labor Party.
A long and winding road.
But in our mighty global movement, you never walk alone.
And – for balance - a shout-out to all the Everton supporters here as well.
Thank you to my mate, and your leader, Prime Minister Keir Starmer.
Thank you for the great honour of inviting me to speak at your conference.
And thank you for your kind introduction.
Keir and I got to know each other well during our time as Leaders of the Opposition.
Back when we thought that was the toughest job in politics.
In Opposition, I was always grateful for the chance to share ideas and compare notes.
In Government, I value the opportunities we have to work together and get results.
To take action together on issues that matter to our two nations and to the wider world.
From standing together, with the Coalition of Willing, to help secure peace on Ukraine’s terms…
…to striving together, to mobilise global action on climate change…
…to investing together, so our citizens can build and crew a new generation of submarines through our AUKUS Security Partnership…
…and working together to break the cycle of violence in the Middle East and build something better, by recognising the state of Palestine…
…as a step towards the two state solution that is so essential for Israelis and Palestinians to live in lasting peace.
Can I also acknowledge a great Australian, a Labor legend and my friend, the 27th Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard.
Friends
None of us who join the labour movement, whether in Australia or here in the UK, do so in search of an easy life.
And no-one comes to a labour conference, expecting a quiet weekend.
Our conferences are big, diverse and passionate family gatherings.
And like any family, when we all get together, we have our differences.
Commentators sometimes fixate on those.
But the debates we hold here are not just healthy, they’re essential.
They are a sign of life.
The energy and enthusiasm of our rank and file members, has always been the beating heart of our movement.
As parliamentarians, we stand on your shoulders.
And as parties, we draw our strength from solidarity of values – not uniformity of thought.
That’s what all of us who belong to the labour movement understand.
The reason passions run high at our conferences, is because the stakes are high.
Because what happens here, matters.
Because our conferences are about what we want for our country.
We deal with real issues, grounded in the real lives and aspirations of the people we seek to serve.
And just like Liverpool itself, this great city of creativity, invention, and reinvention…
…our conference has always been a place for us to define our mission and renew our purpose.
That is how we have endured and evolved…
…by having the courage to test ourselves, to demand more of each other…
…and by demonstrating to a new generation, that we are alive to the challenges they face and engaged in the work of solutions.
That’s what both our nations did after the Second World War.
When Clement Attlee and Ben Chifley and their Labor governments worked to build societies worthy of those who’d fought to defend the world from fascism and tyranny.
By opening the doors of opportunity through education.
By creating secure, well-paid jobs in manufacturing.
By treating housing as not only the need, but the right, of every citizen.
By making medicine affordable for all, through Australia’s world-leading Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
And with the launch of that great pioneering endeavour in universal healthcare, the National Health Service.
A promise that still binds, defines and drives both our Labor Governments.
That no matter where you live, or how much you earn, you should be able to access and afford the health care you need.
The same work of renewal drove Harold Wilson and Gough Whitlam through the 1960s and 70s.
When their governments made equality for women a Labor cause.
When they grasped that for Labor to continue to be the party of fairness and justice…
…we had to become a party for the elimination of discrimination and prejudice.
Just as, in the 1980s and 90s, Bob Hawke and Paul Keating passed the torch to Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.
Where, in both our countries, Labor was able to remain the party of compassion and opportunity…
…by embracing our role as the party of openness, aspiration and prosperity.
In the pages of the history books – and with the benefit of hindsight – all of that seems like a natural progression.
But we know different.
We know every generation encountered resistance.
We know every generation had to overcome sceptics and cynics.
And we know that every Labor generation understood that to fulfil their purpose…
…achieve their goals, give life to their values and keep faith with the people and movement they served…
…they had to be in Government.
Because Government is where you get things done.
The Labor mission has never been a theoretical exercise - or a rhetorical one.
Our work is measured in deeds - and it depends on delivery.
On change our citizens can see.
Tangible, practical outcomes that make a positive difference to people’s lives.
This is where, all of you in the UK, have the most valuable resource for any Labor Government.
The asset every progressive leader in every positive and ambitious government wishes they had more of. Time.
To give you some sense of that, in Australia, my colleagues and I were re-elected less than five months ago.
And yet our next election is due before yours.
For Labor Governments, every day counts.
Because it takes time to turn promises into progress.
It takes time for plans to work – and be seen to work.
For inflation to fall, wages to rise, new homes to be finished, new energy connected, new hospitals to open, new investments in education to flow into results.
It takes time to tackle problems that have been created over decades.
It takes time to repay trust by delivering on our commitments – and in doing so build trust for future action.
It takes time to make change with people – and make change work for people.
And none of that means we can expect, or ask for, patience.
Cost of living pressures do not wait.
Communities that need new jobs and homes cannot wait.
Families that need better schools and hospitals cannot wait.
The challenges the world throws at us: from economic turmoil to threats to our national security, never wait.
And the action we need to take on climate change, the work we need to do to seize the jobs and opportunities of clean energy, that cannot wait.
So while governments always need to be able to tell the difference between what’s urgent and what’s important…
…in the end, we have to do both.
To take immediate action in a way that anticipates and creates future opportunities.
To navigate stormy seas, while always keeping our eyes on the horizon.
And to bring both optimism and urgency to the work of delivery.
To acknowledge the pressures that people are under.
Explain the causes.
And take action to help.
To make it clear, that while we cannot always predict or control the challenges we will face - we can determine how we respond.
In Australia, our election came against the backdrop of the worst global inflation since the 1980s and the biggest international energy crisis since the 1970s.
And there was no quick fix, no easy answer.
These same circumstances had brought about the defeat of incumbents around the world.
And had some predicting that our first term Labor Government would be defeated, or reduced to minority.
But one of the reasons we won re-election and, indeed were able to increase our majority…
…is because in difficult times, we offered people real hope.
We didn’t pretend that we had solved every problem in just three years.
But we could point to an economy that was turning the corner: inflation down, wages up, unemployment low and interest rates starting to fall.
And we offered a second term agenda that built on the patient and disciplined work we had done in our first term.
A positive plan to cut taxes, boost wages, build homes and make it easier to see a doctor for free.
That is the work we are focused on delivering now.
That’s the essential task of every Labor Government.
To apply our timeless Labor values to the challenges of our time.
And friends, in 2025, our values and purpose and effort are needed more than ever before.
In an era where Artificial Intelligence is transforming our economies…
…we must stand up for secure jobs and fair wages.
We must show our citizens that what Harold Wilson called ‘the white heat of technology’ can forge new opportunities for working people.
At a time when young people feel the housing market is beyond their reach…
…we must build the new homes and create the economic opportunity that revives the dream of home ownership.
For cities and regions on the frontlines of economic change…
…we must invest in the education and training that empowers people to fulfil their potential…
…and we must build the clean energy that will power new jobs and industries.
We approach this work with determination and with optimism.
Because all of these problems can be solved.
All of these opportunities can be seized.
But only if our people continue to see our institutions as the best way to make
it happen.
We all know this is a time when trust in governments and institutions is under challenge.
We all sense this is an era when our capacity for peaceful disagreement is being tested.
But I what I see here in UK Labour, is the same determination that I know lives in every member of Australian Labor.
An absolute resolve to stand together and defend democracy itself.
Friends
This is where one of the oldest choices that both our parties made, remains one of the most important.
In Australia, and here in the United Kingdom, the trade union movement chose to advance the rights of working people, as a political party.
In Australia and the UK, Labor chose democracy.
We chose parliament and progress, over protest.
We chose to be both a movement for change and a party of government
We chose to make ourselves part of a system where our political fortunes rise and fall on the power of our ideas and the judgement of our citizens.
We set ourselves the task of winning people’s trust – and proving worthy of it.
And make no mistake, when we chose democracy, we chose the hard road.
Because building to last, takes time.
Delivering change is more difficult than demanding it.
Working within the system is tougher than railing against it.
And creating solutions requires more of us than shouting slogans.
In a democracy, being a party of government means grappling with uncertainty and complexity.
It means dealing with the gritty realities of the world as it is.
It means making – and owning - tough decisions, in the national interest.
Being honest with people about the scale of the challenges facing us – and the time and effort required to meet them.
But – friends - we would not have it any other way.
We are better for all of that.
Our plans and policies are stronger for it.
Our vision and our ambition for our people is bigger because of it.
And our countries are better for it too.
Because, in the end, the hard road is the only one that takes us anywhere.
Tearing things down is easy – but it doesn’t leave you with anything.
The low politics of fear and resentment are easy – but they only divide the country, they don’t advance it.
The things worth doing, are hard.
And things worth doing, are worth fighting for.
Friends
Democracy was a defining choice that both our parties made.
I want to finish with an old truth that both our movements know.
A message that the men and women of the trade union movement carried on their banners more than a century ago.
“Unity of labour is the hope of the world.”
That has always been labour at our best.
Unity of party - and unity of purpose.
A movement that looks out to the world with hope for the future – and works together to make it better.
Unity of labour reflects the power of solidarity to drive change.
And it reflects the responsibility of labour to promote unity.
To foster co-operation and understanding in the world.
And to build cohesion, respect and harmony at home.
We do that by embracing patriotism as a truly progressive cause.
By demonstrating that our love of country is what drives us to serve it.
And also to change it, for the better.
By encouraging pride in everything that sets our nations apart from the world.
By building faith in everything that brings us together.
And by making it clear that the strength and power of the symbols that unite us lies in the fact that they belong to all of our citizens.
Because in both our nations - our democracy, our laws and our values are for all of us.
For all of us to take pride in.
For all of us to protect.
For all of us to build on.
Unity of labour is the hope of the world.
And in that spirit of hope, unity and solidarity – I wish you all the very best for a fantastic conference.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It is a great honour to be with you all for the launch of an outstanding new addition to Australian political biography and indeed Australian history.
Among many distinguished guests, can I acknowledge all the members of the Whitlam family joining us here today.
Including Tony Whitlam, who I learned from this book was very nearly blessed with the name ‘Justinian Dovey Whitlam’ to achieve what Gough called a ‘crescendo effect’.
The tremendous interest surrounding this book speaks for Gough Whitlam’s powerful and enduring hold on the affections and imaginations of so many Australians.
Not just the true believers who have ‘maintained their enthusiasm’.
But all of us whose aspirations, communities and lives have been shaped by the Whitlam legacy.
All of us who have drawn inspiration from Gough’s essential optimism.
From his determination to liberate the talents and uplift the horizons of our citizens, through access to free education and universal healthcare.
From his reimagining of Australia’s place in the world.
From his assertion of equality for women: in our economy, our laws and our society.
From his leadership on land rights.
And from his defining belief that it is the mission of Labor Governments to reject the ‘habits and fears of the past’ and seize the opportunities of the future.
For any author to put forward a new account of the life of such a figure, is an act of real courage.
Especially when you consider that the first three people to write about the Whitlam Government in depth were Laurie Oakes, Graham Freudenberg and Gough Whitlam himself.
Think about that trio.
One of Australia’s best journalists.
Australia’s greatest political speechwriter.
And the Prime Minister at the epicentre of events.
It is a profound credit to Troy Bramston that his work not only belongs in such esteemed company – it actually adds to the picture those giants have painted.
Laurie Oakes gave us a portrait of a new-generation Australian politician, on the march to the Prime Ministership.
Graham Freudenberg wrote about Gough with the deep admiration and affection that characterised Ted Sorensen’s reflections on John F. Kennedy
And – in The Truth of the Matter – Gough was striving above all to set the record straight.
At the distance of 50 years, this book takes us beyond the consuming passions of those immediate political struggles.
And true to its title, offers us a ‘Vista of the New’.
Of course, the fresh insights in these pages are only possible because of the years of research that have been poured into this book.
Troy writes about the staff on Gough’s 1969 election campaign having to haul around a huge trunk filled with volumes of Hansard and a vast accumulation of newspaper clippings and index cards of policy proposals.
That’s also how I picture Troy’s process: part author, part archaeologist.
Sifting through a near-century of correspondence and archival material, as well as years of interviews he has undertaken with so many Labor legends, including, Gough himself.
If you want to know which registry office Gough’s grandmother was married in, or what his primary school maths report was like, or read extracts from the letters he wrote to Margaret during the war, all of that is in here.
But this book is more than the sum of its many parts, more than a mere catalogue or chronology.
In offering us a comprehensive account of Gough’s life before politics and a thoughtful examination of what drew him to parliament and the road he followed to the leadership, we gain a deeper understanding of the forces that shaped his character.
Growing up in Canberra, believing in the value and honour of public service.
His political awakening under Curtin and the 1944 referendum that inspired a lifetime obsession with reforming the Constitution.
His mastery of the House of Representatives, a reflection of his deep respect for that institution.
And that shyness some took as diffidence, which made him something of a solitary individual among the collective.
All this matters.
Because as the accounts of Cabinet and Caucus make clear, perhaps more than any other Government in Australian history, the Whitlam Government was made in its leader’s image.
It bore the imprint of its Prime Minister’s personality, in all its mercurial brilliance and all its crash-through-or-crash courage.
Paul Keating, who makes many insightful contributions to this book, once remarked that he gave more speeches about the Second World War than any Australian Prime Minister since John Curtin.
This was because his four years as PM, almost exactly tracked Curtin’s four years, half a century apart.
In reflecting on all those 50 year anniversaries, Keating said he felt:
“In the lee of Curtin’s trajectory”.
And that this enriched his understanding of the twists and turns of the Pacific war.
For my colleagues and me, our time in office has tracked the 50 year anniversary of the Whitlam Government.
On the 2nd of December 2022, I had the honour of being there in Cabramatta, as a Labor Prime Minister, for the opening of the newly-restored Whitlam family home.
The suburban backyard where people celebrated the ‘It’s Time’ victory, in the community that powered Gough’s passion for urban renewal.
When I travelled to China for the first time as Prime Minister in November 2023, that important step in the deliberate and patient stabilisation of our relationship also marked fifty years since Whitlam’s historic visit.
Penny Wong and I visited Beijing’s Temple of Heaven, the scene of that famous photo of Gough putting his ear to the curve of the Echo Wall.
That was our way of upholding the wisdom of that Chinese proverb: “when drinking water, do not forget those who dug the well.”
When we hosted the leaders of every member of ASEAN at a special summit in Melbourne in 2024, we commemorated a half-century of Australian partnership - an essential element of our engagement in the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
And last month in Port Moresby, we celebrated the golden jubilee of Papua New Guinean independence.
Just as Gough famously declared that independence for PNG ‘was an idea whose time had come’ I was proud to say to Prime Minister Marape that elevating our relationship with PNG to the status of an alliance was an idea whose time had come.
Each of those milestones – and so many more – inspire us and they remind us that Labor Governments are always at our best, when we build to last.
As I said in the House of Representatives, 11 years ago this week, when we came together as a Parliament to pay tribute to the life and service of Gough Whitlam:
“The legacy of our political contribution can be judged by its permanency.”
I do want to make this very personal point.
I love biographies but this is the first Prime Ministerial biography I have read while holding the title, it therefore became a very dynamic and intellectually challenging experience.
There is wisdom in here.
Do not ignore warning signs, engage and respect colleagues.
Understand the dialectical implications of decisions, and be orderly in your decision-making.
This book holds real, ‘contemporary relevance’ for anyone interested in politics or government or Australia’s place in the world.
And while The Vista of the New deals with the injustice of the Dismissal in a characteristically thorough way, importantly, it does not limit itself by looking at Gough Whitlam’s legacy purely through that prism.
It doesn’t diminish the performance of that Labor Government by dealing only with the drama and deception that brought about its downfall.
In the preface to this book, Troy recounts a moving moment in 2013 when Gough said to him:
“I want to be remembered as an achiever, not as a martyr”
This book honours that hope.
This is an account of profound achievements.
And its publication represents a significant achievement too.
It is my great pleasure to wish Gough Whitlam: The Vista of the New, all the very best.


I begin by acknowledging the Anangu, the Traditional Owners of the extraordinary land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to your Elders, past and present.
Ngayulu-na  pukul-pa  kuwari  Anangu-ku  mantangka  tjunguringkula  ngaranyi.
[Translation: I am happy to be together (with you) on Anangu land]
I acknowledge distinguished guests, including the Chair of the Central Land Council, Warren Williams; Chair of Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park, Tapaya Edwards, the Northern Territory Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Steven Edgington, the NT Minister for Parks and Wildlife and Tourism, Marie-Clare Boothby, and the local Territory member, Chansey Paech.
I also acknowledge community members who have travelled from across the region.
And, of course, Her Excellency, the Governor-General, and her partner, Simeon Beckett, as well as my colleagues from across Parliament.
We come together on the eve of an anniversary that stands tall in the story of our nation: 40 years since the Commonwealth of Australia returned Uluru and Kata Tjuta to the Anangu people.
It was a milestone in Aboriginal land rights, and a powerful moment in the story of our continent. 
It was also the fulfilment of a promise made by Bob Hawke less than two years earlier, barely eight months into his prime ministership.
And it reached its culmination on that bright October day in 1985, when Governor-General Sir Ninian Stephens arrived to hand over the title deeds before the elated crowd.
I think back to the words of Aunty Pamela Taylor, who shared this memory during the 30th anniversary:
We were so happy that after all that struggle, all the talking, the fight to get it back – that it was finally going to be given back. … Everybody drew together to celebrate, it was a really happy time.
What rings so clearly in her words is the reminder that, as Australians, we are at our best together.
We also celebrate 40 years of joint management by Anangu Traditional Owners and the Australian Government through Parks Australia.
It has brought together cultural and scientific knowledge, different governance processes and different law systems, working together and making decisions together.
As we come together to reflect on what has been achieved over the years, it is also an important moment for young Anangu to see the achievement of their community and take this into the future.
Yet, as we reflect on the past, and the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead of us, we look to Uluru and behold a physical presence that seems somehow vaster than time.
Around the world, it is instantly recognised as Australian. In Australia, it stands as a monument to a people's love of country and their determination to see justice done.
And it stands as firmly in our hearts as it does in the heart of our continent.
We rejoice in its light and its shadows. We are captivated by the endless shifting of its colours, whether it is blazing in sunshine, brooding beneath the stars, or cascading with desert rain.
It is vast and immoveable, yet it moves us in ways we cannot always explain.
A body of stone whose every fold and ripple and cave is alive with a spirituality so profound and venerated, it is an experience of singular power just to be in its presence and fill our eyes with its wonder.
We walk here in footprints stretching across the millennia, in a landscape that has rung with Anangu voices for generations beyond counting.
Forty years ago, after decades of exclusion, the Anangu's rightful relationship with this place was finally recognised.
And the Anangu responded by choosing to share it with all of us.
Tourists flock to it, rangers care for it. All Australians are welcome here. The whole world is welcome here.
Here in the centre of our continent, there is room for all of us.
That is a privilege we can take joy in. It is something we can take pride in.
It is a deep honour for me to be the first Prime Minister to attend a Handback Anniversary.
On behalf of Australia, I say to the Anangu:
We thank you for your patience. We thank you for your grace.
And we draw together in happiness.
Uwa palya, wiyaringu.
[Traditional ending that translates: Yes, it’s good]


Among all the distinguished guests who have joined us here today, can I acknowledge Minister for Higher Education Zambry.
Monash University Vice Chancellor, Professor Pickering.
Monash University Malaysia President, Professor Adeeba.
And Lendlease CEO and Australia’s Business Champion for Malaysia Tony Lombardo.
It is a great pleasure to be with you for the launch of Monash’s innovative new campus right here in the heart of Kuala Lumpur.
This bold development represents an exciting step forward for Monash University Malaysia, and a further strengthening of the bonds between our two nations.
Australians and Malaysians learning more about each other, by learning alongside each other.
Increasing Australia’s presence and investment in education in the region is a priority recommendation set out in Invested: Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040.
And I would like to acknowledge Nicholas Moore, Australia’s Special Envoy to Southeast Asia and the author of our Strategy.
In many respects, our partnership with Malaysia is the template.
Malaysia is one of Australia’s largest transnational education partners, hosting campuses of four Australian universities.
Monash University Malaysia was the first in 1998.
Not just the first Australian university to open here, the first international university, full stop.
It is has grown to become Monash’s largest and most successful campus outside Australia.
Monash enrolments here reached a record high in 2024 with over 11,000 students from 85 countries.
Of these, 64 per cent were Malaysian students.
By the end of May this year, just over 30,000 students had graduated – more than two thirds of them locals.
Each of those numbers represents someone better equipped to reach their potential, live their aspirations and seize the opportunities of the future.
A future that is more clearly visible from here.
Since 2019, Monash University Malaysia and ASEAN research collaboration has been steadily increasing across critical areas, including digital technology, AI and cyber security, climate change and green finance, as well as healthcare.
It is a reminder that even in a story nearly three decades in the making, there are many more exciting chapters to write.
Because everything that has been achieved to date provides us with the inspiration – and the confidence – to aim higher and build bigger.
That is the spirit we are seeing here as Monash partners with The Exchange TRX to deliver a $1 billion new campus.
Monash’s partnership with TRX is a great example of what has been achieved by the commercial advocacy of the Australian High Commission in Kuala Lumpur and the new Deal Teams – Deal Teams I announced when I launched our Invested Strategy two years ago in Jakarta.
I would also like to acknowledge Lendlease as a co-developer of The Exchange TRX, a major mixed-use development within the TRX precinct.
All of it adds up to a vote of confidence in the future.
A future that Australian and Malaysian Monash graduates will shape together.


Thank you, Prime Minister Anwar, for hosting this 5th annual ASEAN-Australia Summit and for your generous hospitality as the ASEAN Chair this year.
Australia and Malaysia are great friends.
As we celebrate 70 years of diplomatic relations, we can reflect on the remarkable partnership that exists between our two nations.
Across trade and tourism, our education sector and our growing business to business connections, the Australia-Malaysia relationship is going from strength to strength.  
Can I also thank President Prabowo for Indonesia’s ongoing and invaluable support as Australia’s ASEAN Country Coordinator.
I want to take this opportunity to welcome Timor-Leste's admission to ASEAN as its 11th member.
As both a near neighbour and longstanding friend, Australia strongly supports this outcome for ASEAN and Timor-Leste, and has been providing practical assistance to Timor-Leste with its accession.
ASEAN is central to the strength and success of our diverse and dynamic region.
At its best, it brings together our shared aspirations and our collective determination to meet our common challenges.
This is a forum where we can work together to build and sustain a peaceful, stable, and prosperous region for all our citizens.
I am pleased that today we have agreed the ASEAN-Australia Leaders’ Statement on Conflict Prevention and Crisis Management.
This important statement demonstrates our shared commitment to upholding a peaceful and stable Southeast Asia.
Guarding against conflict and other potential threats to the rules and norms that advance all of our interests.
As ASEAN partners, maintaining open and constructive dialogue is always valuable.
The Statement highlights ASEAN’s pivotal role in deepening mutual trust between member nations, to reduce the risk of misunderstanding, navigate differences and prevent escalation.
It draws from and builds on the Vision Statement that we as leaders issued at the ASEAN-Australia Special Summit I hosted in Melbourne last year.
My Government is committed to deepening this economic engagement.
Seizing the opportunities for investment and trade that we identified through our regional strategy for 2040, titled: Invested.
And at a time of global economic uncertainty, Australia remains invested – and committed – to Southeast Asia’s growth and prosperity.
Three-quarters of our total overseas development assistance funding benefits our region.
Our $1.28 billion development program in Southeast Asia is about building economic resilience.
Embracing the opportunities of the digital transformation.
Supporting cleaner, cheaper energy to deliver stronger economies and a healthier environment.
And investing in better health services and outcomes for our neighbours.
Above all, Australia’s partnership with ASEAN is anchored in deep trust between our nations and enduring friendship between our peoples.
Just as our region’s prosperity has been created through shared opportunity.
Our security depends on our collective responsibility – and our shared agency.
We cannot succumb to the fatalism that assumes our future is pre-determined.
None of us are mere spectators.
We are participants, we are responsible, together we will shape our future.
We must work together to choose and build the security and prosperity we want for our citizens.
In this, we all have a part to play.
Thank you.



I begin by thanking Aunty Violet for the Welcome to Country, and I join in acknowledging the owners of the traditional lands on which we're meeting this evening, pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging. And also acknowledge and pay my respects to First Nations people who are joining us here this evening.
I’d like to acknowledge the Minister for Industry and Science, Senator Tim Ayres, the Assistant Minister for Science, Dr Andrew Charlton, and other members and senators that are here.
I do want to acknowledge as well the work that has occurred from the former Minister for Science, Ed Husic, as well, played a really important role.
And I want to acknowledge Australia’s Chief Scientist, Professor Tony Haymet. 
Tonight is an opportunity to give recognition to the memory of former Chief Scientist and President of the Australian Academy of Science, Dr Jim Peacock.
Dr Peacock was a winner of the inaugural Prime Minister’s Prize for Science in 2000 for his contribution to Australian science and agriculture. 
Work shaped by his great love of the Australian bush. 
And a contribution to our nation that will long endure. 
On behalf of the Government of Australia, I offer my condolences to Dr Peacock’s family, friends and colleagues, of whom I know a number of people in this room will fall into that category.
It’s a privilege to be with you all tonight, celebrating the extraordinary achievements of the Prime Minister’s Prizes for Science for another year. 
I must say, I'm always intimidated when I come along to this event. Everyone around these tables not only speaks about what research they're doing, they do it in a way, as if it's really casual. 'We're just discovering a cure for a medical ailment that has been around for a long period of time.' Or 'yeah, we have the Young Australian of the Year from the Torres Strait here, just happens to be chilling out with the scientists here as well.'
So, I went to the previous event - my previous event on the way here was the launch of Parliamentary Friends of Tourism. So, I want to thank you for making me the best dressed person who's ever gone to a Parliamentary Friends Group as well. It gave them a bit of a shock. I condemn them for not dressing up.
But tonight is a chance to truly celebrate the achievements of individuals, but also to celebrate who we are as a nation.
You know, we are very good at celebrating our sports people and achievements in the arts. Today in Parliament, we had Missy Higgins come along and sing a few songs, and that is fantastic.
But the work that you do lasts through generations. 
And that is why, recognising the success, recognising the inspiration, and recognising as well the determination of not only the people in this room but the network of researchers, innovators, teachers and academics that make up Australia’s wonderful scientific community is so important.
This year, like all years, it’s been a good year for Australian science.
Or perhaps I should say – bigger than usual. 
Because it’s not every year an Australian scientist is recognised with a Nobel Prize. 
I am, of course, speaking about Professor Richard Robson, a great Australian. 
Last month, along with two colleagues, Professor Robson became a Nobel Laureate in Chemistry for his work developing an entirely new form of molecular architecture called metal-organic frameworks.
Metal-organic frameworks are tiny, amazing structures.
Literally molecule sized, a teaspoon of these materials has the surface area of a football field.
You can think of metal-organic frameworks as tiny nets, or bubbles, that interact with matter at incredibly precise and miniscule levels. 
And though molecular in scale, the implications of Professor Robson’s discovery for Australian industry and technology are massive. 
From collecting water from the air of arid environments to delivering precise medical treatments, removing carbon from the atmosphere, or storing and transporting hydrogen as an energy source, Professor Robson’s research reveals new ways to tackle stubborn problems.
His achievement is the culmination of a 60 year career of scientific pursuit, of the distillation of his knowledge, of trial, error – and success.
It deserves our congratulations – and our deepest admiration.
And I must say, given the hashtag that's already been advertised by Rae, one of the things I was really pleased by was I gave a speech in the Parliament about the award, and it received an enormous number of likes on the Insta post. So, what that said to me was that out there, there is a yearning for this amongst mainstream Australia. Even those of us - it took me some time to say what exactly it is Professor Robson's done, and how does this work, and why is it important. And I had someone who's smarter than me in my office who was able to explain that to me. 
But this is the great thing that Australians, like we do in so many fields, we punch above our weight - including in science.
This new Australian Nobel Prize also represents a significant moment for the University of Melbourne, the Australian Research Council and the Australian Research Grants Committee.
These organisations have supported Professor Robson and his work for decades, making him the first Australian Laureate to be recognised after receiving Australian public funding for his research. 
Their support for Professor Robson is a reminder of the quiet, sustained way in which our public research institutions contribute not just to the life of the nation, but to the whole world. 
Their investment in science, what it brings us, and how it shapes our world is immensely valuable – not just to Australian researchers, but all of us as Australians. 
Tonight also marks another significant milestone in the scientific life of our nation. 
For the first time, the Prime Minister’s Prizes for Science includes the inaugural Prize for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Knowledge Systems. 
It is a worthy and important change. 
Over the span of thousands of generations, First Nations’ Australians have cultivated a unique connection to this land. 
To its ecosystems, its skies and its waterways. 
An intimate wisdom, passed on through deep time. 
Through this connection Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have created their own detailed knowledge of meteorology, astronomy, horticulture, biology.
For the longest time, much of this knowledge went unseen and unconsidered by mainstream science. 
Yet, just as embracing the world’s oldest continuous culture has enriched our understanding of our history. 
Understanding Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander science allows us to see things we might otherwise have missed. 
Shedding new light on problems, making fresh connections across disciplines and deepening our collective knowledge of our home continent, and the world around us.
This is surely what lies at the heart of science.
Pursuing curiosity. 
Looking at a problem through a different lens or applying a new expertise.
And therefore, expanding the realm of the possible to come to a new or improved hypothesis.
It is that valuable contribution to building on the Australian scientific project that is reflected in the Prime Minister’s Prize for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Knowledge Systems. 
Just the Saturday before last, I was at Uluṟu.
And I was there celebrating the 40-year handback to First Nations people of that most extraordinary piece of Australia in Uluṟu and Kata Tjuṯa. 
And looking at the art there, one of the things that is extraordinary as a non-Indigenous person, and when we speak about science and how this could all occur, how the landscapes in Aboriginal art capture what is on the ground. As if the knowledge from, taken from right up in the sky, the accuracy of what has happened, just shows in one really practical way that I think Australians can understand, that the knowledge that's been built up over First Nations people over the 65,000 years that they have been caring for the lands and waters of this great country really do require just a different level of respect for the way that that knowledge shows itself to those of us who are new arrivals, or descendants of new arrivals on this planet.
My Government will always champion Australian science. 
I'm proud that I attend the meetings of the committee that I have the honour to chair. We'll meet again on Wednesday, with the Chief Scientist and his team.
It matters.
We know Australian science is a key driver of our economy now, and will continue to be. 
Whether it’s harnessing the power of AI, generating and storing renewable energy, improving the way we grow our food or treat illness, or quantum computing, looking at the next few decades, it is Australian science that has so much to contribute to the world that we know is just around the corner. 
Of course, we face a changing world. 
Increasingly Australian challenges are also global ones. 
This makes the impact of those challenges more acute, and also makes them more difficult to solve. 
We know, because the science tells us, that climate change is happening, and we are feeling the effects of climate change.
Our Government has an ambitious and achievable plan to get us to 62 to 70 per cent lower emissions by 2035 and then to Net Zero by 2050. 
But the fact that some question the science, reiterates to us that we have the responsibility to continue to argue the case and not assume that facts are understood.
And we have a responsibility to the people - not so much people in this room - but to my son, and your sons and daughters, and their sons and daughters, and their sons and daughters, to act in a way that stresses the urgency which is required from the challenge.
But also, the opportunity through the use of science to find ways that alleviate the challenge but create actually greater economic prosperity by seizing those opportunities which are there.
It is not either or. It is both.
If we are smart, and if we embrace science rather than embrace a flat Earth position that is not real.
I'm amazed that there's still a debate.
We are investing in the National Reconstruction Fund and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to boost renewables and low carbon industry. 
And the Denholm Review into our research and development performance is focused on harnessing Australian R&amp;D to power economic growth, and boost our industry at home.  
Australian science is at the centre of all this. 
Our technology, our research – and teachers educating and inspiring our next generations with that spark of scientific curiosity. 
As we look ahead, it is the work of the people in this room who will put Australia in the best possible position to seize the opportunities that are in front of us. 
Tonight is an opportunity to reflect on the achievements of those Australians who work diligently in universities, schools and labs, or out in the bush and on our coastlines, devoting their lives to curiosity and the discovery and teaching of science for the benefit of all Australians.
Whether you have been recognised with an award tonight or not – your commitment to science is worth celebrating.
In your pursuit of excellence, you help to drive our nation. 
You add to what – and who – we are.
And you expand the realm of what is possible.
And on behalf of the Australian Government, I say, thank you.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my respects to elders past and present.
I want to thank the IndustriALL General Secretary, Atle Høie, and congratulate his team on putting together a fantastic Congress.
I’d also like to recognise the work of Australian affiliates of IndustriALL and their work in bringing this great Congress to Sydney.
I trust the Australian delegation’s commitment to hospitality is surpassed only by their commitment to solidarity.
I also want to particularly acknowledge my friend, Mining and Energy Union General President, Tony Maher.
Tony is retiring after 27 years in the job – an incredible achievement.
On behalf of all of us here, thank you for your lifetime of service to the Australian union movement.
I also warmly welcome all visiting delegates to Australia, and acknowledge your contributions to the labour movement and the lives of working people.
This is the first IndustriALL Congress held in Australia since the organisation was formed in 2012.
There are delegates here from nearly every continent, representing so many workers across the globe.
A powerful reminder that – by definition – union values are universal values.
Because although the challenges faced by the workers that each of you represent are unique and complex, we all live in a world that is increasingly uncertain.
Conflict, economic volatility and disrupted supply chains demonstrate that the challenges faced by workforces are global.
And that is precisely why solidarity must be global, too.
Why this congress – and IndustriALL as a movement – matters to all of us.
And it’s why each of you are here in Sydney – to do what trade unionists do best.
Organise for better outcomes.
Discuss and learn new ways of solving complex problems.
To champion the dignity of work – and the security and safety that working people deserve.
And to amplify the voices of your members so their rights are protected and their demands are heard.
Friends, the world of work is always changing. And the way people work evolves as well.
But it is the shared task of reforming governments, working with unions, to make sure that the way it evolves delivers for working people.
To anticipate and create change that works for people.
To recognise when imbalances in the status quo have become baked-in unfairness.
And to act.
Because if left unchecked, if those imbalances are allowed to persist, they erode working people’s rights and wages and lead to social exclusion and conflict that is against the national interest.
In 2022, I had the extraordinary honour of being elected Prime Minister of Australia, making the Australian Government an Australian Labor Party Government for the first time in almost a decade.
The industrial relations system we inherited then was suffering from years of not just inaction, but deliberate erosion.
Rates of collective bargaining were down.
Real wages were falling.
After an exhausting pandemic, our front line workers – in healthcare, aged care, retail and hospitality – were underpaid and over worked.
And serious work health and safety issues had been overlooked.
Contracting and casualisation were being increasingly used not as a legitimate option to provide flexible work in a dynamic labour market, but as a tool to undercut wages.
As if to rub it in, our conservative predecessors boasted that low wages were “a deliberate design feature of their economic architecture”.
So when we came to Government – there was a lot of reform required.
That’s why in 2022, we legislated our Secure Jobs, Better Pay laws.
Modernising the bargaining system and expanding access to enterprise and multi-employer, sector-wide bargaining.
Lifting wages and giving workers greater power, and a better deal.
Three years on and those laws are delivering.
The gender pay gap is at the lowest ever level since records began.
Coverage of collective bargaining has increased markedly – with more than 2.6 million Australians covered by enterprise bargaining agreements.
Real wages are up.
And entire workforces are benefiting from increased union coverage.
We acted on these reforms because we want Australian workers’ protections and our industrial relations to reflect the reality of 21st century workplaces, and remain true to union values.
It is the pursuit of those same principles that underpinned our second tranche of reforms.
Same Job, Same Pay became law in 2023.
The principle of this reform is about a simple as you can get –
When there are two people working side by side at the same workplace, wearing the same uniform, working the same rosters, using the same skills – doing the same job – they should be getting the same pay.
To the people in this room that idea may seem beyond common sense, uncontroversial.
But it was not the reality.
After years of contracting, sub-contracting and the use of loopholes in labour-hire laws, the wages of workers indirectly employed in industries like mining, metals, abattoirs and aviation, were not just suffering, they were languishing.
Like the wages of miners employed indirectly by Batchfire’s mine in Biloela, who were paid around $20,000 less than their permanent counterparts before Same Job, Same Pay.
That’s an example of the system not working as it should.
That’s an example of the law, as it stood, facilitating wage suppression.
Since Same Job, Same Pay came into force on 1st November last year, pay increases of up to $60,000 per year have been ordered in a range of workplaces, significantly lifting wages for thousands of people and increasing rates of direct employment.
Importantly too, Same Job, Same Pay has given back dignity to the workers it benefits.
Making sure colleagues working shoulder to shoulder are paid fairly, with the same wage, and putting an end to two speed-workplaces.
Same Job, Same Pay has changed lives.
For individual workers.
For their families.
For fairness.
Of course, this didn’t come without a fight.
The usual suspects made the usual claims.
Claiming an improvement to the status quo would be detrimental.
But of course – Same Job, Same Pay didn’t cause the sky to fall in.
And we knew it wouldn’t.
Because the Australian Labor Party knows that fairness, decent wages and a workforce being treated with respect do not undermine economic growth – they contribute to it.
Our Government has never accepted the argument that prosperity can only come at the expense of working Australians’ jobs, wages, conditions and dignity.
And our Government never will.
That’s why we’ve supported four consecutive increases in the minimum wage.
And why we have protected weekend and overtime pay by enshrining penalty rates into law.
Because we want an economy where productivity and wages rise together.
Where businesses and workers thrive together.
Where growth and fairness are stronger together.
Friends, as trade unionists, each of you fulfil a unique and vital role in the civil society of your nations.
Amplifying the voices of those who struggle to be heard.
Fighting for fairness and pushing for progress.
Helping to secure a better lot in life for the people you represent, sometimes in the face of personal risk.
It is people like you standing up for workers, and governments working with you to back-in fairness that builds safer workplaces and a more economically secure future for all.
Those are the outcomes by which we must judge ourselves – governments and trade unionists alike.
And it’s also why the work you do will always matter and will always be worth it – because of the positive difference you make to people’s lives.
Friends, our mission is global.
Our values are universal.
And our purpose is eternal.
That’s why solidarity is forever.
Have a great Congress.



I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge all our distinguished guests.
Including members of the Whitlam family.
And everyone who was in this very building fifty years ago – as members of Parliament, staffers, journalists.
On the 11th of November 1975, I was in Year 7.
Our history teacher, Mr Vince Crow, burst into our classroom and said:
“Our government has been dismissed.”
Our Government.
Catholic schools always had a powerful sense of social justice.
Tomorrow, this grand old building will host an extraordinary program of reflections from historians, journalists, constitutional experts, former Prime Ministers Keating and Howard and even the Governor General.
Something that would have seemed somewhat unlikely half a century ago.
It is hard to imagine any other event in Australian political history that could inspire such a combination of analysis, debate, passion and affection, even at a distance of 50 years.
That speaks for the earthquake effect of the Dismissal and its aftershocks.
But it also points to the stature and significance of the Government and the Prime Minister it brought down.
What I remember most of all from those days is the sense of dismay.
All the Labor faithful who had endured those 23 years in the political wilderness.
All those true believers who had celebrated the ‘It’s Time’ victory less than three years earlier.
And all who had been inspired and energised by the change the Whitlam Government had brought to Australia.
After years of drift, a new sense of confidence and purpose and ambition.
A new sense of a distinctly, proudly Australian identity.
More equal, more open, more at home in our region, more comfortable with ourselves.
And a deeper belief in our people’s capacity.
In the understanding that for our nation to be our best, every Australian had to have the opportunity to be their best.
Running through all of that, a new sense of the power of a positive, reforming Government to redefine a nation.
To treat its democratic mandate, in Gough’s words:
‘not as permission to preside…but as a command to perform’.
And, in doing so, shine the Commonwealth spotlight on people and communities and causes that had been forgotten or ignored for so long.
For so many of us, this was the first Australian government in our lifetimes that reflected our values and championed our aspirations.
Which is why so many of us felt like my history teacher, that this was our government.
And – for all the constitutional and political and legal arguments that prove the injustice of the Dismissal – in the end it also felt personal.
That somehow, the old suffocating conservatism so many had imagined defeated for good in December 1972 had reached out of its political grave to drag down a democratically-elected Government.
None of this is to say Gough Whitlam or the Government he led was perfect.
No Government is.
But it commanded a majority in the House of Representatives - and it had nearly two years of its term still to run.
And in those circumstances, the decision as to when to call an election should belong to the Prime Minister.
Not the Opposition, not the Governor General.
And in precisely the same way, the choice as to whether a new government is formed, belongs to the people of Australia.
Make no mistake: November 11th 1975 was not a ‘constitutional crisis’ - it was a partisan political ambush.
There was no real precedent – and no legitimate pretext.
The Opposition orchestrated a parliamentary gridlock over the Budget and then secretly prevailed upon the Governor General to break it, by sacking the Prime Minister.
Sir John Kerr justified his actions on the basis of incorrect advice from Chief Justice Barwick, improperly given.
But in truth, the Opposition had preyed upon Sir John Kerr’s desire to be at the centre of events.
And they had cultivated his paranoia, his fear that Whitlam was planning to replace him.
They were aided in their actions by the Prime Minister’s unshakeable belief - right up until the moment he was handed his letter of dismissal – that Kerr was a proper person, who would do the right thing.
While the scenes in this building on 11 November may have been chaotic.
The Dismissal was a calculated plot, hatched by conservative forces which sacrificed conventions and institutions in the pursuit of power.
And the result of the election that followed does not wash any of that away.
Behind all the various schemes and subplots that will be unpacked and revisited tomorrow lies an overt refusal to respect the mandate or even acknowledge the legitimacy of a Labor Government that had secured a majority in two consecutive federal elections inside three years.
That was the essential argument Gough made in his contributions to the parliamentary debate on the Supply Bills.
And it was the case he put with such intellectual force in his book, The Truth of the Matter.
I had the honour of being asked to contribute a preface to this year’s anniversary edition.
And as someone who has served in the Parliament for nearly 30 years, I can say that Gough’s book is the most eloquent tribute to the democratic primacy of the House of Representatives and its role as the people’s house that I have ever encountered.
And from that, all of us can take great heart.
Because after everything, Gough Whitlam retained a deep faith in our democracy.
He remained a profound optimist – about what our democracy could endure but also what it could achieve.
He maintained his enthusiasm.
He retained his respect for the wisdom and the aspirations of the Australian people.
And, in a remarkable lesson to anyone in public life who might be tempted to hold on to resentment or bitterness he rebuilt a friendship with Malcolm Fraser.
When we think of those two giants now, we remember them campaigning for a Republic together.
Or we picture that line up of former prime ministers on the morning of the National Apology to the Stolen Generations, with Gough’s hand resting on Malcolm’s shoulder.
Friends
The speech Gough Whitlam delivered on the steps of this building fifty years ago tomorrow was only 149 words long.
Ever the institutionalist, he later said to Niki Savva:
“That was the best speech I ever gave in this place and it’s not even in Hansard.”
That extraordinary scene might not be in the parliamentary record.
But as a moment in the life of our nation, our parliament, our politics and our democracy it deserves permanent commemoration.
Tonight I announce our Government will commission a statue of Gough Whitlam.
This new statue will stand not just for the immortal words Gough uttered on that day.
More importantly, it will honour all that he achieved in this place.
And in doing so, it will celebrate the enduring power of our democracy to change our nation for the better.
It will be a worthy and timely addition to the statues of leaders and trailblazers which adorn our national capital: Barton, Menzies, Curtin and Chifley, Lyons and Tangney, McEwen, Gorton and Bonner.
Gough Whitlam belongs in their company – and he belongs here, at the democratic institution he both revered and commanded.
In Graham Freudenberg’s words:
“His great stage was the House of Representatives – stage, pulpit, arena.”
John Howard - among many others - rated Whitlam the greatest parliamentary performer this building ever knew.
And, for Gough, performance was always bound-up in purpose.
Because this building was where the first iteration of universal health care – Medibank - became law.
Where the renewal of our suburbs and regions was put at the heart of national policy.
This was where the first bricks were removed from the tariff wall.
The first steps taken to Land Rights.
Where a new generation of Australians were given access to the life-changing opportunity of a university education.
Where the White Australia Policy was finally abolished.
Diplomatic relations with China first established.
The Racial Discrimination Act passed.
The Family Court and Single Mother’s Payment created.
And so much more.
This statue of Gough will commemorate the reforms he drove and delivered.
And – above all - the lives and communities his vision and ambition transformed.
Here in our nation’s capital, Gough’s statue will look out on the public service he revitalised and energised.
Down toward the National Gallery he established, and forever enhanced with the acquisition of Blue Poles.
And it will look out upon the nation Gough Whitlam changed.
The modern, confident and more equal Australia he helped bring into being.
A country coming to grips with the fullness and richness of our history.
Taking pride in the privilege we have to share this ancient continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
An Australia making our own way in our region – partnering with ASEAN, recognising China, at home in Asia, speaking for ourselves in the world.
A nation where equal pay for women, access to great education and affordable healthcare for all. liberate the talents and uplift the horizons of our citizens.
An optimistic country, rejecting the habits and fears of the past.
Rising to the demands and opportunities of the future.
A great nation such as ours honours its history – and remembers those who made it.
In years to come, this statue will take us closer to the drama of the 11th of November, 1975.
It will commemorate the sternest test our democracy has known.
And it will stand in tribute to all that came before it - and all that endures.
Gough will stand here, welcoming people to our Museum of Australian Democracy.
And Australians will be able to stand with Gough, put an arm around the great man’s shoulders, and remind ourselves that if we maintain our enthusiasm, it’s always time. 


Can I thank Mick for the Welcome to Country and I also acknowledge the traditional owners and land and pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
To all the distinguished guests who are here today as well.
In February 2024, we were just out there, there was a pile of earth, breaking ground on this new facility.
I said to the Premier of Victoria, whoever's in charge here of getting this infrastructure done, we need to get them in charge of a few of our programs around the country, because this is an extraordinary achievement on time and on budget.
And like my friend, the Victoria Premier, we're both infrastructure nerds who got to go on the Metro here yesterday, which will be a game changer but other infrastructure projects as well.
This is a growing part of Melbourne, and this is about the Hawthorn Football Club, but it's about more than that. It's about this community in the south eastern suburbs of Melbourne, and about the growth and giving them and giving them access.
And that's why I'm very pleased that Clare O'Neil and Mark Dreyfus from my team are here today, as well as local members, and in Clare's case, a fellow Hawthorn tragic.
This is so exciting to see a big vision turn into a reality.
Seeing the difference in a world class facility like this can make to people and to communities.
John Kennedy, of course, his statute, I'm very pleased to see has made the trip from Waverley Park, famously said, it is never enough to hope or think, you have to do, you have to do something, as he famously said.
Our Government is proud to have supported the work with the Hawthorn Football Club, the Victorian Government, and the Kingston City Council.
So to all of you who have worked so hard to believe deliver this project, you have indeed done something and you've done something extraordinary.
As Hawks supporter, of course, I hope that this is a launching pad for a 2026 Premiership.
But as an Australian, I'm so pleased that this is a place that belongs to the community, because that's what sport in Australia is all about.
This morning, I was on Nova radio and I had Jason's son, 13 year old, had recorded some questions for me about the social media ban coming on December 10.
And one of the things that that's about is getting kids off their devices and onto the sporting fields.
In order to do that, we need to give them access. We need to, in particular, support young girls coming on.
The idea, when I was the age of the footballers today, that young girls and women will be playing top level AFLW and NRLW was something that wouldn't have been seen.
We are in a revolution and that is a great thing.
But we need to do everything we can to give young people the opportunity to be the best in life.
Because playing team sport teaches you how to win, teaches you how to lose, it teaches you resilience. Importantly, it teaches you, you can have the best player in the league, unless you've got the best team, it doesn't count for much.
And that sense of belonging is so important.
Hawks have always taken pride in being the community club. These facilities show that you are the community club.
We want people to spend more time on ovals, more time on netball courts, on tennis courts, in swimming pools. More time learning an instrument, more time engaging, actually talking to each other.
And you can be so proud of what you have done here. Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the lands on which we meet, and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I’d like to acknowledge the Senators and Members of Parliament who have joined us.
As well as members of the diplomatic corps, the RMIT leadership and business leaders.
I’d also like to acknowledge my friend, Dr Craig Emerson.
Craig’s professional life has been linked with APEC and its mission for a long time.
First when he was working for Bob Hawke at APEC’s inception over three decades ago, then as Trade Minister in the Gillard and Rudd Governments, with a particular focus on furthering Australia’s engagement with Asia and the Pacific.
To now serving with distinction as the Executive Chair of the Australian APEC Study Centre.
Craig continues to champion Australia and our capacity to be a positive force both within APEC and beyond.
From the very beginning, APEC has held a unique and central place in Australia’s trade and foreign policy.
In the best of the Australian traditions, we did not just join this institution – we helped to shape it.
We are not just observers, or members, we are the architects.
In 1989, Prime Minister Bob Hawke mounted the case for a new regional economic partnership.
One that brought together the growing economies of the Asia-Pacific, and recognised their shared interests as liberalising, trading nations in a post-Cold War world.
By December of that year, APEC had sprung to life in the form of a Ministers Meeting, hosted by the Australian Government in Canberra.
From there, the vision of APEC as a body to drive the new economy of the 21st century continued to crystallise.
In 1993 Paul Keating, flanked by President Clinton, used a speech titled ‘Present at the Creation of the Asia-Pacific Economic Community' to announce the elevation of APEC to the status of a Leaders’ Meeting.
For Keating, elevating APEC signified a natural coming together of a new community of nations, represented at the highest levels.
In his words, a community “marked by the comprehension of common, and enduring, interests…by a shared sense of possibility, shared goals, and a shared sense of the future.”
In those words is contained a clear vision not to merely retain an Australian seat at the table of the old economic forums of the post-war period but to build something new that would benefit the region – and the nation.
To construct something that reflected the state of the world as it was developing around us in real time.
To anticipate, and create the economic and trade opportunities of this new future.
It is true that the creation of APEC owed something to the optimism of an era when people wrote about ‘the end of history’.
The benign assumption that accelerating globalisation would inevitably lead to more open economies, deeper security and greater prosperity for all.
The past two decades have reminded us that progress doesn’t travel in straight lines.
Many economies are still living with the aftershocks of the Global Financial Crisis and its impact on their model for growth.
We’ve seen the return of nativism – from Brexit to protectionism.
A fracturing of the global consensus around climate action.
A pandemic that revealed the fragility of international supply chains. 
A land war in Europe – and strategic competition in our own region.
Yet the vision of Hawke and Keating endures – it lives in the transformation we have seen.
In 1993, APEC brought together 12 nations – including the rapidly expanding economies of China, Indonesia, Japan and Korea – along with the might of the United States.
Back then, APEC accounted for a market of 2 billion people, as well as half the world’s production and half the world’s trade.
Now, in 2025, APEC is a market of nearly 3 billion people across 21 economies.
It represents over 60 per cent of global GDP and 75 per cent of Australia’s trade.
Just think about that.
In an economy like ours, where 1 in 4 Australian jobs depends on trade, the impact of that market and those supply chains is enormous.
From then to now, APEC has risen to take its rightful place as an economic forum of real weight – and unique strength.
APEC still remains the only international economic forum that brings together economies across the Asia Pacific in voluntary, non-binding cooperation.
For Australia, Hawke and Keating’s push for APEC meant more than just an expansion of economic cooperation.
It also said something about our foreign policy – and our ambition.
Because what underpinned that economic vision was an innate understanding of Australia’s strategic role as a middle power in the region.
A nation able to show leadership in the world, to point to the future, and to act in concert with others for mutual benefit.
Hawke and Keating’s view was of an Australia connected to our region and the world economically, but also as a nation with the power to shape outcomes through cooperation and leadership.
That is both an economic and a strategic legacy that continues to resonate.
More than ever, we seek our security in Asia, not from it.
Just last week I warmly welcomed President Prabowo Subianto to Australia.
Together, we announced the substantive conclusion of negotiations on a new treaty on the common security of Indonesia and Australia.
It is a watershed moment in our relationship – one that is based on friendship, trust, mutual respect, and a shared commitment to peace and stability in our region.
And earlier this year, Australia and Papua New Guinea – a fellow APEC member – signed the Pukpuk Treaty, elevating our relationship to the level of an alliance.
The agreement with PNG is only our third alliance, and our first in over seven decades.
It is a truly historic moment for Australia.
And we should be proud that our nearest neighbour – and one of our dearest friends – is now our newest ally.
More than ever, our future prosperity lies in the economies of our region.
More than ever, our role as a middle power matters.
Australia’s word matters.
We are a trusted partner in the Pacific.
And a respected voice in the world.
Geographically centred in this region, we are uniquely placed to further our shared interests, as well as to demonstrate solutions and strategies to solve shared problems.
Perhaps now more than ever that is the role of a middle power.
To step up.
To facilitate the dialogue that leads to understanding.
To give voice to the aspirations and priorities of our neighbours and our region.
To take the more fragmented and uncertain world and to look for opportunities to bring others together – and bring them along with us.
Not because we force them to, or because we hassle them.
But because when we act in pursuit of Australia’s national interest, in line with Australian values, without arrogance or bluster, we can provide leadership to others.
That is the model of how Australia can impact the world.
Working as a trusted partner to deliver mutual prosperity.
Pointing to the future we want to see.
And inviting others to come there with us.
Since I had the great honour of being elected as Prime Minister in 2022, I have attended the APEC Summit every year – first in Thailand, then the United States, Peru and this year in South Korea.
And at every meeting I am reminded that one of APEC’s great strengths is its focus on cultivating business connections abroad, in order to strengthen jobs, trade and industries at home.
During my time in Korea I visited POSCO Steelworks.
POSCO is Australia’s largest commercial customer in the world – bar none.
In the last year alone it had a trading relationship with Australia worth $18.2 billion. 
That is Australian jobs, Australian industry and Australian trade on a mind-boggling scale.
I also saw how APEC positions Australia as a key partner in business – unlocking the jobs and trade of the future.
In Korea I held zero emissions steel in my hand.
It was the product of our two nations – of our partnership in trade and innovation.
Australia, of course, as a supplier of iron ore, but also as a source of critical minerals, of green technology and rare earths – powering Korea’s energy transition and today’s green metal industry.
That is the economic strength of APEC.
Creating jobs, growing industry and increasing free and fair trade across the board – together.
That’s what our joint commitment with Singapore to establish an APEC Centre of Excellence for Paperless Trade is about too.
Improving efficiency and security for export and import businesses alike.
Saving costs, saving time and reducing barriers for goods as they travel across borders and into economies.
Of course APEC can be – and is – more than a collection of economies.
It is also an important forum for face to face dialogue between leaders.
In just the last few weeks alone at multiple forums I have personally engaged with more than 20 leaders – including a dinner with Korea’s President Lee and President Trump. 
And on the sidelines of last month’s APEC Summit, President Trump and President Xi met for the first time since President Trump’s re-election.
It was a positive meeting with good outcomes for the world.
But what it demonstrated is how APEC – and the support for trade generally – can act as a bulwark against conflict.
It can incentivise de-escalation – even at the highest levels.
Because trade doesn’t happen in isolation.
For the economic benefits to flow at home, you need to be able to trust partners overseas.
That reliance on trust and mutual benefit encourages nations to work out their differences with dialogue.
To work it out rather than to have it out.
That strategic role of APEC and of the trade it facilitates shouldn’t be underestimated or undervalued – it is a great strength of the organisation.
And it is a benefit to the world that when leaders come to APEC to talk about their economies – they also end up talking about their security.
It’s an example of trade backing in stability.
And stability backing in trade.
Friends, I have always been optimistic about Australia’s future.
We are in a decisive decade.
If we get it right, if we move with urgency and purpose, we can set our nation up for the long term.
Forums like APEC, the dialogue and co-operation they facilitate, the jobs and trade they bring us, are a vital part of that, because open, inclusive, rules-based trade remains the surest way to grow all of our economies and lift living standards.
In short, to make the lives of our citizens better.
Industries with stable demand and secure jobs.
Better infrastructure.
Lower prices and fairer, uniform production standards.
All these things translate into real benefits for the people we serve.
And through its economic and business links, APEC helps us to tackle challenges, and to seize and cement opportunities.
Climate change and the global shift to clean energy.
Artificial intelligence and the technological benefits it can bring to health, work and industry.
As well as a changing – but rewarding – system of global trade.
All of these represent Australian challenges and Australian opportunities.
But not uniquely so.
They are global in scale and they connect us all.
That is why we cannot find our prosperity – or our place in the world – by only looking inward.
Our sense of who we are, what we believe, and the Australian values we cherish all rely on us looking out toward the region and the world.
Seizing opportunities.
Remaining a trusted partner.
Pursuing Australia’s interest abroad – but always with the motivation of making Australians’ lives better here at home.


Distinguished guests
Friends
It is a great honour to be here at Freedom Park.
A place dedicated to commemorating those who have fought for a free and democratic South Africa.
And to fostering understanding and reconciliation between all peoples.
Today, we pay tribute to three Australians who embodied these causes — former Prime Ministers Bob Hawke and Malcolm Fraser, and former diplomat Bruce Haigh.
In recognition of their courage and commitment, their names will forever be inscribed here on this Wall.
Malcolm Fraser knew that dividing us by race, diminished us all.
As Prime Minister of Australia, he condemned prejudice – and he backed his words with actions.
Fraser’s principled opposition to the apartheid system in South Africa was as strong as it was deeply instinctive.
Under his Government, Australia supported the UN General Assembly Resolution on apartheid in 1976, and became party to the Gleneagles Agreement in 1977, under which the Commonwealth effectively boycotted sporting contacts with South Africa.
Later, he served as co-chairman of the Commonwealth eminent persons group, dedicated to ending apartheid.
And he was one of the first world leaders to visit Nelson Mandela in prison.
During their meeting, Mandela asked him if the legendary Australian cricketer, Donald Bradman, was still alive.
Years later, when Mandela was President, Fraser gave him a cricket bat signed by The Don “in recognition of a great unfinished innings”.
Bob Hawke was every bit as committed to the anti-apartheid cause.
Twelve years before he was elected Prime Minister, he led the Australian union movement’s boycott of the Springboks 1971 tour of Australia.
A courageous position, ahead of its time.
As Hawke later recounted:
“[W]e had an obligation to act ahead of public opinion … in the hope that the public would come to understand.”
Australia – and the world – proved him right.
As Prime Minister, Hawke upheld the ban on South African sporting tours that Fraser had instituted.
And he built international support for financial sanctions against South Africa.
Action that South Africa’s then finance minister described as “the dagger that finally immobilised apartheid.”
Australian diplomat Bruce Haigh arrived in South Africa in mid-1976.
The Soweto riots had broken out two weeks earlier, and Haigh said the shame of apartheid confronted him quickly.
He was far from the highest-ranking official at the Australian Embassy in Pretoria.
But he felt he had to do something — and the constraints of bureaucracy wouldn’t stop him.
He met with anti-apartheid activist Steve Biko, who later died in custody in 1977 after being severely beaten by police.
He also befriended newspaper editor Donald Woods — an outspoken critic of the regime — who introduced him to Desmond Tutu.
Later, Haigh famously helped Woods escape from South Africa to Lesotho.
A feat depicted in Richard Attenborough’s brilliant film ‘Cry Freedom’.
Haigh also visited political prisoners in detention, and delivered funds from the World Council of Churches to their families.
He carried messages between banned activists, and supporters in South Africa and abroad.
And he took medicines and letters to refugees-in-exile.
Haigh continued his anti-apartheid advocacy back home in Australia, too.
He helped set up the Ifa Lethu Foundation, to repatriate Black South African art taken out of the country during apartheid.
The personal collection he donated in 2005 began the collection, which now consists of hundreds of works.
Just eight months after his release from prison in February 1990, Nelson Mandela came to Australia.
He chose to visit Australia because of the anti-apartheid stance of our government and the millions of Australians who leant their support to it.
“Your actions,” he said, “gave us strength and confidence that our just cause would prevail.”
I had the extraordinary honour and privilege of meeting Mandela at the Sydney Trades Hall and at a major event at the Sydney Opera House.
He was a magnetic presence.
And – like so many around the world - Mandela’s commitment to peace and justice inspired me then, and continues to do so today.
He strove to heal the divisions of the past, and forgive his oppressors.
And while the oppression of the regime he stood against is long gone, the power and the resonance of his leadership endures.
There is still much his vision, compassion and resilience can teach us.
Malcolm Fraser, Bob Hawke and Bruce Haigh represent the best of who we are as Australians: our instinct for equality, fairness, decency.
And the way we bring these Australian values with us, when we engage with the world. Their names will stand alongside along all those who supported South Africa in its struggle for liberation.
And their deeds will live in our memory – a reminder that no matter how long the walk to freedom – courage, kindness and solidarity will get us there.


I acknowledge the traditional owners of the lands on which we meet, and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I extend a warm welcome to all leaders from across business and government joining us today – from Papua New Guinea, Australia, our region and the world.
My particular thanks to Tracey Spicer and the President of PNG Core, Anthony Smare.
This forum is about all of us working together to find new pathways for investment and development and maximising the dynamic and growing trade relationships that do so much to benefit the people of both PNG and Australia.
I also want to acknowledge my friend, Prime Minister James Marape.
Over recent years we’ve shared in so many memories and celebrated so many milestones in the PNG-Australia relationship.
We’ve each had the honour of addressing the other’s national parliament including the great personal honour and privilege I had to be the first foreign Head of Government to address the Parliament of PNG.
We’ve trekked Kokoda side by side and step by step.
At Isurava we honoured the bond between our people and the ANZAC legacy we share, forged in the hardship and the pain of the Second World War.
In October, we watched the NRL Grand Final together, here in Sydney.
And in what was a spectacular occasion, we celebrated 50 years of PNG’s Independence in Port Moresby.
At that terrific Golden Jubilee we came together to look back on a nation-shaping moment in the history of both of our great countries and to look ahead to our shared future.
There are certain values that link these moments that lend them a special significance and connect them.
A sense of mutual respect between our nations.
A deep trust.
And an appreciation for the history and geography that unites us and our peoples.
As leaders, it is those values, the values of the citizens we serve the values our people have defended together in war and built together in peace that underpin all we seek to do within the PNG-Australia relationship.
The enduring strength of those values is proved by the friendships and connections we see here today.
We are the nearest of neighbours.
We are the closest of friends.
And with the signing of the Pukpuk Treaty – we are allies, too.
Pukpuk is important.
An acknowledgment that our mutual security in the Pacific comes naturally from within our Pacific family.
For Australia, it is only our third alliance – and the first in more than seven decades.
It is without a doubt an historic moment and it formalises a deep and enduring truth.
We are mates. We are equals.
As Prime Minister Marape has put it before:
“Australia and PNG are equal partners – relating, coexisting, working side by side going forward into the future.”
We have built our nations together.
We are allies in protecting sovereignty and defending democracy.
And importantly, we are allies in prosperity.
Because it is in each other that we find our most reliable and abundant sources of friendship and it is with each other that we also find our most reliable and abundant sources of economic opportunity.
Friends,
Australia is committed to remaining a proud and reciprocal economic partner of PNG.
A record $8.1 billion in goods flowed between our two nations in 2024-2025 alone.
PNG’s exports to Australia continue to flourish.
And while raw materials are an important feature of our trade relationship, they are by no means the whole of it.
New investments to strengthen biosecurity mean PNG’s dynamic agriculture sector can continue to thrive and grow its market access.
Exports of vanilla, coffee and cocoa beans to Australia are growing strongly diversifying our trade relationship and proving that Australian markets are hungry for PNG’s exceptional produce.
Infrastructure investments are helping local producers take their goods to port – and to market – via better, safer, more reliable roads.
We are backing the upgrade of 47 kilometres of the Wau Highway connecting communities and boosting commerce across the Morobe Province.
And we are committed to sealing the Kokoda Highway in partnership with the PNG Government – a fitting name for a joint project, given our history.
We are investing over $600 million to help upgrade five critical ports in PNG – because for a nation of 600 islands, we know that sea-trade is crucial for growth.
And in a region where climate change is an existential threat, we are helping PNG attract a greater share of international climate finance.
Building infrastructure and supporting agriculture that can withstand more severe weather patterns.
All of these projects are concerned with backing local jobs, construction and supply chains within PNG.
So the benefits of these new developments and the enhanced trade that come with them flow straight back into PNG, strengthening its status as an essential economic partner in the Pacific.
We are also proud to be investing in PNG’s greatest resource: its people and their capacity.
Better health facilities, new opportunities in education and skills, more resilient energy and communications technology - these are the building blocks for stronger communities and better lives.
They are also investments in a more dynamic, more productive and more prosperous economy.
But just as investing in our people and our trade creates economic opportunity – so too does investing in our shared culture.
For every one of us in this room, I know the entry of the PNG Chiefs into the NRL is a deeply exciting prospect.
It’s a celebration of shared culture between PNG and Australia, certainly.
But it also represents new opportunities for investment.
Footy games held in Port Moresby.
Increased tourism and economic activity.
The development and upgrade of key infrastructure.
All of this holds massive economic potential for PNG.
Because the PNG Chiefs are about furthering the love of the game and backing PNG to flourish grasping with both hands the investment that flows with elite sport.
That’s something we are already seeing, with Qantas announcing last week direct flights between Sydney and Port Moresby will resume in March.
It’s all part of welcoming a country which has given so much to rugby league into a competition where they so obviously belong.
Friends,
As you spend this week furthering and building opportunities for our two nations to grow and reflect on the two threads which run through all we do together.
The thread of prosperity that benefits and belongs to our two peoples.
And the thread of our mateship.
That is the story of everything we have achieved together in trade, in education, in our mutual defence and infrastructure.
And that is the next chapter we have to write together.
To ensure every Pacific nation can author their own destiny.
To secure the future of the beautiful region we all call home.
As Prime Minister Marape says: Papua New Guinea and Australia are two houses, with one fence.
And we both benefit, we all benefit, from a neighbourhood that is more peaceful, more stable and more prosperous.
Where sovereignty is upheld and democracy is supported.
Where investment is encouraged and trade is sustained.
Where we work together, each day, to benefit the people we serve.
To honour our shared history.
And to grasp the opportunities of our shared future.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Thanks so much Wippa and good morning to everyone and thank you all for being here. I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and pay my respect to elders, past, present, and emerging. Well, this is a day in which my pride to be Prime Minister of Australia has never been greater. This is world-leading. This is Australia showing enough is enough. And the world – including through, I note, some leading media global organisations who are here, just to confirm – is watching. Is watching and is following. But Australia is leading. And it's leading not because of actions of my Government. It is leading because of some of the heroes who are behind me and who are joining us here today. Australians who've lost a son or a daughter. Australians who have seen the direct impact of social media causing social harm for their families, for their communities. People who have had the courage to take what is a personal tragedy and turn that into a commitment and determination that others who will follow will not go through the traumatic experience that they have.
This is indeed a proud day to be Australian because make no mistake, this reform will change lives for Australian kids and allowing them to just have their childhood for Australian parents, enabling them to have greater peace of mind, but also for the global community who are looking at Australia and saying, well, if Australia can do it, why can't we? This will make an enormous difference. It is one of the biggest social and cultural changes that our nation has faced. It's a profound reform, which will continue to reverberate around the world in coming months, to assist not just this generation, but generations to come. It is about our families taking back control. Technology can have an amazing impact on making our life easier, but it is important, as technology develops, that humans keep control, that we assert our authority as a society and to back families and to say that enough is enough. We will take back control. We will control the impact that this is having.
To those parents, to those people who have campaigned, people like Wippa and Mel, who you'll hear from as well, but the parents directly affected, I just say, you have my admiration. I just bow down to you. Because this change has come from you and it's a government that has then responded. I do want to acknowledge as well Peter Dutton, on a day like today. This legislation passed the Parliament last year with bipartisan support. Peter Dutton, someone who has always cared about the impact of harm on young Australians, with a range of the measures that he established as well to protect young people from perpetrators of violence and grooming and other activities as well. So, this is a day that I think will be marked down. This is a journey that Australia has gone on.
It won't be perfect, it won't be perfect. This is a big change. But I've been asked this morning in media interviews, what will success look like? Success is the fact that it's happening. Success is the fact that we're having this discussion. Parents are talking to their children around the breakfast table. Teachers, as we are speaking, will be speaking to their students. And we as the society, I must say, not just young people as well, but non-young people are also thinking about the impact that scrolling is having on their sleep, that engaging with each other. Nothing beats interpersonal communication.
So, it is about as well, importantly, pushing back against big tech, saying that social media companies have a social responsibility. So, we do acknowledge it won't be perfect and we'll work through it. But I do want to work through and acknowledge the work that Minister Wells has done in bringing this to fruition, Minister Rowland in her advocacy previously in the lead up to the legislation being carried, and Julie Inman Grant, who you'll hear from, and her team in the eSafety Commission for the work that they've done, for the media who've backed this in as well. I've got to say that the tabloids on Sunday, that wraparound was the most powerful use of print media I have seen for a very long period of time. The fact that a great deal of effort had been got into it. But all those in TV, radio, the people who've engaged with this, it is important to have these discussions.
So, be proud today and remember this day, December 10. I think it will go with the other great reforms that Australia has led the world on. There are many of them in our great democracy that we can be proud of. Things that we call – the Australian ballot, for example, is just one of them. Before we go though, I do want to just say that yes, this is about parents and largely, I spoke with Charlotte's mum, gave a phone call after that tragedy, and the one-on-one discussions I've had with parents really convinced me that this was the right thing to do.
But as well as that, we've had young people advocating themselves, and I do want to introduce to you a remarkable young Tasmanian, Flossie, a 12-year-old who I've had the pleasure of welcoming into my office in Parliament House. Now, straight after this event. I'm told that she'll be racing back to Hobart for her last day of primary school and the end-of-year dance, which is one of the things that people can do. You can't dance if you're online, and it's much more fun to do it than to watch it. And you know what? There's something else, Flossie. The people that you're dancing with at your year six school you'll know are real, unlike the people online who you don't know, whether they're real, whether they exist, whether it's AI, what really is going on there. So, to Flossie, a powerful advocate, just one of the young people who I've met, thank you for your advocacy and for squeezing us into your very tight social calendar.


Your Grace, Archbishop Anthony Fisher, the Premier of New South Wales, Christopher Minns, Rabbi Ben Elton, interfaith leaders, the Governor of New South Wales, members of the diplomatic corps, including Ambassador Amir Maimon of Israel.
Tonight, as we gather in one iconic Sydney location, we mourn the devastation inflicted at another.
At this Cathedral dedicated to our Catholic faith, we grieve for all those who were killed affirming their faith.
Jewish Australians deliberately targeted on the first night of Chanukah.
As they came together at that beautiful place to renew their hope, their resilience, their belief in the power of light, the darkness of terror and antisemitism was cast upon them.
Our prayers this evening are for the souls of the innocent people whose lives were so cruelly and violently stolen away at Bondi Beach that Sunday evening.
We pray with those who knew and loved them. Including, I know, the family of Rabbi Eli, who was farewelled today.
Everyone who has lost the centre of their universe.
The love of their life.
Their pride and joy.
We grieve for the light and laughter and strength and comfort that so many have lost.
We grieve for everyone denied their future – and we grieve with everyone who would have shared in their happiness.
We pray that those being treated for their injuries recover.
We reflect with gratitude on the bravery and skill of the police and first responders, who saved lives.
And we offer our thanks for the courage and selflessness of everyday Australians.
People who – in a moment of deadly danger – did not hesitate to run to the aid of strangers.
To shield, shelter or comfort people fleeing in fear.
Ordinary people, demonstrating extraordinary courage.
Including the remarkable actions of Ahmed Al Ahmed, who put himself in the line of fire wrestling a gun away from one of the shooters.
People he has never met, owe him their lives.
We pray for the souls of Boris and Sofia Gurman and Reuven Morrison, murdered while bravely protecting others.
Our nation owes them – and all the heroes of Bondi – a profound debt of gratitude.
Not just for their bravery – but also for their example.
For reminding us that the worst of times, we see the best of the Australian character.
There was pure evil at Bondi on Sunday.
Yet even in that moment we were given proof that evil will never overcome the courage, decency, compassion and kindness of Australians.
That is central to the character of who we are. Our nation is stronger than the cowards who seek to divide us.
The spirit of the country that we have built together will always be greater than those who seek to breach it.
We are braver than the people who try to make us afraid.
We will not be divided.
We will come together, as we are this evening – and we will come through this together.
Friends, this place is where I learned about the love and compassion of Christ.
I commenced school here in Year 5 and for the next eight years I was nurtured here, as a student, as a boy maturing into a young man and as an altar boy in the Guild of St Stephen.
I was raised to believe in the duty we owe to the vulnerable – not as a question of charity, but as the measure of our common humanity.
When we go in peace today, let us carry the hope of this place in our hearts.
For those of us celebrating the birth of Jesus Christ in just over one week, let us live up to his example of love to our neighbours.
Let us wrap our arms around the Jewish community.
And with our words and our deeds, make it clear, you are Australian – and all Australians stand with you.
No matter which faith we worship or whether we have no faith at all, we stand with Jewish Australians.
You have every right to worship and study and work and live in peace and safety.
You have every right to be proud of who you are – and proud of the remarkable contribution your community has made to Sydney and to modern Australia, over generations.
Sunday was a dark day for our nation.
Tonight, as we illuminate this Cathedral, let us ensure Australia remains a land of light.
A nation blessed and enriched and strengthened and inspired by every faith.
And in the days ahead, may your faith comfort you, may it sustain you, may it lift you up and surround you with the love and nurture of others.


Matilda.
Edith Brutman.
Dan Elkayam.
Boris and Sofia Gurman.
Alexander Kleytman.
Rabbi Yaakov Levitan.
Peter Meagher.
Reuven Morrison.
Marika Pogany.
Rabbi Eli Schlanger.
Adam Smyth.
Boris Tetleroyd.
Tania Tretiak.
Tibor Weitzen.
Mr Speaker, the minute of silence we have just observed echoes with those 15 names.
Fifteen innocent people for whom today should be just another Monday morning.
Another day in this beautiful country they loved, in the embrace of the family and friends they adored.
Another day in busy lives, rich in passion and purpose, defined by hard work and by humour.
Another day devoted to others, serving their community, nourishing their faith.
Another day of school holidays.
Instead, our Parliament comes together in sorrow to offer our nation’s condolences to the people who knew and loved them best.
We welcome all the family members and dear friends and spiritual leaders joining us here.
From the depths of grief, you have summoned remarkable strength.
You have given us a glimpse of who your loved ones were, how much they meant – and how brave they proved themselves to be.
As Rabbi Ulman put it: “the light that each of those souls brought into the world”. 
As we pause in silence to remember them, we recognise that for you an unbearable silence has fallen.
The silence of laughter forever stilled.
Of footsteps in the hallway that will never come.
Of a voice that will never be heard again, except in memories held in broken hearts.
The silence of futures unlived.
The silence of a sorrow beyond words, inflicted by an atrocity beyond comprehension.
On the 14th of December 2025, Chabad of Bondi hosted hundreds of Jewish Australians for the first night of Chanukah.
They gathered at that world-famous spot, a beautiful place at the heart of their community.
And in coming together to celebrate the Chanukah message of hope, resilience and the victory of light over darkness, they were also re-affirming their identity – proud Jews and proud Australians.
From grandparents who had survived the horrors of the Holocaust and made a life and home here in Australia.
To children playing in the summer twilight.
When the gunshots began, some people in the crowd looked up to the sky, to see the fireworks.
Others thought it was balloons popping.
Then the horrific reality descended.
As we join in mourning for the 15 souls whose lives and futures were so cruelly stolen, our hearts also go out to everyone injured and traumatised.
People who will always carry scars from what they suffered and saw on that dark night for our nation.
We say to all of you who have travelled here today and to those watching at home, on your long road to healing, Australia will be by your side.
Mr Speaker, just as our nation came together one week after Bondi to light candles against the darkness, we must continue to raise our voices against the silence.
Because while the massacre at Bondi Beach was cruel and senseless, it was not random.
Jewish Australians were the target.
As we offer our love, sympathy and solidarity to everyone bearing the weight of trauma and loss, we make it clear to every Jewish Australian, you are not alone.
All Australians stand with you.
Australians were with you at Bondi Beach in those unspeakable minutes of violence and terror.
Police officers and first responders, running towards danger to save lives, backed by Hatzolah and Community Health Support.
Adults shielding children they did not know from bullets.
Lifeguards using their boards as stretchers to carry the wounded.
Café staff giving shelter to people fleeing in fear.
And passers-by performing acts of extraordinary bravery.
Mr Speaker, I have asked the Governor General to create a Special Honours List, so all Australians can nominate these heroes of Bondi for formal recognition.
Because the defining and enduring truth of that fateful Sunday is not fear or bloodshed.
It is not the cowardly antisemitic evil of the terrorists.
Nor the murderous perversion of Islam they took as inspiration.
It is the courage and kindness of people risking their own lives to save others. People I have had the opportunity to meet.
Yanky Super.
Gefen Bitton.
Ahmed Al Ahmed.
Constable Scott Dyson and Probationary Constable Jack Hibbert.
And so many more.
I have had the honour to meet with some of these heroes, to express the gratitude and admiration of our whole country.
Their bravery is inspiring and it was instinctive.
They did not need to know the names of the people they faced gunfire to help.
They did not stop to think about faith or nationality.
Their bond was more profound than that.
Their bravery was an act of shared humanity.
And that is the spirit in which Australians have responded, every day since.
Working around the clock in hospitals across Sydney.
Donating blood in record numbers.
Turning that famous foreshore into a sea of beautiful flowers.
Matching their words of love, with deeds of kindness and unity. Mitzvahs.
And in that same spirit, honouring the heroes of Bondi also means standing together against that evil that inflicted this devastation.
Standing together against hatred, standing together against division.
And working together to eradicate antisemitism, wherever it hides, whatever form it assumes and whatever weapons it wields.
Affirming, loudly and clearly, that Jewish Australians have every right to be proud of who you are.
Proud to raise and educate your children in your faith.
Proud to freely participate in the public life of our nation.
And proud that you are not just a part of the Australian story, you have helped to write the Australian story.
In government and the law, in business, education and the arts, on the battlefield and in every field of human endeavour.
Your faith, resilience, wisdom and compassion enrich our national life.
You belong here. You are respected, valued and admired.
As Prime Minister, I give you this solemn promise on behalf of every Australian.
We will not meet your suffering with silence.
We will not leave you in darkness.
We will continue to do everything required to ensure your security, uphold your safety and protect and honour your place here with us, as Australians.
Mr Speaker, amidst our grief for those killed and injured, and our gratitude to those who saved lives.
I know there is disbelief and anger too.
How could there not be?
A Holocaust survivor was gunned down in a nation that had given him refuge from the worst of humanity.
A 10-year-old girl will never have another birthday.
Terrorists, inspired by ISIS, murdered our citizens, on our soil.
In the long days and hard weeks that have followed, so many of us have thought to ourselves and said to each other:
“This doesn’t happen here, not in Australia. It’s not the Australian way.” 
Bondi Beach changed that, forever.
We must face that unforgiving truth and we must learn from it.
And we must channel our anger into meaningful action to ensure an atrocity such as this can never happen again.
That responsibility starts with me, as Australia’s 31st Prime Minister.
It also belongs to each of us here in this chamber as Parliamentarians.
And it is a task for all of us, as Australians, to build social cohesion, to reject division and prejudice in all of its forms.
Mr Speaker, in the great tradition of Jewish Australians serving our nation, Sir Isaac Isaacs was Chief Justice of the High Court and the first Australian-born Governor-General.
And it was the Member for Isaacs who reminded me of the Jewish concept of Tikkun Olam, ‘the responsibility to repair the world’.
A mighty collective task that begins with individual good deeds, mitzvahs, as Rabbi Ulman and Rabbi Mendel have spoken with me about many times over recent weeks.
Small acts of kindness and care that add up to a better world.
That is central to the Jewish faith and it is at the heart of our Australian character too.
Knowing that our strength comes from caring for each other, respecting each other, looking after each other.
Bringing light into other people’s lives.
And recognising that kindness is an act of courage.
The courage to listen, understand, learn and change.
That is how all of us can help repair and strengthen the fabric of our nation.
How we heal and move forward in a spirit of national unity, where light triumphs over darkness.
It is how we honour the heroes of Bondi.
And ensure that the 15 people we remember and honour today, are never forgotten.
May their memories be a blessing.


My fellow Australians
Tonight should have been nothing more than a regular Thursday night, our beautiful city brightened by the light of another 15 lives.
Fifteen lives illuminated by possibility, opportunity, and dreams.
Tragically we are gathered here because on the 14th of December, everything changed. And for that, I am sorry.
We cherish the promise that this country is a safe harbour. But sadly that promise was broken.
You came to celebrate a festival of light and freedom and you were met with the violence of hatred.
I am deeply and profoundly sorry that we could not protect your loved ones from this evil.
We gather here tonight, drawn together in one Australian icon to mourn the devastation inflicted at another.
Tonight we stand in solidarity with Jewish Australians. And affirm the shared values of unity, compassion, and resilience that define Australia.
When we look to Bondi, we see it not just as a beach, but as a part of our promise to the world. A welcoming embrace. That famous crescent of sand and water where there is room for everyone.
A place where nothing should break but the waves.
And yet there on that most fateful of evenings, our hearts were collectively shattered.
The attack was anything but random. Jewish Australians were targeted because they were Jewish.
Let me say this clearly: An attack on Jewish Australians is an attack on all Australians.
It was an atrocity perpetrated in the heart of this city, in a place that dwells in the very heart of our identity.
Tonight, in this building that has seen so many displays of carefully composed passion play out across its stages, we are joined in a grief that is all too real.
A grief with no ending, only a beginning.
Grief is love wrapped around an absence.
The imagined silhouette in the doorway.
The longed-for footsteps in the hallway that never come.
It is the voice desperately held on to as it passes into the realm of memory.
It is the unanswerable desire for one more conversation, one more embrace, even just one more glimpse.
It is the glow that shines – bereft – through the cracks of broken hearts.
That is the love those 15 souls inspired. That is the love they created.
Love is the light that brightens our days and lifts our hearts, yet in grief we feel its weight.
And for that weight to be felt like this by a community that has carried such a burden of suffering across generations is a cruelty beyond measure.
As we look back on those most difficult days, when the lighting of each candle in the menorah felt like an act of defiance in the face of evil, we return to the messages of Chanukah.
The message of hope. Of resilience. And of the need to keep sending the glow of those candles out into the world.
Those who attacked you did not count on your spirit.
In the weeks since the world was upended, you have not retreated. You have not hidden away in fear. Instead, you have shown profound strength.
You inspired a movement that has swept across this country.
The "One Mitzvah" campaign – where everyday Australians are taking on a single act of kindness – was sparked by your example.
As Rabbi Ulman, Rabbi Wolff and Sheina Gutnick have mentioned to me in recent days, mitzvah doesn’t just mean a good deed, it also means a connection.
In just two syllables, that one powerful Hebrew word tells us how good deeds can bind a society together.
You showed us that resilience is so much than survival – it’s about defying hate with unstoppable goodness.
You have taught a grieving nation that the only way to defeat darkness is to add the light.
And through the sheer power of your example, you have reminded us that just as modern Australia was born out of an instinct to unify, that same instinct is the one that guides us still.
The great Australian urge to pull together will always be stronger than those who seek to drive us apart.
The reason they cannot succeed is a simple as it is powerful.
You do not stand apart from us. You are a part of us.
The Jewish community is at the very heart of the Australian story.
From the moment Esther Abrahams stepped off the First Fleet – barely a handful of metres from here – Jewish Australians have been part of the remarkable story of our continent.
You gave us our greatest soldier, Sir John Monash, whose very name is a byword for the courage we see at the heart of our national character.
You gave us intellect and dignity in leaders like Sir Isaac Isaacs and Sir Zelman Cowen.
In every field of human endeavour, Jewish Australians have helped build this nation.
Generation after generation. With energy. With creativity. With generosity.
A vital thread that runs through the fabric of this nation is Jewish.
And just as Jewish Australians have been a crucial part of our history, you are essential to the even greater future within our reach.
You are not just accepted. You are valued. You are cherished.
You have the right to pray, to learn and to live as proud Jews without looking over your shoulder.
Australians are committed to driving antisemitism from our shores because it stands in opposition to all we are as a country, the nation we have built together – with care and compassion – over generations.
A week after the massacre, when Rabbi Ulman spoke of the fifteen souls we mourn tonight, he described the light that each had brought into the world.
May their memories be a blessing.
And in their name, we will work to open all eyes to that light.
Because that is the light that will win.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the lands on which we meet, and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
As Australians we have the unique privilege of sharing this continent with the world’s oldest continuous culture.
That is a source of pride, for all of us.
Distinguished guests, my fellow Australians.
Every year, on the eve of our national day, we honour the people who represent our national values.
The hard work and aspiration that have built our prosperity.
The courage and resilience that carry us through adversity.
The creativity and genius that have changed our country – and our wider world – for the better.
And the kindness, service and sense of community that bind us together as Australians.
These are the values that draw together our nominees for 2026, just as they defined the class of 2025.
I want to take a moment to recognise the extraordinary contribution our outgoing winners have made to our nation:
Our Local Heroes: Vanessa Brettell and Hannah Costello.
Young Australian of the Year: Dr Katrina Wruck.
Senior Australian of the Year: Brother Thomas Oliver Pickett AM.
And of course, the 2025 Australian of the Year, the remarkable Neale Daniher AO.
Tonight, I announce our Government will be partnering with FightMND to create the Neale Daniher MND Clinical Network.
Helping more Australians with motor neurone disease to access treatment, trials and care.
Neale, your courage and advocacy has brought hope to so many – and we will ensure your work continues to change lives.
An enduring truth of our national story is that the worst of times reveal the best of the Australian character.
We have seen that again this summer in the bravery of communities battling the devastation of floods and bushfires.
People working together and looking after each other.
And we saw it, beyond measure, at Bondi.
People risking their own lives to save others.
Australians matching their words of love, with acts of kindness and unity.
Just as all of us draw inspiration from honouring you, our Australians of the Year, I have asked the Governor General to create a Special Honours List, so people can nominate the heroes of Bondi for formal recognition.
On Australia Day, we reflect on how lucky we are to live in the best country on earth.
Yet this nation we cherish and all that we have achieved together is not the product of luck.
Our democracy, our prosperity, our commitment to fairness and opportunity have been built, enriched, defended and strengthened over generations.
By people of every background and tradition, people united by their love of this country, their optimism for their future and their determination to shape it.
125 years ago, our Commonwealth was born in that spirit of national unity, in the understanding we are stronger together.
All of us belong to that story – together, we will write the next chapter in it.
And when we consider the uplifting example of the nominees here tonight.
We have every reason to be optimistic about Australia’s future.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Your Excellency, distinguished guests.
My fellow Australians.
What a wonderful phrase that is.
It gives me particular pleasure to direct it to those of who have taken your seats as citizens of India, New Zealand, Türkiye, the United States, Nigeria, Malaysia, Nepal, and the United Kingdom but will leave here as our fellow Australians.
It is such an honour for me as Prime Minister to be able to personally welcome you to the Australian family – and to be with you on this significant and joyous occasion.
Today is a day that will stay with you forever.
A profound and personal commitment to our nation – on our national day.
A day when we celebrate everything that brings us together as Australians – and everything that sets us apart from the world.
We are a small population on an immense landmass.
A former collection of colonies who freely and peacefully put aside their differences and chose to come together 125 years ago.
And out of that powerful instinct to unify emerged the Commonwealth of Australia – still a relatively young member of the family of nations, yet one of the world’s oldest and strongest democracies.
A country that has been enriched by people from every background and every faith from across the globe, all enjoying the privilege of sharing this continent with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
It is a proud story, a story we continue to write.
And today, it is a story into which you are so emphatically writing yourselves.
Where we are gathered today is not far from Albert Hall, the scene of the very first Australian citizenship ceremony on the 3rd of February 1949.
Seven people – one representing each State and the ACT – from seven nations, became citizens.
And they were welcomed into the Australian family by the Prime Minister of the day, Ben Chifley. As he said to them:
You have come to a country in which great opportunities will present themselves.
You have come to a country where democracy is not just a platitude but something which is practised.
While so much has changed in Australia in the nearly eight decades since, the truth of Prime Minister Chifley’s words has not.
Today, at more than 325 ceremonies across the nation, nearly 19,000 people from more than 150 countries have been invited to become citizens.
Whether we are Australian by birth or by choice, we all share the opportunity, the privilege and the responsibility of being part of something extraordinary.
A nation built with hope and hard work, aspiration and determination.
A society guided by freedom and fairness, compassion and courage.
A democracy where every citizen is equal.
A country united and liberated by the Australian covenant.
A commitment every citizen makes to our nation – and a promise our people make to each other – to leave behind the burden of old prejudices and hatreds.
Because at the heart of the pledge you make today, to our laws, our values and our people is the respect for our common humanity that defines modern Australia.
Thank you to all of you who have made the choice to embrace that today.
Welcome home.


Your Excellency, President José Ramos-Horta.
Your Excellency, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão.
Your Excellency, President of the National Parliament of Timor-Leste, Maria Fernanda Lay.
Ministers, Vice Ministers and Secretaries of State of the Government of Timor-Leste.
And Members of the National Parliament of Timor-Leste.
Boatarde.
Thank you for your warm welcome, and for granting me the great honour of addressing your Parliament, the heart of your proud democracy.
Timor-Leste is a magnificent country, and Dili is a magnificent city.
Set within a landscape of such deep natural beauty and positioned on the edge of a shining sea.
From this building, Timor-Leste looks out toward a horizon of opportunity.
Out toward Southeast Asia and the Indo-Pacific, out toward our shared place in the world.
For Australia and Timor Leste, our geography makes us neighbours.
Our history and our values make us friends.
And as we look out together on the same region – we look towards a shared future.
A new deeper partnership in security, in energy and economic resilience.
Our connection goes back a long way.
In the Second World War, Australian diggers led the Allied forces in the Battle of Timor.
But it was the Timorese people who helped them to survive – and to resist.
Guiding and sheltering Australian troops.
Shaping a battle plan for the unforgiving jungle and mountain terrain so alien to the Australian forces, who were mainly drawn from Western Australia and Tasmania.
And of course, it was also the Timorese who fought.
Who took up arms alongside us in a nearly yearlong guerrilla campaign.
Australians and Timorese serving – side by side – with valour and honour.
Standing together in the cause of peace – and in defence of their home.
One Australian soldier spoke for all his brothers in his arms, when he said of the Timorese:
“They were so good…they risked their lives all the time for us”. 
50,000 Timorese would lose their lives in that conflict.
Many young Australians suffered as prisoners of war, including my mentor Tom Uren.
In 1945, with victory in sight but Timor still under Japanese occupation.
Australian planes dropped leaflets that carried a simple, heartfelt message:
“Your friends do not forget you”. 
As the Prime Minister of Australia, I say to you today and to the courageous Timorese people you represent:
Your Australian friends will never forget you.
Honourable Members,
Just as Australians and Timorese stood together to defend peace and sovereignty in our region in 1942, so too we came together in 1999, when your nation reflected on the question of its independence.
It was Australia’s proud position to support that referendum process and to help restore peace in the troubled times that followed.
Those 5,500 Australian Defence Force personnel – led so ably by Sir Peter Cosgrove – represented Australia’s largest overseas military deployment since the Vietnam War.
Then, in 2006, Australia led the International Stabilisation Force in Timor-Leste.
Along with others, we committed to restoring and maintaining the stability and the democratic way of life Timorese people themselves had sought for so long.
Standing shoulder to shoulder, again, with the proud people of this nation.
I know that for many – including members here today – the events of those years are bound up with difficult memories of violence and repression.
But I do not raise these struggles to emphasise the dark.
It is quite the opposite.
Because what that history shows is that in dark times, it is our friendship and our innate respect for each other, for democracy and for sovereignty that will prevail.
Indeed, history holds hard truths for all of us.
We have a responsibility to acknowledge them – and to learn from them.
In the past, some actions taken by Australian Governments did not honour – and were not worthy – of the close friendship between our nations.
But it is the firm resolve of the Labor Government I lead – and the Australian people I serve – that peace, mutual respect and shared prosperity continue to be the guiding principles of our shared future.
It is important to shape that future with words, but also with actions.
That’s why Australia strongly supported Timor-Leste’s accession to ASEAN as its 11th full member at the ASEAN Summit in Malaysia last year.
That is a milestone which speaks for Timor-Leste’s deepening engagement in this, the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
And it is an achievement which will stand in tribute to the personal leadership and advocacy of Prime Minister Gusmão.
Australia will work with Timor-Leste to continue to strengthen your standing as Asia’s youngest nation and as ASEAN’s newest democracy.
Because we know that over the years ahead, our resilience, our security, our prosperity and our destiny lies here, in Southeast Asia.  
That’s why we proudly provided funding to help realise the goal of ASEAN membership through our Technical Assistance and Capacity Building package.
Today I announce we will contribute a further $8.2 million to this package, bringing total funding to $20 million.
An investment in Timor-Leste’s place in the Southeast Asian community of nations.
Furthering friendships, deepening dialogue and advancing shared interests, all while ensuring Timor-Leste’s autonomy and economic advancement.
But to do that, we need to be looking to build.
To integrate and strengthen our economic ties and therefore our shared economic resilience.
It is those priorities that remain the focus of our partnership across the board.
Together, we are building on Timor-Leste’s comparative advantages and strengthening Timor as a growing market for Australia.
Facilitating hundreds of millions of dollars of bilateral trade in sectors spanning resources, financial services, shipping and manufacturing.
Because fostering relationships in key growing industries is so important.
That is why I am proud Australia is investing $80 million in a new private sector development program for small and medium business in Timor-Leste.
Supporting Timorese entrepreneurs to develop their businesses, boost their access to markets, amplify their production and strengthen their know-how.
Because it is by fostering commerce and investment that we see tangible benefits for the people we represent and serve.
That is precisely what Australia wants the Greater Sunrise project to deliver.
Lasting, long-term economic security for workers, energy security for industry and new prosperity for Timor-Leste.
All while helping power the growth, stability and security of our region.
The Greater Sunrise Project is a natural partnership, in the service of those shared goals.
Today I am pleased to announce that a total 10 per cent of States Revenue of any future Greater Sunrise project between our two nations will be used to establish a dedicated infrastructure fund to fortify Timor-Leste’s economic resilience and grow opportunity for its people.
The fund will be drawn entirely from the Australian share of the Greater Sunrise project, and would represent at least a third of Australia’s future revenue.
We make this commitment because Australia wants to see investment in this nation.
In its people and its jobs.
In the growth and sustainability of what Prime Minister Gusmão has called Timor-Leste’s “Blue Economy.”
We do this because we know sharing opportunities for economic growth is fundamental to improving the lives of our citizens – while strengthening the stability and prosperity of our region.
Friends,
As legislators and leaders, we know there is nothing more crucial to our national success than investing in the skills and wellbeing of our people.
Making a positive difference in the lives of our citizens so they can flourish, achieve their goals and contribute to their country.
We recognise the aspiration in Timor-Leste to build workforces and develop skills.
We share that aspiration too.  
That’s why programs like the Pacific-Australia Labour Mobility Scheme are so important.
It represents a partnership between our two nations.
Providing employment, wages and skills for Timorese, who in turn become an indispensable aspect of the Australian economy, workforce and indeed – the Australian community.
As of October 2025, more than 5,000 Timorese workers chose Australia as their home away from home.
And Timorese citizens have taken part in more than 20,000 labour mobility assignments in Australia since Timor-Leste joined these programs in 2012.
And that participation is important.
Because by fostering greater interaction between our two peoples, we will build the links to carry our relationship forward into the future.
And just as investment in skills and jobs are crucial, so too is investment in the well-being of the Timorese people.
In this pursuit, Timor-Leste will always find a partner in Australia, ready to unleash this nation’s great reservoir of potential.
That’s why I am proud of our commitment of up to $220 million to a human development program in Timor-Leste.
Focusing on strengthening primary health services, along with nutrition, literacy and numeracy for all Timorese people, and improving support to people with disabilities to reach their full potential.
And it’s why we are increasing our annual Overseas Development Assistance funding to over $135 million in 2025-26.
We want to help invigorate opportunity, build capacity and find new ways for Timor-Leste to flourish at home and in the region.
Friends,
We recognise that for generations, the people of this nation have endured immense struggles in pursuit of their political and economic independence.
Many have fought to assert their right to determine their own future path – one that is defined by hope and growth.
Australia – as both a security and a development partner – will always honour that independence, and seek to bolster and protect Timorese sovereignty.
Because we recognise that the progress of our region – of our peoples – can only be fully realised when we prioritise cooperation.
It is that same spirit of cooperation which underpins the agreement Prime Minister Gusmão and I signed today.
Our Parseria Foun ba Era Foun which is Tetum for a ‘New Partnership for a New Era.’
It is a touchstone, outlining our shared commitment to continuing cooperation and consultation, and our mutual respect for national sovereignty.
It reflects our collective vision of a peaceful, stable and prosperous region and commits our governments to regular communication and collaboration on common security interests.
And importantly, it simply reaffirms how we see each other. 
Not just as partners – but as equal partners.
One leader to another.
One democracy to another.
One people to another.
Working together in the interests of peace and prosperity, recognising that it is from those two aspects, that our economic resilience is born.
Honourable Members,
For thousands of years the peoples of our two nations have looked up to the same patch of sky to see the same stars.
Through our shared history, we have fought and died together.
We have advocated for democracy, peace and prosperity.
We have extended our hands to a neighbour that has extend theirs.
And as we gather here now and look across those same blue waters of Southeast Asia and the beautiful Indo-Pacific toward that horizon of opportunity, we see a bright sun rising.
It is the future we will share together.
Obrigado wain.
Thank you very much.


Your Excellency, President José Ramos-Horta.
Your Excellency, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão.
Distinguished guests.
I am deeply humbled to receive this honour.
I give my sincere thanks to you all and to the people of Timor-Leste.
For me, the gift of this Order serves as a testament to the strength and depth of the friendship between our two great nations.
The success and flourishing of Timor-Leste, its democracy and its people, matters deeply to me as Prime Minister of Australia and it matters deeply to the people of Australia that I serve and represent.
Because reflected in each other we find a shared history, and our shared future.
I was first elected to the Australian Parliament in 1996.
At that time, the movement to secure Timor-Leste’s future as a free, proud and independent nation was gaining speed.
Then in 1999, the moment arrived for your nation to choose its own, hopeful path.
As a parliamentarian, I was proud to add to the chorus of Australian voices calling for a peaceful referendum that would lead to a peaceful future for this nation.
I am proud that in 1999, Australia stepped up, reached out our hand to meet yours, and helped to secure that referendum and maintain that peace.
Another person – indeed a future parliamentarian – who stepped up at that time, was Luke Gosling.
Luke is with us today.
Now, he serves as Australia’s Special Envoy for Defence, Veterans' Affairs and Northern Australia.
But from 2005 –2008 Luke served as an Officer in the Australian Defence Force in Timor-Leste.
There is a familiar echo of symmetry to his service.
An example of how so many contributions to public life – both Australian and Timorese – have been shaped by the shared history of our two nations.
Now, in 2026, we look back across more than a quarter century of Timorese independence.
From here, it is clear Timor-Leste has come to fully and wholly inhabit the sense of identity and nationhood that was really always there and that the world came to recognise in 1999.
And seeing this nation take its rightful place in the world and in our region has been a great thing to watch.
But more than that, it is something Australia has long advocated for.
My Government strongly supported Timor-Leste’s accession to ASEAN as its 11th member.
I was at the ASEAN meeting in Malaysia last year where the formalities took place, and as you said at the time, Prime Minister:
‘Not only is ASEAN membership a dream realised for your people, but it is a powerful affirmation of Timor-Leste’s journey.’
That journey, without a doubt, will continue – and continue to be supported by Australia.
We have had to deal with our differences but as we look from here toward the next quarter century and beyond, I reaffirm wholeheartedly Australia’s commitment to your people and your country.
To the flourishing of this democracy and the proud spirit that underpins it.
Seeking new opportunities for Timorese people and businesses – together.
Improving access to better infrastructure, education and healthcare – together.
Growing trade links and furthering regional prosperity – together.
All in the pursuit of securing a peaceful, stable and economically resilient region where we can all flourish – together.
Thank you again for bestowing on me this immense honour.
I am truly humbled.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge Her Excellency Hilda Heine, President of the Republic of Marshall Islands;
I also acknowledge my colleagues from across the parliament;
Admiral David Johnston, Chief of the Defence Force, and senior officers from across the services;
The Honourable Peter Tinley, National President of the RSL;
Alison Frame, Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs;
Wing Commander Sharon Bown, representing the Chair of the Council of the Australian War Memorial; and
Matt Anderson, Director of the Australian War Memorial.
We come here each year carrying the simplest of phrases in our hearts:
Lest we forget.
It comes down to us through the years, four syllables tapping softly but steadily like a heartbeat.
We hear it in every corner of the earth made hallow by our fallen, every military cemetery and battleground.
Every cenotaph and war memorial in every city and every country town. Every old photograph in which the smile and the eyes refuse to fade.
Every letter in which a long-silent voice lives on, sometimes laconic, sometimes humorous, and so often aching with longing for home and a reunion with loved ones that never came.
“Lest we forget” is the foundation stone of this place.
It is both a vow, and a reminder.
In all its solemn power, it begins each parliamentary year for the same reason the War Memorial and Parliament House face each other across the lake.
To remind us that the spirit of democracy that our national Parliament embodies is built upon the spirit that permeates these very walls.
Generations of Australians have served in our name with a spirit that has never bent to tyranny.
They have served with courage. With character. With humanity.
Just as Australia has offered refuge to those fleeing the darkness, Australians in uniform have stood as a beacon of hope to the world.
And all too often, they have paid the greatest price.
All around us here, the names our fallen and the places they fell are mapped out in constellations of sacrifice. 
Each name the heart of its own universe of grief.
Yet as we reflect on all this loss, and every shoulder that has borne its burden, we finds its counterweight in all that we have gained – because of them.
All we have been able to hold on to as a people and as a nation – because of them.
When Prime Minister John Curtin spoke at the opening of Australian War Memorial on Remembrance Day in 1941, the Second World War had already been raging for more than two years, and was only months from reaching our shores.
Curtin understood the gravity of that threat, yet he looked to the future.
To what he called “a peace worth the winning”.
A peace worthy of all the courage, sacrifice and faith that Australians had shown to win it.
When the war finally ended, his successor Ben Chifley spoke of those who had fought the darkness – but not lived to see the light. As he implored the nation:
Let us remember those whose lives were given that we may enjoy this glorious moment and may look forward to a peace which they have won for us.
Let us remember those whose thoughts, with proud sorrow, turn towards gallant, loved ones who will not come back. …
Nothing can fully repay the debt we owe them nor can history record in adequate terms their deeds.
Chifley was right, but we go on, honouring our debt as best we can by honouring every Australian who fell.
Every Australian who came home.
Every Australian who came home but never left the battle.
Every Australian who has served, every Australian who serves now.
And we remember them.
Time marches on relentlessly, but we do not let it become a thief.
Together, we tend memory like a flame, ensuring its glow can be passed into the hands – and hearts – of generations of Australians to come.
So that many years from now, they too will look back with gratitude and pride, drawing together as we do today to say those three words:
Lest we forget.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Welcome back. Of course, we came back early to deal with the immediate consequences of December 14, the antisemitic terrorist attack. And we got the legislation through, not in the form that we originally proposed, because some of it was unable to receive support of people who had called for the precise measures that we introduced into the Parliament. But the legislation on guns and hate speech that we were able to carry through the Parliament was a significant advance. And the commitment of this group to not just talk about bringing Parliament back and getting reform done but actually support it and vote for it, was a major beginning for this year.
In January, of course, we got a lot done. I stood in this room after the election in May of 2025 and said that I wanted it to be the year of delivery, that we wanted to fulfil the commitments that we took to the Australian people. If you have a look at what we've been doing this month, we've been doing just that. On the 1st of January, 1800MEDICARE came into being, and already tens of thousands of Australians have benefited from that. The Cheaper Medicines, down to $25, began in January, the same price they were in 2004. When you look at measures and improve people's health, but also our cost of living measures, that has been a real focus for us. We've now opened 120 of the 137 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics. We've been opening them right around the country over the last couple of months as well.
On the 6th of January, the Three Day Child Care Guarantee came in, making an enormous difference, particularly for women, to be able to participate in the workforce, removing an area of real discrimination that was keeping people in a trap where they couldn't work, but they couldn't get subsidy as well for child care. It was a perverse system that was in place.
Since then, as well, on Friday, a really important reform, the Health and Hospitals Agreement, a landmark reform, but it also is connected up with reform of the National Disability Insurance Scheme to make sure that it's sustainable into the future. $25 billion for our public hospital system across the board, making sure, when you combine that with the work that we have done in taking pressure off emergency departments through Urgent Care Clinics, in making sure as well, that we have the opening of the Medicare Mental Health Centres. If you look at the tripling of the bulk billing incentive that has led to a situation whereby there's an extra 1,300 medical practices around Australia are now fully bulk billed as a direct result of that reform.
 All of these measures, improving people's quality of life, immediately giving them access to health care, access to child care, and in the next week as schools go back, will be the beginning of our fully funded public schools system for the first time that that has ever happened. The beginning of that rollout, making sure that people can have the confidence that every child will get the opportunity in life that they deserve. So, education, health, housing.
On Saturday, we began the first rollout with South Australia of the housing deal. 17,000 additional homes being built, 7,000 of those reserved for first home buyers. Making sure that they get the infrastructure in place at the same time as the houses are being built. We need to move away from the idea that you just have suburbs rolled out without the community infrastructure, let alone the water and roads and other facilities which are there. Working through this agreement, providing an incentive. The Commonwealth working with state and territory governments across the board to make a difference.
All of these things put in place over the summer period. More to do in the lead up to the Budget, where we will look towards significant reform. We know that there are real cost of living pressures still there in our economy - that's why we have plans to actually do something about it. That is the focus of this united, cohesive, orderly government, led by the people in this room, across our united caucus.
And it stands in contrast with our opponents. Because you can't fight for Australia if you're obsessed by fighting each other. And that is what we are seeing on the other side with the fragmentation of people competing for who can be more right wing, who can be more divisive, who can dislike their own people more and more. We're very focused on the national interest, as we bring Parliament back for its normal sitting schedule during this period. We will continue to look for how we can make sure that we have sustainability in our systems, that we provide responsible economic management, that we continue to deliver for people in lifting up their quality of life.
That is our focus each and every day in this room. The last time that we sat, we passed the significant environmental reforms during that last sitting week as part of the package of legislation that we were able to achieve through the Parliament. As we continue to roll out our reforms this week, we continue also to be engaged internationally, whether it be the agreement that we set last week with Timor-Leste, this Friday, I'll be in Indonesia to sign the Treaty that we agreed with President Prabowo at the end of last year. Again, making sure that in this region and in the world that we're engaged in a way that protects our national interest. So, back to work. That's what we are focused on. The other side, we’ll allow them to engage in their bizarre behaviour.
I note that Married At First Sight begins tonight and it's a bit like that with the relationships on the other side. You know they're going to end badly. You know there's going to be cheating involved and they're going to be not truthful to each other and, you know, that's what we're seeing played out in real-time down the other, I'm not sure if they're down the other end of the corridor or where their meetings are taking place at this point in time, but we'll continue to be focused. Thanks.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge all my parliamentary colleagues here today.
From the very beginning of the United Nations, Australia has been a leader in the global effort to promote equality for women.
Indeed, the reason the UN Charter makes specific mention of sexual discrimination is because of a great Australian, Jessie Street.
One of just eight women among 850 delegates in San Francisco in 1945.
She told that conference:
“Where the rules are silent, women are not usually considered.”
This year’s call to “Balance the Scales” reminds us that there are still nations around the world where discrimination against women is written into the law.
That was Australia, back when married women were excluded from working in the public service.
When only widows were eligible for the single parent payment.
When there was no such thing as no-fault divorce, or the Family Court.
Those barriers didn’t fall over on their own.
Australian women organised and campaigned to bring them down.
Generations of women have made the personal, political – and delivered political change as a result.
Yet the wisdom of Jessie Street still holds true, for all of us.
Because it is not enough for the rules to be silent.
It is not enough to assume that the playing field is level and opportunity is equal, just because there is nothing in writing that says otherwise.
It is easy to talk about equality for women in principle.
What matters is advancing equality for women in practice.
That’s what the Labor Party did at our National Conference in 1994, when we adopted affirmative action.
We took a longstanding theoretical commitment to equal representation and made it something that could be measured.
In doing so, we made ourselves accountable for the outcome, not just the ambition.
I am proud to lead the first Government in Australian history with a majority of women.
We are a better party and a better government because of that fact, because the Cabinet table and the Caucus room reflect modern Australia.
And the policies and reforms that we deliver are better for the experience, empathy, intellect and leadership of Labor women.
You can trace that, right through our agenda:
Record new investments in women’s health. 
Boosting the wages and bargaining power of people in aged care, child care and the other female-dominated workforces.
Abolishing the punitive Activity Test and replacing it with 3 days of guaranteed access to the child care subsidy.
Or expanding Paid Parental Leave to a full 6 months – and adding superannuation to it for the first time ever.
Our colleagues advocate for it, because they have lived it.
They know the time and energy and effort that unpaid labour demands, the sacrifices it requires.
That is why, for our Government, equality for women is not an add-on, or a nice-to-have.
It’s not confined to an individual portfolio, or treated as a matter of special interest – it is the national interest.
Greater equality for women is central to our Government’s agenda because it is fundamental to Australia’s success.
Today, the gender pay gap is at an historic low – and women’s economic participation is at record highs.
That’s the product of reforms across our economy.
Addressing the scourge of violence against women is about action across our society.
For a long time, this was an issue Australia met with silence.
Neighbours turned a blind eye.
Law enforcement was inclined to dismiss it.
Politicians didn’t talk about it.
And the media didn’t cover it.
The courage and leadership of Australian women has helped us cross a national threshold on awareness.
We speak honestly about the devastation violence inflicts on women, children, families and communities.
The lives that violence scars – and the lives it steals.
The test for our generation, for all of us, is action and outcomes.
That’s why one of the first laws we passed in 2022 was establishing 10 Days Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave, because no-one should have to choose between their safety and their job.
We are boosting the supply of crisis accommodation and affordable housing.
And we have expanded the Leaving Violence Program, providing financial and practical support to help people get back on their feet in a new home.
Because too often women are trapped in violent households because they have no means of getting out – and nowhere to go.
At the same time, we are taking tougher and more targeted action against perpetrators.
Making sure that our social security, tax and superannuation system cannot be abused by perpetrators as tools for coercive control.
And that our courts and legal system serve as instruments of justice, not trauma.
We are also putting a new focus on preventing violence, rather than waiting until it escalates.
Including early intervention for young men, to break the cycle of abuse.
Because one of the great evils of family violence is that its victims can grow up to become perpetrators.
When we consider this year’s call to ‘Balance the Scales’, we understand there is no single act, no one reform that will do it.
Balancing the scales will take the combined weight of economic and social and legal change, new investments in housing and health and education, better resources for frontline services, better training and awareness for law enforcement.
It will take all of that – and it will take all of us. Women and men.
Because men have a responsibility here – to talk with our sons and our mates.
To be accountable for the culture we are part of, the standard and example we set.
Greater equality for women is a test of our national character – and we will meet it by staying true to our national character.
By trusting in our Australian values of fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all, by investing in our people and their capacity.
And just as Australia led the way in 1945 – we can show the way in the years ahead.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Can I welcome you very much, Mr. President, and can I thank you for the comfort and solidarity provided last night, particularly to the families who lost loved ones, the 15 innocent Australians who've lost their lives on December 14. But importantly, as well, you've provided comfort to the Jewish Australian community who are grieving this loss as a result of the antisemitic terrorist attack that occurred on December 14. It's also been an opportunity for us to engage on issues, and I look forward to further discussion about the Middle East. We in Australia want to see peace in the Middle East. We want to see Israelis and Palestinians living side by side, peace and security as we go forward.
ISAAC HERZOG, PRESIDENT OF ISRAEL: Thank you, Prime Minister. This visit has been very emotional. You know, when one Jew is hurt anywhere around the world, we in Israel ache and our heart misses a beat. That is why it was so important to visit the community and express heartfelt condolences and strengthen the community. It is also an opportunity to bring the relations between our nations on a new beginning and a better future. I think the relations between us do not depend only on the issue of Israel and the Palestinians and the conflict, but has a much broader base and we should together make sure that it's uplifted to new directions. And I will conclude by wishing President Trump and Prime Minister Netanyahu, who are meeting today at the White House to the discuss a very important international and regional and Israeli matter, which means the Iranian-American negotiations, to wish them success in bringing peace and undermining that empire of evil emanating from Tehran. And also discussing the next phase in Gaza, which is important to all of us, which I hope will bring a better future for all of us.
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Thanks, Mr. President. I stood in this very courtyard and announced the expulsion of the Iranian Ambassador due to the direct evidence that we had of the involvement in the Revolutionary Guard in atrocities that occurred in our nation, Australia, the first time we have expelled an ambassador since the Second World War. We needed to take that action because the Iranian regime have also now, of course, been in recent times oppressing their own people. And can I conclude also, Mr. President, to say publicly as well, to thank Mrs. Herzog. I saw firsthand the comfort that she gave people last night of the Chabad community there in Bondi. And her presence here has also been very important.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge our outstanding Minister for Indigenous Australians, Senator McCarthy.
Together with First Nations Members and Senators, from across our Parliament.
We all join in welcoming members of the Stolen Generations and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders here in the Chamber today.
You enhance this place with your presence.
I know that since the alleged terrorist attack in Perth, many of you have been providing comfort to people grappling with shock and fear.
People imagining how much worse things could have been.
I want to reaffirm what I said here last week, on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia.
We see you. We stand with you.
The danger of that alleged attack was real – and so was the racism and hatred behind it, motivated by a white supremacy ideology.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have the right to gather and express their views, without fear of violence.
More than that, you have the right to a full and equal place in our nation and our future.
Unburdened by discrimination or disadvantage.
Empowered by opportunity and security.
That is the test – and the purpose – of Closing the Gap.
Mr Speaker
As Prime Minister, I have the honour of presenting the Australian of the Year Awards.
The 2026 Local Hero is Frank Mitchell, a Whadjuk-Yued Noongar man, from Western Australia.
In his acceptance speech, Frank reflected on a low point in his life: isolated in a small community, under pressure as a single dad and grieving the deaths of two close mates, when his uncle offered him a lifeline: a mature-age electrical apprenticeship.
Frank said:
“I now understand that work and education are not just about income or career progression.
They are determinants of health and wellbeing.
Completing my electrical apprenticeship gave me pride, hope, and stability.
It gave me the foundation to provide for my family and to grow into a leader within my community.”
Today, Frank is a partner in four companies in the construction industry.
They have created 30 electrical apprenticeships for Indigenous Australians and a further 40 upskilling roles.
And awarded $11 million in work to other Aboriginal subcontractors.
Frank modestly says he is just one success story among many.
Yet his story tells us so much about the work of Closing the Gap.
First, it reminds us that everything is connected.
Your health and education, your home and your job - that shapes who you are as a parent, your place in your community, the goals you set and the choices you have.
Second, Frank’s story proves that one lifeline, one moment when someone recognises your potential and backs it, can change everything.
Sometimes when we talk about Closing the Gap, we can be guilty of focusing on that first idea at the expense of the second.
The challenges facing us are significant, complex and connected, with causes that reach back generations.
But that does not render us powerless - it makes each act of change powerful.
It means progress towards one target, will drive improvement in others.
Since July 2022, more than 850 new homes have been built in remote communities.
This reduces overcrowding – a target where we are seeing improvement.
But we understand that a secure roof over your head is also a stable foundation: for family, school, study and work.
Building more homes creates local jobs and apprenticeships in construction.
It drives better health outcomes.
And it makes communities safer.
In health, we are upgrading over 100 services - from maternal health to mental health, from remote Australia to our cities.
Many of these clinics had not seen a dollar of new investment for decades.
Today, I announce we will provide a further $144 million to upgrade dozens more services.
And, as part of the historic hospital funding agreement we secured at National Cabinet this month, we will deliver a joint $450 million boost to Indigenous Health.
Health is an area where the Coalition of Peaks has worked for years to drive a change in government’s approach.
Now all levels of government will work together to see this funding deliver a change in outcomes.
This time last year, I outlined our plan to reduce the cost of 30 essential items in 76 community stores.
So household staples like flour, cereal, pasta, even nappies and toothpaste are tied to city prices.
And – importantly - investing in supply chains as well, so these items are actually on the shelves in remote communities.
We have already expanded the success of that program to 113 stores across the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia.
Today, I announce we will guarantee the reduced price of these 30 essentials is available in all 225 remote stores around Australia.
We will also fund upgrades for storage in 75 stores to keep stock fresh when the wet season makes transport difficult.
We all know what it means to be able to put healthy food on the table.
The difference it makes for mums expecting a baby, for a child’s health and growth, even for their ability to concentrate at school.
And that same multiplier effect is true for water too.
As of today, 40 clean water projects are either underway – or complete.
Delivering for around 34,000 people in 110 communities.
For most Australians, drinkable water sounds like the most basic thing.
But it is everything.
It keeps communities together – and connected to their land.
It keeps schools open.
It means health clinics can perform dialysis, on country.
Mr Speaker
Closing the Gap is a national test, a generational task, a moral imperative.
But it is one we measure in these tangible outcomes.
That is why listen to communities.
Invest in co-design.
Trust in the Coalition of Peaks, led with such passion by Pat Turner AM – represented here today by Catherine Liddle and Scott Wilson.
And partner with Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations.
We built on that on Tuesday this week, when Minister McCarthy and Minister Plibersek launched Our Ways, Strong Ways, Our Voices.
The first standalone plan to end violence against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and children.
Mr Speaker
We are now 5 years away from most of the target deadlines.
We are clear about where there is more to do.
We must also guard against talk of failure.
Because talk of failure dismisses the aspirations and achievements of Indigenous Australians.
It ignores the leaders and communities who are changing lives.
Failure is a word for those who have stopped trying - or given up listening.
I make this clear today: I am not contemplating failure.
Our Government is not contemplating failure.
We are determined to succeed. 
The Closing the Gap targets are a measure of our national progress.
And there is real progress.
Four targets are on track.
And based on progress to date, later this year we expect confirmation that the target of 95 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children enrolled in preschool has been achieved.
A further six targets are improving.
And that number is based on the national average.
Different states and territories are performing better on different outcomes, even in some of the more challenging areas.
New South Wales, the Northern Territory and ACT are improving when it comes to children in out of home care.
While Western Australia, Victoria and South Australia have made significant progress in reducing youth detention.
However, there are 4 areas where progress is stalled, or going backwards.
The most urgent is suicide.
Suicide shatters families, it tears apart communities.
So often amidst the grief, loved ones return to the heartbreaking question: how did it come to this?
Compared to non-Indigenous Australians, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are two and a half times more likely to die by suicide.
As a matter of priority, our Government will deliver $13.9 million to boost the national support line, 13 YARN.
A crisis counselling service designed, led and delivered by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, they offer:
“No shame, no judgement, a safe place to yarn.”
We understand the suicide rate among Indigenous Australians includes a number of deaths in custody.
Thirty-five years after that historic Royal Commission, the hard truth is that no government from either side of politics has done enough.
The primary responsibility for law enforcement and detention rests with State and Territory Governments - and they have every right to put the safety of their communities first.
No-one is making excuses for crime.
But we cannot ignore its causes.
That is why our Government is investing in prevention, not just punishment - particularly for young people.
Because we know justice reinvestment works.
When communities are empowered to take responsibility, to provide structure and support and put young people back on the right track.
The individual rates of re-offending drop - and the crime rate falls too.
Communities are safer, families are safer.
No-one should grow up imagining that prison is a rite of passage.
And as a society, our definition of justice must be measured by more than the capacity of our jails.
Mr Speaker
Our government’s approach to Closing the Gap begins with the building blocks of a good life.
And it is driven by economic empowerment.
Breaking down barriers to wealth creation.
Nourishing aspiration and rewarding hard work.
The self-determination that flows from financial security, from having a stake in the economy.
This is less about what government can do with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
It is about the success Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are achieving for themselves.
Because we do not need to create a new culture of innovation or aspiration among Indigenous Australians.
That culture is over 65,000 years old.
In energy and construction, tourism and fashion, hospitality and technology, Indigenous Businesses are winning awards – and creating jobs.
Indeed, they are between 40 and 100 times more likely to employ Indigenous Australians.
We are boosting the financing capacity of Indigenous Business Australia – backing more entrepreneurs to get their great ideas off the ground.
And in that spirit, we are working to ensure communities can unlock the wealth of their land.
We are on track to achieve the two Closing the Gap targets for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ access to their land and waters.
And we want land to be a basis for prosperity and economic sovereignty, not a barrier to it.
This is why we are investing $75 million to reform Prescribed Bodies Corporate and Native Title Organisations and empower them as economic decision-makers.
Dealing direct with government investment vehicles like the Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund.
And private capital, particularly in the resources and clean energy sector - securing new projects and creating new jobs.
Our Government values the security and opportunity that a good job provides - and we respect the dignity of work.
That is why we promised to abolish the failed CDP – and we have.
Our Remote Jobs and Economic Development program has already supported over 1,500 new jobs.
Today I announce that by 2027 we will double that number.
And by 2030 we will double it again.
Six thousand new jobs - paying real wages and bringing new pride and purpose to people’s lives.
That goes together with the 900 new jobs created through expanding Indigenous Rangers.
A program that draws on the wisdom of a thousand generations to preserve our environment for the future.
Mr Speaker
As a Labor Government, we know economic empowerment begins with education.
Early childhood.
Fully funding every government school.
And expanding horizons through university and TAFE.
The last four years prove that when those opportunities are in reach – Indigenous Australians will grab them with both hands.
In 2022, we promised to train 500 First Nations health workers.
More than 580 have enrolled so far – and 162 have already graduated.
And in the last three years, over 40,000Indigenous students have benefited from Free TAFE.
Now, we are taking that success on the road.
New Mobile TAFE utes and trailers will deliver training, on country.
So locals have the skills and qualifications to build new homes, connect new energy, secure clean water and deliver the health care their communities need.
Tomorrow, in the Great Hall, we will gather to commemorate the 18th anniversary of the National Apology to the Stolen Generations.
Sitting behind Prime Minister Rudd that day, I remember looking up to the gallery.
Seeing the tears and quiet pride on the faces of those who had fought so bravely and for so long to hear those words.
The survivors who honoured us with their grace, by accepting the Apology in the spirit it was offered.
The Apology was an honest reckoning with our history.
A call to action for our future.
And a profound act of patriotism, true to the best of our values.
Mr Speaker
By global standards, our 125 years of Federation makes us an old democracy.
In the full sweep of Australian history, it is the blink of an eye.
Today, we celebrate that truth as a source of national pride – and we are all enriched by it.
Because every time we open our minds to the wisdom and strength of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, every time we break down barriers of racism, or disadvantage, every time we broaden the circle of Australian opportunity and deepen the meaning of the fair go - we are all stronger for it.
Our nation is better and more united for it.
That is the determination and the optimism we bring to this partnership.
Together, we will succeed.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I would also like to acknowledge Her Excellency, the Governor-General.
To be here every year with you remains one of my greatest honours as Prime Minister.
I particularly want to welcome the survivors who grace us with your presence here this morning. Your strength gave us all the chance of a better Australia.
When we look back to that extraordinary day 18 years ago, we are looking back to the fulfilment of a promise.
It was long overdue, held back for too long by those – John Howard so prominent among them – who feared that saying sorry would be calamitous for our country.
It was anything but.
Our nation came together, united in the fundamental decency that I believe remains our truest guiding light.
The Apology was a moment of catharsis, and it was a moment of healing.
It remains – and I suspect will always remain – my proudest day as a parliamentarian.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd spoke the words that were heard right across this nation. And as he spoke, I looked to the faces in the gallery above.
I saw tears. I saw relief. And I saw looks of quiet pride from those who had fought for so long to bring about that act of justice and healing.
Survivors with the grace and the bigness of spirit to accept our Apology.
As I said in the chamber yesterday, the Apology was an honest reckoning with our history.
It was a recognition that children were torn from their families and from their culture, and that what was broken could not be easily put together.
I think of when the great Lowitja O’Donoghue finally saw her mother Lily for the first time in 33 years – having been taken from her at the age of 2.
Neither could speak the other’s language. As her biographer Stuart Rintoul wrote:
The reunion was not easy. They did not embrace. They did not know how to be with one another. 
The wounds carried by the Stolen Generations are so profoundly deep.
But the Apology didn’t just look to the past – it was a call to action for the future.
A call that was – at its heart – deeply patriotic, true to our abiding instincts for better, fairer, stronger Australia.
An Australia in which we have closed the gap.
An Australia in which all Australians get the same chance in life.
In which all Australians have power over their destiny.
When we look back to that day in February 2008, we rightly reflect on the courage of those who made it possible.
And the courage of those who came here to this very building, the pinnacle of a system that had so often let them down.
So many of the finest moments in our history have been defined by resilience, by perseverance, and above all, by courage.
And we saw it exemplified that day, and every day leading up to it, by every member of the Stolen Generations who had spoken up.
For themselves and for those who could not.
And for those who were no longer with us.
What that courage held within it was not just the chance for healing. It held the opportunity of a better future. Of a nation brought closer together.
Once again I would like to acknowledge the then Opposition Leader Brendan Nelson, who recognised that bipartisanship was essential.
I particularly want to express my gratitude for the ongoing work of Stolen Generations organisations, driven by survivors, which provide the services and support their communities need.
Our Government will continue to support survivors of the Stolen Generations. Today I announce up to $87 million over four years for specialised support services. 
These services include family tracing and reunification which are vital in supporting healing and acknowledging the traumatic and intergenerational impacts of forced removal from family, culture and Country. 
Next year, it will be 30 years since the release of the Bringing Them Home report – the report of the inquiry into the Stolen Generations.
I always find it worth returning to the words of Mick Dodson, who said:
I know of no Indigenous person who told their story to the inquiry who wanted non-Indigenous Australians to feel guilty – they just wanted to people to know the truth.
I am pleased Mick’s daughter, Shannan Dodson, is here with us today, and I’d like to acknowledge her great contribution through the Healing Foundation.
Truth is essential because we can only truly know where we’re going if we know where we’ve been.
That is the great journey we can be on together.
Last October, I attended the 40th anniversary of the Hawke Government handing back Uluru to its traditional owners.
And I turned to the words Aunty Pamela Taylor, who had shared this memory a decade earlier:
We were so happy that after all that struggle, all the talking, the fight to get it back – that it was finally going to be given back. … Everybody drew together to celebrate, it was a really happy time.
And that is a microcosm of the even greater Australia we can be.
Saying sorry was never intended as the final word, but as the beginning of a bigger, brighter story.
A story in which we keep working to Close the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians until that gap belongs to history.
Closing the Gap is a national mission and a moral imperative. And it is the work of generations.
We measure tangible outcomes that change peoples’ lives for the better.
Achieving better outcomes in health and education.
Planning the economic empowerment that nourishes aspiration and invests in hard work, laying the ground for the success Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can build for themselves.
As we see results, we draw encouragement from every single reminder that difficult does not mean impossible.
However, we cannot close our eyes to the reality that there are areas where progress has stalled.
It is starkly clear that we have no room for complacency.
And as the recent alleged terrorist attack in Perth reminded us, the forces of racism remain a real and present danger.
I repeat to you – and to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people – the message I have been delivering in Parliament: We see you. We stand with you.
As we gather today to remember, we continue our efforts. We continue what’s working, and we work out solutions for what doesn’t.
And our Government knows that there is no better path forward than listening to communities and partnering with locals.
The story of the Apology began when we – as a nation – decided to listen. To open our ears and open our hearts.
We thank you for what you made possible.
And we vow that the new chapter we began to write together that day is one that we continue to write.
With determination.
With optimism.
And above all, with each other.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Thank you, Janelle, for your kind introduction.
And thank you for being such an outstanding example of how when Labor wins in the regions, the regions win with Labor.
Thank you all for that very warm Country Labor welcome, here in the beautiful Central West.
I acknowledge all my state and federal Labor colleagues.
I thank the mighty trade union movement of Australia for everything you do to advance the cause of working people.
And I pay tribute to all the true believers, our rank-and-file members.
You are Labor’s heart and soul.
And I am so grateful for how hard each and every one of you worked to help our Federal Government secure an historic victory last year.
Including 24 seats in rural and regional Australia, one of our strongest ever results in the regions.
And I know you will bring that same energy and enthusiasm to helping Chris Minns and his team win the State Election next March.
Friends, what drives you to volunteer and hand out and knock on doors is the same belief and determination that drives every member of the Parliamentary Labor party.
Because we all know the power and the value of positive, reforming, long-term Labor Governments.
And we understand that the opportunity – and responsibility – of Government is to serve all Australians, in every part of our great country.
Because for Australia to fulfil our potential, every Australian must have the opportunity to fulfil their potential.
For our nation to be its best, every Australian must have the chance to be their best.
To fulfil our Australian values, we must value every Australian.
That’s why we are building new early education centres across regional Australia.
And partnering with the Minns Government to fully fund every government school.
So every child in the regions gets the best start in life.
It is why we build the local infrastructure that connects communities.
And the national infrastructure that boosts productivity and creates jobs.
The roads and rail that enable our farmers and producers and exporters to take their high-quality products to consumers in our cities, our region and the world.
It’s why we are upgrading – and finishing – the NBN, with fibre not copper, and keeping it in public hands.
So small businesses, students, telehealth consultations and people working from home can count on fast, reliable internet.
It’s why we stepped up to back Rex Airlines.
And have ensured that the new operator will keep flying from Orange to Sydney – and across regional Australia.
And it is why we strengthen Medicare for all Australians.
We have cut the price of medicines on the PBS to no more than $25, the lowest it has been since 2004.
In co-operation with the state government, we are delivering an historic boost to public hospitals.
We have already opened 40 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics in regional Australia.
Including eight here in New South Wales – and another coming soon to Nowra.  
On the 1st of January, 1800 Medicare was up and running.
So now, wherever you live in Australia, free, expert health advice is just a phone call away.
And after we made the biggest investment in bulk-billing in Australian history, last November.
This week saw the biggest quarterly jump in the bulk-billing rate in 20 years.
Millions of Australians able to see a doctor, with just their Medicare card.
We've been focused on the work of delivery – and our opponents have also been busy.
If any of you have found the last fortnight hard to follow, don’t worry you were not alone.
There were Nationals fighting Nationals.
Liberals fighting Nationals.
And Liberals fighting Liberals.
At this point, there is nothing I can say about them today that they haven’t already said about each other on Sky News.
But I will make two points.
First, none of this drama and conflict and betrayal had anything to do serving the Australian people.
Second, none of their disagreements were about policy.
Because that’s the bit they actually agree on – the Conservatives and Moderates, the Liberals and Nationals, the right and the far right, and the far, far right.
They all say that helping people with the cost of living is ‘wasteful spending’.
They all want to cut Medicare, just as we are getting bulk-billing back above 80%.
They all want to cut Free TAFE, just as we pass 725,000 enrolments.
They all want to make it harder for first home buyers, even though our plan for 5 per cent deposits has already helped 15,000 people in regional New South Wales into a home of their own.
The Liberals and Nationals cannot stand each other – but they all stand for cutting wages.
In fact, the only piece of legislation that they disagreed on in the last fortnight was our Government’s bill to freeze the excise on draft beer.
They have spent so long supporting nothing and saying no to everything that they are now opposed to cheaper beer.                                  And if you want proof that our opponents have not learned and will never change, then you only need to look at who they have chosen as their Leader.
Paul Keating famously said of Andrew Peacock:
 ‘The question is can a souffle rise twice?’
Angus Taylor presents us with a new question:
“Can a souffle rise once?”
Angus Taylor is the fourth Liberal leader in my time leading the Labor Party.
And while the Liberals keep changing their leader – they never change their agenda.
He is just another Liberal.
Just a different name pushing the same cuts to Medicare.
The same tax increases, the same denial and delay on climate and energy, the same fixation with talking Australia down.
To quote Angus Taylor:
“The best indicator of future performance is past performance”
And his past performance tells us everything.
He opposed the tax cuts we delivered for every Australian taxpayer in 2024.
And he is against the top-up tax cuts we are delivering for every Australian taxpayer this year – and next year.
In fact, he actually went to the last election promising to increase taxes for 14 million Australian taxpayers.
Scrapping our cost-of-living measures, to spend $600 billion on nuclear reactors.
As well as sacking tens of thousands of public servants.
Though to be fair, his new Deputy Leader came up with that one – and the ban on working from home.
And somehow they made this add-up to higher taxes and bigger deficits.
And – if anything – his record as Energy Minister makes his time as Shadow Treasurer look good.
Because every challenge Australia faces in energy can be traced back to the wreckage he left behind.
When the Coalition were in Government, 24 out of 28 coal fired power stations announced they were closing.
And all Angus Taylor did was close his eyes.
The only decisive action he took as Energy Minister was to change the law to cover up his nearly 20 per cent increase in energy bills until after the election.
When it comes to energy it is this simple: Angus Taylor created the problem, he is not the solution.
He is just another Liberal.
Friends, we all know that we live in a world that is less certain and more polarised.
That global volatility affects our economy, our security – and our politics, our democracy.
The way people get their news, engage with issues and follow debates is fundamentally different, compared to even a decade ago.
That fragmentation is changing the political landscape, everywhere – including Australia.
It presents us with new challenges in reaching people, in organising, in campaigning.
It also offers us new opportunities – particularly in regional areas.
It is clear that communities which have been represented by the Nationals or the Liberals for decades on end are looking for change.
Part of that is because these places have been taken for granted.
Because while the Nats like to talk about being from the regions, they do not act for the regions.
It is also because in regional communities – as in our cities and suburbs – we know there are people under financial pressure.                                      We know there are people working hard but struggling to save for a home.
And we know every Australian parent looks to the future wondering what it will hold for their child.
Determined for them to have a better life, with greater opportunity.
We don’t dismiss any of these concerns, or downplay them.
But nor do we seek to harvest them for our political benefit.
We don’t go looking for grievances, just so we can find someone else to blame.
When we see a problem, we focus on action – not outrage.
That’s why we are delivering real help with cost of living.
That’s why we are strengthening Medicare.
That’s why we are building new homes and helping more people buy a first home.
Some people go into politics to get angry – we are in Government to get things done.
That is the Labor way.
Of course, global economic change brings challenges, it always has.
But it also presents profound opportunities, especially for Australia.
Because we have everything we need to compete and succeed in a world powered by clean energy.                                                         We have the traditional resources, the critical minerals, the sunlight and space – and best of all we have the skills and smarts of the Australian people.
That is why, unlike those who pretend that they can somehow turn back the clock.
We take responsibility for anticipating change and making it work for people.
Investing in the technology and energy and infrastructure and manufacturing that means we shape the future, rather than waiting for the future to shape us.
That is the Labor way – and it is the Australian way.
Because our prosperity and our unity has always depended on people having a stake in our economy.
At the same time as that great son of Orange, Banjo Patterson, was writing The Man from Snowy River and Waltzing Matilda, our movement was leading the world in the fight for a fair’s day work for a fair day’s wage.
The same determination has driven our movement since 1891.
We built for the best with Medicare, not just a source of security for families, a source of pride for our nation.
And we did the same with universal superannuation – ensuring the right of every worker to security in retirement.
Those are the foundations we strengthen and build on today.
Not claiming the system is perfect – working together to make it better.
To deepen the meaning of the fair go.
To give new life to our enduring values.
To give more people a place in the opportunities of our nation.
That is the choice our predecessors made, 135 years ago.
When we chose to be a movement for change – and a party of government.
We chose meaningful progress, not empty protest.
And that choice defines us still.
We build national unity, for national success.
We deal in purpose and optimism.
We take the hard road of delivery, not the dead-end of division.
Friends, that is the message you can take from this conference to your communities.
Say with pride that Labor is the party for the regions.
Because we are the party of jobs – 1.2 million new jobs.
We are the party that has delivered four consecutive increases in the minimum wage.
We are the party protecting penalty rates, your right to disconnect – and your right to work from home.
We are the party that has brought the gender pay gap to an all-time low.
And we are the party of Same Job, Same Pay.
Labor is the party for the regions because we are the party of education and aspiration.
Cutting student debt by 20 per cent.
Opening 56 new Regional University Study Hubs, including 14 right here in New South Wales.
Boosting funding for regional campuses, including Charles Sturt University here in Orange.
And helping over 113,000 people from regional New South Wales access the life-changing opportunity of Free TAFE.
Labor is the party for the regions because we are the ones acting on the environmental challenge of climate change.
And seizing the economic opportunities of renewable energy.
And friends, Labor is the party of the regions because we are the party of Medicare.
From the cities to the suburbs, to the proud regions of this country we love.
Labor governs for all Australians.
We are delivering for all Australians.
And we are building a better, stronger and fairer future – for all Australians.
Have a great conference.


Thank you so much.
I'm absolutely delighted to be here, and I want to acknowledge Matt Gregg and the local member, Gabriel Ng, for the extraordinary contribution that they're making already to the Australian Parliament.
I was here in Box Hill North on Election Day last May, less than a year ago, handing out for Gabriel, who has had an impact already and is a champion of this local community.
So, can I say, I'm delighted to be with all of you to celebrate the Year of the Horse. Well done to all of you. Gung Hay Fat Choy. Chun Jie Kuai Le. Not as good as Gabriel, I'm sure, but I get points for effort.
So, can I say that, it is indeed a great honour. And right throughout Australia, we will be celebrating Chinese New Year over the coming fortnight and indeed beyond.
We'll keep going. On Sunday, I'll be in Sydney opening a museum, paying tribute to the contribution that Chinese-Australians have made as well in my home city of Sydney.
But here in Melbourne, the growth of this community, particularly around Box Hill and around this local area in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne, has been quite extraordinary. And the contribution that you are making is incredible as well.
People come to Australia. With the exception of First Nations people, we're all either migrants or descendants of migrants. And I'm really proud that the Government that I lead looks like Australia, half men, half women, people of different backgrounds.
Someone with a surname like 'Albanese' as the leader of the House of Representatives as Prime Minister. My friend whose surname happens to be 'Wong' is Leader in the Senate.
People like Gabriel making a difference as well, with his background from Singapore, and his cultural background of which he is so proud.
But people have come to Australia to make a difference. And the Chinese-Australian community are driven by the same spirit that drives the rest of Australia.
Your entrepreneurial spirit, your contribution to small business and to the economy, your desire for your children to have a better life than the one that you have enjoyed as well is inspiration.
And the fact that here in Australia, we can celebrate culture from all around the world, but in particular in the next fortnight there will be a focus on Chinese culture.
And what that does is enrich all of us through the music and dancing, and I congratulate the wonderful musicians who we just saw here to open with their performance.
But the food, the language, the engagement, and the joy of life.
One of the things, I've been to the big festival in Box Hill a couple of times now, and there is nowhere you'd rather be than right there with people really celebrating in your way of, in this case, the Year of the Horse and different years.
I was born in the Year of the Rabbit. And so, we are all in Australia enriched by the fact that that culture is there.
And can I say as well that here in Australia, one of the things that we need to really be proud about are the fact that people who have come here who share so much in common, in spite of whatever our background might be, such as Australian values of looking after each other, the Australian values of family, the Australian values of education and training, the contribution that people are making to economy as well is something of which we can be so proud.
I have been really proud as well that as the Australian Prime Minister we are punching above our weight around the world. And one of the things that we have done, of course is to restore relations with China as well.
That is so important for our economy, but important as well for what we want in this region, which is peace and security in the region, that we share in our local region.
So, we've engaged with China to stabilise relations, we've engaged with ASEAN like never before.
We engage in the Pacific Island Forum, in APEC, in all of these as well, particularly in our region. And that has made a positive difference to Australia's standing in the world.
So, thank you for sharing your culture with me.
Thank you to the organisations for allowing us to be here with you as well. For a short period of time today, this celebration will be mirrored all around the world and in particular all around Australia because the Chinese Australian community have been here making contributions for a very long period of time.
There are artefacts that have been found recently in Western Australia that go back well before, well before the First Fleet sailed into Sydney Harbour, that acknowledged that many hundreds of years ago there was exploration and early contact between the Chinese and Indigenous Australians, going back in time.
Congratulations to everyone here.
Happy Year of the Horse.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Thanks everyone for joining us, and thanks to the Premier for joining us, but more importantly, thanks for the collaboration where we're working well together, as we do with states and territories right around the country. And here in Victoria, at the beginning of last year, was one of the first states to sign up to full and fair funding for every public school, and that funding has started to flow. And a few weeks ago, of course, we signed up to the National Health and Hospitals Agreement, resulting in $25 billion of additional investment over the next five year agreement. But importantly, as well, the work that we're doing in primary health care with opening of new Urgent Care Clinics, the tripling of the bulk billing incentive, the $25 price for PBS medicines, is $7.70 for concession card holders - all of this work that we are doing is a partnership, as well as working together on the energy transition, we're doing it together in a cooperative way, as well as investing in infrastructure here in Victoria. Victoria missed out for a long while from the Commonwealth Government, with something like 8 per cent at one stage of the National Budget going to Victoria, in spite of the fact that this has been a growing state and a growing city of Melbourne. So, you are very welcome here, Premier, and we look forward to continuing to engage with you and happy if you can say a few words.
JACINTA ALLAN, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: Thanks, Prime Minister. Thanks to you and all your colleagues, not just for being here today, but for being here very regularly. I think you made a comment the other day about the number of times you've been here from to Melbourne and Victoria. It really means a lot, because as the PM has just gone through, we had a few lean years, it's more than a few lean years, and the PM mentioned that in the context of infrastructure funding, and it makes a real and meaningful difference to Victorians and the people that we represent, that we've got a partner in the Federal Government that doesn't just understand us, but wants to back this great state. And it's those outcomes that the Prime Minister, whether it is the infrastructure projects, and if you look at this great city, apologies to our New South Wales friends - we are the biggest city, pretty soon going to be the biggest city in the nation, population wise. But we've got a partner in Canberra that's delivering those projects to back that growth, the Airport Rail, the North East Link, the Suburban Rail Loop, the three big road rail projects are going to bring this city and support that growth into the future. But I think also too, the PM went through a few areas where, if you line up your Cabinet agenda and our Cabinet's agenda, they're pretty much the same, focusing on better health care - you mentioned the Urgent Care Centres, we're delivering that as well. The work on the PBS, the work on the Medicare benefits, where we're delivering free virtual emergency departments, care at the chemists. It's that shared agenda. The work we're doing in schools is so really important, the Free TAFE agenda that we both share. It all comes from having that understanding that there's a value set that we share as governments, which is about being focused on working people, on families, and understanding that we have a responsibility as governments to recognise where they're at right now, a lot of pressures. Cost of living is real. And cost of living isn't just money, as real as that is, it's also time. So how do we ease the pressure? Make it easy to see a GP is saving families time and stress during their days. So, these are just some - we could talk all afternoon, but I know you've got a very busy Cabinet agenda about the joint program, but it all comes back to that understanding that when Federal and State Governments work together, we can drive these outcomes for the people that we represent and certainly Prime Minister, since the election of you and your team, Victoria has noticed the difference. We appreciate the difference, and we appreciate having a Federal Government that's got our back. So, thank you.
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much.


Thanks so much, Correna, and thank you to all of you for a very warm welcome here, including a couple of people over here who have been Souths supporters for years, who I met on the way through.
So, I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting, and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I do acknowledge your federal president, Correna Haythorpe, and to give credit where credit's due, Correna is relentless.
In campaigning, one of the things about the leadup to that announcement at the National Press Club is that we didn't commit to this in the 2022 election.
So, when I say that the commitments that we take to an election are the start that we're committed to doing, but we always look to be more ambitious – the opportunity came for us to really push and we wanted to get it done before the 2022 election.
And Correna was, I must say as well, something that isn't always present, I understand why – she had faith that we really wanted to deliver. What I said in private was what I tried to deliver them in public, that I was absolutely committed to it, that I'm proud that we were able to deliver it.
And I'm proud that my son went through the entire system through public school, through to Sydney Secondary College through. [INDISTINCT] and it made a difference.
But I could see as well, in talking to the teachers during all that experience, the difference that it would make to fully fund every public school with the school resourcing standard.
I want to acknowledge the federal secretary, Nicole, and all the international education union leaders who are here as well today.
But to the heart of your union, which is your branch delegates and your leadership in the state branches, as members of the AEU, each of you represents a contribution to our nation that is fundamental to our collective success. We know the role that you play.
And indeed, when my car and security pulled up downstairs, there was a person – I'm not sure who it was, Kylie down there – was trying to instruct the C1 car precisely. I said to my AFP driver, don't worry, it's just a teacher telling you where to go. And I, just like the student I was, treated those directions as optional.
But the work that you do in classrooms, in labs, in libraries, in lecture theatres, your passion, your commitment, your expertise, it shapes lives. And there's teachers that explain the world, who help their students find their place within it. In helping young Australians discover and fulfil their potential, you ensure that Australia fulfils our potential.
And the best weapon against disadvantage is what you do, providing people with an opportunity. And what Gonski – it became something that people didn't necessarily understand. It's pretty simple, really. It was about creating the resources so that every child can fulfil their potential, about creating opportunity. And when you create opportunity, you create future success.
And that's precisely why strengthening our public education system has always informed the priorities and the work of Labor governments. It is what Labor does.
But it's also what we need to do to entrench – the Rudd and Gillard governments, which I was a very proud minister of, and leader of the government in the house – because we didn't entrench Labor governments, that got taken away in the 2014 Budget. $30 billion ripped out of education, $50 billion ripped out of public health.
So, when you hear the latest in the revolving door of leaders on the other side of the house talking about fiscal responsibility, we know where they always go. They always go education and health, public education and public health is where they will go.
And that's why our reelection in May last year was so important to bed down the agreements that we signed, one by one, with Correna helping, working in tandem to get state and territory governments, some of which were more enthusiastic than others, to sign up, that we got all signed up prior to that election.
And indeed the last state to sign up, Queensland, we got literally on the day before the Budget on 24 March, knowing that I was going to call the election that Friday.
So, that was a critical delivery to make sure that it was right across the country. We also of course understand that when it comes to public education, it isn't just the schools. And Correna referred to the Jobs and Skills Summit, and what we have done with TAFE is something I'm so proud of.
Here's a simple little exercise for you rather than your students. You can look at the APH website, that has Hansard, and see how many times leaders of the other side politics have ever mentioned TAFE, as a word. It is quite extraordinary. They just never talk about it.
The first time I came to this conference was a long time ago as Shadow Minister for Employment Services and Training, where I first worked with, I'm not sure if the structure has changed, but the TAFE Teachers' Association. It's all changed? Showing my age here, how long I've been in the business.
I worked very closely, because what had happened with the privatisation of the sector was that, simply, Australia wasn't keeping up with the skills that we need. It was actually damaging our economy as well as depriving people from the opportunity to have a career and to be able to contribute.
Not everyone wants to go to university and it's just as fulfilling. In some cases – all the tradies that I went to school came out a lot more prosperous than I was in my early years. And it's really fulfilling. This week I was at Swinburne TAFE, talking with construction apprentices.
And we not only have free TAFE, but in construction and electrical of course we have $10,000 cash incentives.
Good for the individuals, but good for the country as well, if we're going to build the houses that we need and deal with the energy transition that will be so important going forward as well. Absolutely critical.
And I was there at another TAFE that was in Melbourne as well a while ago, and there was a young man there and was going around with me. He was doing construction, carpentry and joinery. And he was beginning his apprenticeship.
He said 'I've almost finished my law degree, so I've started doing this'. 'You've almost finished your law degree?' He said 'yeah, I'll finish at the end of the year, but I've realised I actually don't want to be a lawyer. What I want is to make things with my hands and to see the product of what I do.'
And good on him. That really was a conversation that has really stuck with me as well. And so whether it's schools or TAFE, we have made I think an enormous difference in our first years. More to do, of course, but every time our opponents talk about waste spending, that's what they're talking about.
And the former leader was actually very, very explicit about it. Said people don't value it – this was her opposition to free TAFE – 'people don't value it unless you pay for it'. An extraordinary admission of the ideological condition that was held by the Liberal Party.
Now, one of the other things that we're doing of course in the school funding is to make sure it's targeted, well-resourced and it's guaranteed, but it's linked as well with real reform, investing in what works.
When we signed the agreement in Victoria here, I went to the electorate of Aston in the outer eastern suburbs with the Premier, Jacinta Allan. And there, the teachers there did a demonstration of the primary school we were in, of how they were teaching kids with phonics and what they were doing.
And these kids were amazing. They were just so enthusiastic about their learning, and that is precisely what I know all of you want to see, but what the nation needs as well.
So, tying it up to make sure as well that if a kid falls behind, early intervention, it's a bit like health, the earlier you intervene, the easier it is to lift people up. And in the end it doesn't cost you money, it saves you money. Because it's more effective in terms of the outcome.
If our students are falling behind, we want them to be able to keep up. And so many times we see that issues have not been identified early in a young child's life, and so they've covered it up and that leads to behavioural problems as well as we go through.
So, what this investment is about is just that. Making sure that we turn the commitment that I've made - no one held back, no left behind - into a reality. That's what it means. It's not something that's abstract, as you all know as well.
And we want to empower teachers with the proven methods and the proper resources they need so that you can do what you do best, which is to teach.
So, friends, we have fully funded every government school. We have put public TAFE back at the centre of vocational education and training, and a Labor government will never minimise the power that vocational education and training has to change lives. And we will never minimise, either, the importance of high school education.
And at a time where we talk about social cohesion as well in this country, one of the things about public schools is that they're open to everyone. Open to everyone. That is about people being able to participate, of different place, different backgrounds, learn and engage from each other.
I always love going into public schools as well because for those who, with the rise in some of the far right ideological positions in recent times, one of the things about [INDISTINCT] is the same, particularly whether it's a early learning centre or into a primary school. Kids don't see race, religion, gender, anything else. They just see other kids. Hatred and division is something that's learned.
And so, public schooling is so important. And that engagement, I think, as we go forward can make a big difference. The funding for our schools will come through, put into the Budget last year, but it began to flow this year and it'll flow through each year.
And we ensured as well that state governments are putting in additional resources as well. It was important that there not be simply a transfer.
One of the issues – if you were designing Australia again, you might not have three tiers of government, but we do, so we have to deal with that. And we have to make sure that additional federal resources didn't just result in state resources being lower.
So, the biggest, you won't be surprised that the biggest beneficiaries proportionately are areas where there is the biggest disadvantage. So, Northern Territory for example, is getting an extraordinary boost to the resources as we go forward, not surprisingly.
But if you combine that with what we're doing in TAFE, 725,000 free TAFE courses have been enrolled in. Already, that has produced well over 200,000 graduates, people finishing their courses as we go forward as well.
And we have legislated now to make free TAFE permanent. Cost-of-living relief, helping with skills shortages, boosting the economy, all of that, making a difference. But it's also in other areas as well, when it comes to education that is making the difference.
I've spoken about the $10,000 cash incentives. The other thing that we have done that I'm really proud of is to identify particularly feminised professions and the fact that they have fallen behind when it comes to wages.
We face a crisis in this country. Child care and aged workers, and early educators in child care of course aren't child minders – we know that 90 per cent, over 90 per cent of human brain development occurs in the first five years.
And so, I was in a centre in Latrobe in Tassie just this week, I can't recall what day. Wednesday I think. And there, the people that you meet there making a difference, were losing people from the sector.
Just like we were losing people in aged care as well. [INDISTINCT] Make sure our youngest and older Australians are looked after.
But the other thing we were conscious of as well when it comes to education is intergenerational equity. That's why we cut 20 per cent off the HECS, the student debt, to make a difference. Three million Australians have benefited by an average of $5,500 each. It's an enormous contribution.
The other thing that we've done in a related area is paid prac. I was at the Royal Children's Hospital here in Melbourne on Tuesday, and there I met four nursing students. And for them doing their course, one of them has a six-week paid prac placement. For all of them, at least four weeks.
The idea, I reckon if you went out there and at random stopped people here in South Melbourne and said, do you think that someone undertaking a nursing degree is good? They'd say, yep, tick. Do you think we need more nurses? They go, yep, tick. Do you think that they can survive with zero income over a month or more while they're doing their course? They'd go, no, that's crazy. But that's the truth.
So, paid prac for people undertaking courses in nursing, social work, in these areas as well, the early educators, is really important and is making the difference as we go forward.
So friends, I thank you for invite to talk with you here today. I admire what you do. It's an extraordinary thing to make the decision that you are going to go into a profession – not withstanding the fact that you have a very good union, you don't go into it to make money and to be very wealthy down the track. You go into it because of the commitment that you have.
And that is something that I really, really admire. The last time in government, my Deputy Chief of Staff chose to leave around about 2011 because he decided at age 50, his midlife crisis was he was going to become a maths teacher, teach boys maths in particular.
So, he went and did that. He went back and did his education section to back up his degree at UTS and became a maths teacher. And that to me, I was surprised when he came to see me and told me that. That was a wonderful thing to do.
Now, many of you will have made that decision in your lives much earlier than the age of 50, but you are motivated by making such an enormous difference.
The Labor Party is a political organisation where I think education is just part of our DNA. On top of all of that, I haven't spoke about what we've done with universities as well. 54 regional hubs, 15 suburban hubs in our universities as well. Study Hubs that are making a difference as well. How to expand opportunity.
If you look at some areas, the differentials on people going to university can really be determined by postcode. And one of the things that we need to do is to make sure that you can't identify people's opportunities in life by looking at postcode in they were born.
Certainly, if you look at where I was born and the circumstances, you would've got pretty good odds against me standing here addressing you as Prime Minister today. But through opportunity I was fortunate to have unconditional love and connection from my mum, a single mum. And that can make a difference.
And for teachers each and every day, the power of education is the wind in the sails of a young person's life as they go through. So, thank you for what you're doing.
Thank you to the union for the leadership that you have shown as well. Campaigning, obviously campaigning for on industrial issues, but on this issue, I can't think of a union – as much as I don't want this reported to all of the ACTU executive next week – I can't think of a union that has run such a long campaign, absolute commitment not to help teachers, to help those that you teach, to help your customers, if you like, to put it that way. To help students.
And that is to your great credit and you should be really proud. This is your victory that you achieved through that unmitigated, relentless commitment, that you showed through your union's leadership backed up, of course, by the union's membership.
Thanks very much.


Thank you so much for that generous introduction, and I thank Uncle Michael for his welcome to country, and I join with him in acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we're meeting and pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I also want to acknowledge my colleagues who are here. Peter Cai, thank you very much for the introduction, the CEO.
Dr John Yu AC, the founding chair.
Daphne Lowe Kelly, the chair of the Museum of Chinese in Australia.
The Lord Mayor of Sydney, at Clover Moore.
But I want to particularly acknowledge my local my federal colleagues who are here.
We've got Zhi Soon, who is here. We've got Ash Ambihaipahar, who is here. Sally Sitou, who is here, and Tanya Plibersek, the local MP.
I am indeed proud that my team in Canberra includes Sally, Zhi, but also Gabriel Ng, Sam Lim and Julie-Ann Campbell, as well as of course, Penny Wong.
Australians who are proud of their Chinese heritage and who are an example of what I aim for, which is I want a parliament that looks like Australia.
That looks like modern Australia, which is diverse, which is enriched by our multiculturalism as well.
I'm very pleased to be here today, I've got to say.
I was in Melbourne, in the Box Hill area, just on Thursday of this week, celebrating the Year of the Fire Horse. And there I had to make dumplings and try calligraphy as well. Here I just have to give a speech - something I'm much more comfortable with, it's got to be said.
During the campaign last year, Tanya came here with Foreign Minister Wong to announce that a re-elected Labour government would provide $2.6 million for the completion of this museum.
This is something that we supported very strongly.
I came here a couple of years ago and just saw the progress that was being made.
And it's important that we understand our history, that we understand the contribution which people of Chinese descent have made here in Australia over a long period of time.
By making contribution to the commercial activity in this great city of Sydney. Made a contribution to the cultural life here in Sydney, and continue to do so with descendants as well.
There are Chinese Australians in every aspect of Australian life, something that enriches our country and something that is part of the reason why we need to tell the story about that long and extraordinary history of the connection between Chinese Australians as contributors to our nation.
I’d particularly like to mention the generosity of the three Pang sisters, who donated $4 million to help make this dream reality. I’m pleased to say Winnie Pang is here with us today.
Now I can't think of a better site for this museum than right here in the Haymarket.
I also acknowledge Jerome Laxale is here as well, the member for Bennelong.
I have spent a fair bit of my life, I grew up not far from here in Camperdown and went to school here in the city of St Mary's.
And one of the things that I well recall growing up as it was just myself and my mother at home. And when you’ve got just two people at Christmas, a Christian celebration, of course, then it's not a big group – there’s no point having a big turkey.
So what we did was to come to one of the outlets down here, and we had duck and pork barbecue was our Christmas meal, every single year.
And that way, as well, whoever dropped in and everyone was welcome at our place - that was a part of the benefit that we had.
But of course, it goes to very much every aspect of Australian life.
People who've served in our defence force, people who've built businesses, people who have served as doctors and lawyers, people who have made an extraordinary contribution here.
And this building here, that was once home to a library, is a haven of those stories.
Storytelling is at the heart of how a nation has a sense of our self.
Stories that tell us who we are and bind us together.
Stories that illuminate the rich and beautiful complexity of all that Australia has become.
Stories that are in themselves, the conscious act of memory.
And in the case of somewhere like this, stories have doubled as a collective act of appreciation as well.
The truest power of this museum is that it shines a light on individuals like Gordon Mar and families like Simpson-Lee, who can be overshadowed in the telling of our history.
Yet theirs are all important stories.
Stories of contribution, of ambition and aspiration, of energy and hard work.
The sheer determination to realise a dream and to make a difference.
And whether it's in hospitality, business, commerce, medicine, science or culture, this is all the stuff of nation building, and that is what undermined my underpins the spirit of the Museum of Chinese in Australia.
The very real and important idea that these stories are not just worth remembering because they remind us of what we have and enjoy as Australians didn't just happen of its own accord.
It was built and nurtured generation after generation.
And as we enter the Year of the Horse, people right across Australia are celebrating Chinese New Year.
What was once a preserve of those with Chinese heritage is beautifully burst its banks and proudly taken its place on our Australian calendar.
And at a time where multiculturalism and our diversity under challenge from some, pretending that we can go to an Australia that, if it ever was, certainly isn't the case now.
People who don't acknowledge that, with the exception of First Nations, people, we are all either migrants or descendants of migrants, who cover this country to make a better life for themselves, but also for their children and generations to come.
We need to challenge that very directly when racism raises its hand.
But we also need to challenge it by our actions, by our deeds, by the positive messages, such as what this shows right here with this museum.
So I want to thank everyone who kept believing in the museum project here.
To everyone who puts their hand up to make a difference or put their hand in their pocket to make a difference as well.
You've all been a part of something quite wonderful, and you have added something really, really important to our city and to our nation.
It is a great honour for me to be here opening this museum.
We not only cherish diversity and celebrate culture here in Australia, of course, my government is very proud of the fact that we've worked very hard towards a peaceful and secure Indo-Pacific region as well, and we continue to do so.
We continue to reach out and argue the case for friendly relations with our neighbours, but also with making sure we celebrate who we are as a modern Australian nation, and that's precisely what this museum here does.
Thanks very much.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past present and emerging.
Thank you to our hosts at the Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and The Herald Sun for bringing this forum together once again.
I had the pleasure of spending nearly all last week here in Victoria.
I met with nurses at the Royal Children’s Hospital who had been supported by Paid Prac while they did their training placement.
I spoke to construction apprentices in Croydon, who are among the nearly 150,000 Victorians to have enrolled in Free TAFE.
I presented a great Australian, Rob Winther with an award for his 60 years of service to Veterans at the Heidelberg Repatriation Hospital.
I visited small businesses in Bayswater.
Even held an impromptu community meeting on a street corner in Thornbury.
And in this remarkable multicultural city, enriched by generations of migration: I celebrated Lunar New Year in Lower Templestowe and Ramadan at the Dandenong Night Markets.
Of course, in between all of that, I enjoyed a lot of great coffee.
As you get around Melbourne, you can almost see it growing in real time - and you can see why.
This a wonderful global city to visit, rightly famous for its major events and vibrant culture.
This is also a great place to live, study, make a career, raise a family.
So much of that is credit to the hard work and aspiration of the Victorian people.
People studying, training and teaching at Victoria’s world class TAFEs and universities.
The scientists and skilled workers combining their talents in this state’s growing advanced manufacturing sector.
The farmers who have endured drought, bushfires and floods, yet picked themselves up and won global recognition for the quality of theirproducts.
And small business owners who start early, stay late, take risks and create jobs.
Underpinning all this effort and sacrifice is a powerful sense of optimism and determination, even in difficult times.
That’s what all of you in this room represent: a deep pride in this city and this state, a belief in it.
That’s why you build and invest and employ in Victoria.
Because you know there are things this state does better than anywhere else in Australia and therefore better than anywhere else in the world. 
Our Government’s vision for Victoria’s future is about building on those strengths – and investing in them.
Rewarding hard work.
Nourishing aspiration.
And ensuring that the Commonwealth acts as a constructive partner – not a critic, or a commentator.
Because a strong, growing, thriving Victoria is essential to Australia’s future.
And because none of the challenges facing this state will be solved by talking Victoria down.
That’s why I am pleased this forum has chosen a positive theme: ‘Smart Growth’.
That is the balance we have to get right.
For this city, for our economy – and for our nation more broadly.
Maximising the benefits of growth, while managing the pressures that come with it.
For Melbourne, Australia’s fastest-growing city, this means building new homes, roads, public transport and energy.
It also means strengthening essential services: schools, hospitals, Medicare and child care. 
Investing in the aspirations that should be the right of every Australian: a secure job that pays a fair wage, quality healthcare they can count on, a great education for their child.
This is the work of delivery that drives our Government.
Repaying the trust that the Australian people have placed in us.
Doing what we said we would do.
Working through and ticking off the commitments we took to the last election.
Cutting income tax for all 14 million taxpayers this year – and next year.
Cutting student debt by 20 per cent.
Protecting penalty rates.
Expanding Paid Parental Leave and adding superannuation to it.
Making Free TAFE permanent, nationwide.
Ensuring every child has access to 3 days of child care subsidy.
Opening more Medicare Urgent Care Clinics and new Medicare Mental Health Centres.
Making medicines cheaper, reducing the cost of PBS scripts to no more than $25.
And cutting power bills, with cheaper batteries.
All of this helps people with the cost of living.  
It also lays the foundations for further economic reform.
Indeed, it is the entry ticket for that bigger conversation.
At a time when people around the world are being told the economy doesn’t work for them and the system is against them the best possible counterargument is change that people can see.
Proof that not only do governments follow through on their promises – but that these promises make a positive difference.
Already, 540,000 Victorians have been able to get free healthcare, closer to home at one of the 28 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics we have opened.
Thousands more have called 1800 MEDICARE since it came online on 1 January.
This takes pressure off public hospitals and emergency departments.
And it’s part of rebuilding confidence in the universality of Medicare.
At the heart of our election campaign was our commitment to make the biggest investment in bulk-billing in the history of Medicare. 
And the last three months have seen the biggest lift in the bulk-billing rate in 20 years.
Including a 5 per cent increase, here in Victoria.
And because of the incentives we have put on the table, every week more and more GPs and surgeries are switching over to bulk-bill every patient, every time.
Being able to see a doctor for free in your suburb, having a bulk-billing surgery in your country town, saves you money and it gives you peace of mind.
It means people don’t put off treatment because they can’t afford it, only for a small thing to become much more serious later on.
And it also stands as a reminder to all of us, that here in Australia, we didn’t settle for a health system that would be good for some of the people some of the time, depending on where they lived.
We built a universal system.
We are strengthening that – and expanding it – including with the biggest ever investment in Women’s Health.
Something that had been treated as a side issue for far too long.
Medicare is a statement of our national values – and it’s a marker of our national capacity.
In Australia, we aim for the best.
That’s who we are - that’s what we are capable of, as a country.  
And when Governments hold true to that, when we trust in our people and their capacity when we empower our population to be their best, nothing is beyond us.
We are seeing that now with the shift to clean energy.
The biggest global economic transformation since the industrial revolution – and a change that Australians are driving in their own home.
We are the world leader in rooftop solar.
And we are well on the way to being a world leader in storage too.
Our 30 per cent discount has now seen nearly 250,000 Australians install a battery in their home or small business since 1 July last year.
Around 45,000 of those here in Victoria.  
People permanently reducing their own power bills.
And benefiting everyone else too, with power generated and stored during the day taking pressure off the grid in the evening peak.
This is not some inner-city crusade - it is a success story being written in the outer suburbs and regional Australia.
With ten times more batteries in Frankston than Toorak.
Australians are making the practical choice and backing the proven technology.
At the heart of Australian aspiration, is the dream of home ownership.
And this is the first home buyer capital of Australia.
In the last year, 1 in every 3 Australians who bought their first home was a Victorian.
And since we came to Government, 71,000 Victorians have been able to purchase their first home with just a 5 per cent deposit.
What’s happening in Victoria underlines an important fact.
When it comes to housing affordability, the most important thing is supply. 
More Victorians have been able to buy a home, because Victoria is building more homes.
In our first term, our National Housing Accord set a common goal with the states and territories of building 1.2 million new homes before 2030.
Victoria embraced that challenge – and is on pace to deliver 98 per cent of its share.
And now our Government will make it easier for Victoria to build more homes, by providing more land.
Earlier this month, we confirmed that we would be selling empty or underused defence land in prime locations around Australia.
Eight in metropolitan Melbourne and a further eight in regional Victoria.  
Of course, we will respect the history and heritage of iconic buildings.
And on some sites, we know there is work to do before the land is ready for development, as well as making sure that the supporting infrastructure is in place, from the outset.
But because this is Commonwealth Land, we have a head start.
We can work with the State Government to accelerate the usual processes around approvals and zoning.
And we will use Commonwealth powers to ensure that this land delivers the best outcomes for affordable housing and local communities. 
As we build new homes, we must build the roads and public transport to service them.
For too long, Victoria was getting a dud deal from Canberra on infrastructure.
Political game-playing meant that this state with over 20 per cent of the population was only receiving 8 per cent of Federal infrastructure funding.
The new Metro Tunnel is an extraordinary achievement for so many reasons, not the least of which is the Victorian Government had to go it alone on the cost of construction.
That wasn’t fair to Victorians – and it’s not sustainable for a state budget.
Which is why we have stepped up and invested in North-East Link.
Backed the early works on Suburban Rail Loop.
And when I came to this forum this time last year, I announced an additional $2 billion to transform Sunshine Station.
Taking the Federal Government’s total investment in the Melbourne Airport Rail section of the Suburban Rail Loop, to $7 billion.  
This funding will turn Sunshine into a hub for regional rail services, so V-line passengers can go direct to Tullamarine, not into the city and then back out.
It will also support the long overdue upgrade of the Melton line, delivering better services for locals in the west.
We locked in this commitment ahead of the last election, because we wanted to lock in the start date.
And this morning, our Minister for Infrastructure, Catherine King stood alongside the Premier, Jacinta Allan to mark the beginning of construction.
This is a project that has been debated and announced and re-announced for decades.
Now it is underway.
Plans approved, shovels in the ground. No turning back.
And when we made that commitment to Sunshine Station and Airport Rail, we also created a $1.2 billion fund to support road repairs in the suburbs and regions.
Upgrading intersections, sealing roads, expanding roundabouts.
At the time we identified three projects.
Today, working with local councils and the state government, we are funding a total of 19.
Those smaller projects make a big difference – to traffic flow and road safety.
And they earn you the social licence, the community buy-in, to do the big things, to embark on generational projects like Suburban Rail Loop.
And to take the country forward on High Speed Rail.
Yesterday, we announced that we would be taking the first stage of this project, Newcastle to Sydney, into design and development.
Because the business case is compelling, it demonstrates the positive return for investors.    There are, of course, engineering and construction challenges to consider.  
As a former Infrastructure Minister I can tell you, the only thing that moves fast in this process is the train.
But let me be clear: for high speed rail to deliver its full economic and national benefits, it cannot terminate at Sydney.
Australia is the only inhabited continent on earth that doesn’t already have high speed rail.
And Melbourne to Sydney is one of the busiest flight corridors in the world.
I accept that I will not be the Prime Minister when High Speed Rail is finished.
But I am determined to be the Prime Minister who starts it.
Nation-building infrastructure enables growth – and boosts productivity.
This is our focus, across the board.
Our government is proud that over 1.2 million new jobs have been created on our watch.
And we are encouraged by the fact that the private sector is resuming its rightful place as the major driver of economic growth and job creation.
A key priority for the Federal Budget in May is to enable this growth without adding to pressure on inflation.
Working to turn around Australia’s longstanding productivity challenge, so that our economy has more room to grow, more quickly.
That’s why, alongside our cost of living measures, we will continue to invest in new skills and infrastructure, new energy and technology – expanding capacity and capturing future growth.
Just as importantly, our Treasurer, Jim Chalmers and Finance Minister, Katy Gallagher are making structural savings.
Including the reforms we are undertaking that will ensure essential services like the National Disability Insurance Scheme and Aged Care are sustainable into the future.
And working with the States and Territories to establish the new Thriving Kids program.
We know there is more to do to strengthen the Budget.
Our commitment to responsible economic management means we are always looking to eliminate waste and drive maximum value for every taxpayer dollar.
But responsible economic management is also about the responsibility we have to help people under pressure, here and now.
And the responsibility we hold to prepare for the future - and invest in it.
In a time of global uncertainty, the answer for Australia is not unthinking austerity.
It is investing in our nation’s capacity to create – and secure - prosperity.
The economic framework that Australians built in the 1980s and 90s was designed for a more predictable and more stable world, of ever-expanding free trade.
Today, when nations are openly linking their economic policy with national security.
And where global supply chains can be tangled up in this strategic competition.
We need to make ourselves more resilient – and more independent.
Navigating this new economic and strategic reality will be the focus of my discussions with Mark Carney, the Prime Minister of Canada, during his visit to Australia next week.
Both Australia and Canada are middle powers in a world that is changing.
We cannot change it back - but we can back ourselves.
We can work to shape the future, not wait for the future to shape us.
For Australia, that means investing in our strengths and our skills, our resources – and our economic resilience.
Making more things here in Australia – and making our own way in the world.
If we are always the last link in the global supply chain, we will always be vulnerable.
And if we rely too much on any single market, we are more at risk.
That is why we have working to diversify our trade partnerships and deepen our engagement, particularly in our region.
As well as building new markets for Australian products and services in countries such as India, Indonesia and the United Arab Emirates.
And Trade Minister Don Farrell is working through the final stages of negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement with the European Union, home to 450 million consumers.
Our Future Made in Australia agenda is about making the most of these global opportunities.
Combining our traditional resources, our critical minerals and our clean energy to make more things here and sell them to the world. 
In the years ahead, we need to consolidate that ambition – and broaden it out.
Expanding our defence sovereignty as well as our manufacturing capability.
And securing what economists call the physical inputs of economic growth: not just resources but fabricated metals and pharmaceuticals.
In all of this, energy is absolutely essential.
Building new renewable generation and storage, backed by affordable Australian gas, is vital to bring down bills here and now.
And we need to go beyond that, to create an abundance of cheap, clean energy that we can use as a source of enduring competitive advantage.
That is vital for manufacturing – and for securing Australia’s place on the digital frontier.  
Positioning our nation and this state as the destination of choice for the new jobs and opportunities of data centres and Artificial Intelligence.
As well as the productivity benefits this can deliver for businesses across our economy.
We all know that A.I. presents challenges, it carries risks, new technology always does.
But the biggest risk for Australia is missing the boat. Or imagining that we can sit back and wait and see how this plays out somewhere else.
We need to strike the right balance in our regulations – and we also need to invest in the right skills and knowledge for our workers, our businesses and our society.
What Australia has done with our Social Media Ban for Under 16s shows that our nation is not powerless in the way it engages with technology.
We can embrace its opportunities, in our national interest.  
Our choices matter, our values matter – and they can help shape – and lead - the global response.
There are real challenges facing us – there are also profound opportunities ahead of us.
Because when you think about the forces that will shape the future of the global economy: digital technology, clean energy, advanced manufacturing,
And when you consider what a country needs to succeed in these industries: a skilled workforce, a culture of innovation, world-class research and education,
Truly, there is nowhere else you’d rather be than right here in Australia and indeed right here in Victoria.
If we back ourselves and build for the best.
If we invest in our people and our capacity.
Then Victorians and Australians can seize this moment and make it our own.


Prime Minister Carney, Madame Fox-Carney, it is my great honour and absolute pleasure to welcome you and all the members of your delegation to our Parliament, on behalf of the people of Australia.
And I know I speak for every member of this place, when I say we are very much looking forward to your address.
It may help you to know that back in 1839, Britain sentenced 58 French-Canadians involved in the rebellion in Quebec, to be transported to New South Wales, and put to work, widening Parramatta Road, which goes through my local electorate in Sydney and past Canada Bay, in the electorate of the Member for Reid.
In 1854, it was a Canadian, Henry Ross, who stood in the centre of the Eureka Stockade at Ballarat and raised a new flag.
The iconic Southern Cross, a symbol of the miners’ struggle for justice.
In other words, Prime Minister, Canadian rebels with bold ideas have always been welcome here in Australia.
That is because our countries have always recognised something of ourselves in each other.
We are two societies enriched by Indigenous cultures and their love and connection to the beauty of our lands and our waters.
Commonwealth countries that have forged unique, proud and independent identities.
Democracies that did not just adopt the Westminster system – we made it fairer, stronger and our own.
Two nations that are at our very best when we look over our wide horizons.
When we look out to the world – and bring our values with us, as we engage with it.
The first Australian Prime Minister to address a joint sitting of the Canadian Parliament was our great wartime Labor leader, John Curtin.
Standing in your House of Commons on the 1st of June, 1944, just five days before Australians would help Canadians take - and hold - Juno Beach, Curtin looked to the future those brave men were fighting for.
How to secure a lasting peace, worth the winning.
How to build an economy and society worthy of the service, sacrifice and suffering of those who had kept it free.
And the role that Australia and Canada had to play in this.
Curtin said this:
“In a world where none of us is strong enough to stand alone, we shall discover how – and by what means – we can best stand with and for each other”
More than eight decades on - even in a new world order - that old test endures.
Technology is changing the nature of conflict and heightening the risk - and cost - of escalation.
And if ever nations such as ours had the luxury of imagining that distance alone kept us safe, those days are certainly gone.
The same Iranian Regime launching indiscriminate attacks on nations across the Middle East orchestrated antisemitic attacks on a synagogue and a small business here in Australia in 2024.
For us, as two democracies in an age of polarisation.
As two dynamic trading nations in a time of disrupted supply chains.
And as two middle powers in an era of strategic competition.
Australia and Canada must seek and create new ways to stand with – and for – each other.
Prime Minister, for all the comfortable ties of old affection, what makes the friendship between Australia and Canada noteworthy is what we do not share.
We do not share a border, a region, a hemisphere, or any market smaller than the global one.
Yet this makes the connection between our countries more meaningful, not less.
Because our co-operation, our partnership, is a positive choice – not a necessity.
When we work together it is on the basis of our shared convictions – not mutual convenience.
And when we do, when we stand in solidarity with the brave people of Ukraine.
When we work together to seize the economic opportunities of clean energy.
When we strengthen our defence industry co-operation, including through Australia’s biggest-ever defence export, the world-leading ‘Over The Horizon Radar’ technology.
And when we face-up to the urgent global challenge of climate change.
Because we know what it means for our unique environments, for our farmers and growers and producers and for our firefighters, who for decades have travelled between our nations to help each other in the toughest of times, and now face the prospect of their fire seasons overlapping because of climate change.
When we act together, we demonstrate to our citizens that government is not a passive institution, it is an instrument for positive change.
And what’s more, when we send a message to all those nations that look to us - as equals, as peers, as neighbours, and as leaders.
That they too have choice, agency and a part to play.
Because peace, security and prosperity are not the preserve of the great powers alone.
They are our common cause – and our collective responsibility.
Prime Minister, Australia and Canada are middle powers in a world that is changing.
We cannot change it back.
But we can back ourselves, back our citizens - and back each other.
And your visit reflects our shared ambition for Australia and Canada to do more together, at a deeper level.
To build on our shared strengths, from our resources and critical minerals to defence technology, to the investing power of our superannuation and pension funds.
Prime Minister, in this decade, where nearly every single challenge is a global one.
The distance between our two nations has never mattered less.
And the closeness of our values has never mattered more.
Together, let us seize the opportunities that the world holds for us.
You are very welcome here in our Parliament today, I thank you for your ongoing friendship and our regular dialogue. You'll be welcome in Australia always.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Prime Minister and your delegation, you are very welcome in Australia. Our two nations share values. We share common interests as well. One of the things that we've been discussing over a period of time is as middle powers, how we can cooperate across the whole sphere of economic, defence, social, environmental relationships as well. We're both impacted by climate change, and one of the practical ways that we assist each other is your firefighters helping us and our firefighters helping you. Unfortunately, those seasons are becoming longer, which means the challenge is something that we need to deal with, not just in the short term, but the long term as well. We have also shared our experience, how we deal with the changing world, how that evolves around defence and security issues, but also practical issues of the impact of new technology. Our ban on social media for under 16s has been something that we regard as world leading, been quite successful up to this point. And that's just one element of how we deal with ensuring that the positives which new technology brings; productivity benefits. We've never been more interconnected, distance has never been less important than it is today. But at the same time, we need to make sure that we secure advantages in employment, in our interaction, the way that society functions as well in terms of social cohesion. So, we have much to learn off each other, much to gain from cooperation with each other, and it's been a pleasure to get to know yourself and Diana over a relatively short period of time, but to build that relationship between our two nations, and your visit here, following on from the warm welcome I received at the G7, just seems like a few weeks ago, held a little while ago, was also something that I appreciated, but Australia appreciated it as well. You are welcome.
MARK CARNEY, PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. And let me start with that G7, it was greatly enhanced by your presence and some of the discussions that we'll have today around this table, and more broadly, some of the agreements that were, our governments are signing reflect the progress we started there. Secondly, you and I met first time properly, we've met a few times virtually, but first time properly back in April. And yes, a natural relationship. And I think a natural relationship partly because of your personality, but also because of our two countries and so much that we share. We navigate to the North Star, you to the Southern Cross, but with the same orientation, the same underlying values, and that gets expressed across a range of issues that are both great challenges but tremendous opportunities. You touched on some defence cooperation necessitated by a more divided and dangerous world, with trusted allies. The shift in technological change that we're seeing across artificial intelligence brings risk to our sovereignty if we don't control the stack across all aspects of AI brings great possibility to our societies in terms of the application, and rightly, as you've emphasised, and this is, I think, bred in the bone of Australia, and certainly your government, is the importance of inclusiveness and ensuring that AI works for all, and one of our shared challenges is to make sure that that happens as quickly as possible. So, we're looking forward to learning from you, cooperating in those areas, cooperating in other strategic areas, such as critical minerals and financial services, where we are quiet powerhouses in and of ourselves. And if I may say that more volatile global environment, which is likely to persist for some time, the strength of our financial systems, the options, the strength of national balance sheets, the strength of our large pension funds, the supers, and the supers afford us tremendous opportunities in that world, is crucial. So, thank you. Thank you for the honour of today, but also the substance.
[Remarks in French]
And I'll finish just to observe the following, which is your Co-Presidency of COP31 this year, you talked about it, very important that leadership, and also the prospect, I know it's early days, but you tend to win elections, Prime Minister. It's early days for the Security Council position 29-30, and there's a real opportunity through what we would call coalitions and variables, we all introduce some common values, building that out on specific issues, to help come behind your efforts and make not just this relationship, but the world a better place, more just. So, thank you very much. 
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Thanks, Prime Minister.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: I want to welcome Your Majesty the King on your first visit to Australia since your ascension. It's a pleasure as well to welcome Her Majesty the Queen, who has of course a very special relationship with our country. Australians have a great affection for both of you, and we also have a great affection for Denmark. Many of us have travelled there. We understand each other, our countries share very similar values about human rights and democracy. Similar values as well about the challenges facing the world, in particular the challenge of climate change and energy and how to deal with what is the biggest economic transformation since the Industrial Revolution. And the work that we're doing together is so important. Your support for Australia, of Denmark, for our Free Trade Agreement with the European Union is also much appreciated and I take the opportunity to thank you for that support. Of course, on this visit through two territories, Uluru, of course, a very important site for every Australian, but particularly for First Nations people. We also, with your visits to Victoria and then I will join you in Tasmania in a couple of days' time. And it's important as well, I think that this isn't just a royal visit, this is an extensive visit with members of the delegation talking with Australia about economic cooperation, and our foreign affairs relationships as well. So, welcome. Jodie and I look forward very much to having dinner with you tonight at The Lodge, and I know that at Government House yesterday was a splendid welcome, thank you, you can take credit for the weather, it's been quite extraordinary since you have been here as well. So, welcome.
HIS MAJESTY, KING FREDERIK OF DENMARK: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. My wife and I are delighted to be back in Australia. We are proud to be here, feel at home in both countries, particularly your country here. Having experienced Uluru with the peoples and Traditional Owners of the land, it was quite a fantastic experience for us, I must say. Truly feel the magic or the beauty of the rock. One of the many newest experiences we've had in Australia. My wife had never visited Uluru Park before. We also, we feel very much at home, as I said. Seeing people we saw last time we were here. So, that makes us happy. And I think the official, sorry, and the official text for this visit is, we call it, 'Partnering For A Green, Secure and Sustainable Tomorrow'. So, we have a wide range of representative businesses that are here to exchange and renew, but also found, hopefully, new ties in deals with Australian partners and we have a lot to offer. They're very aware of how insecure the climate is in many ways for the coming generations. And we'd love to walk hand in hand towards the sunset on that one. So, thanks again.


Thank you to your CEO James Voortman for the invitation to join you for breakfast this morning.
And thank you to all of you for the contribution you make to our nation.
This room represents:
Over 3,800 dealerships.
64,000 jobs - including 7,500 apprenticeships. 
Tens of billions of dollars of economic activity.
And behind all of it, people with the aspiration to build a business.
The courage to invest in themselves.
And the countless hours of hard work required to make that investment pay.
Of course, your contribution goes beyond that.
So often, it’s the local car dealership sponsoring the footy or netball club, or donating a prize for a charity fundraiser, supporting the local festival.
And just as what you do strengthens both the national economy and your local communities, your Association’s work delivers well beyond your membership.
The changes we are working with you to deliver to Australian consumer and competition law not only benefit the thousands of dealerships you represent.
They will mean a better deal for hundreds of thousands of Australian small businesses and franchise holders, in all manner of industries.And a better deal for consumers, across our country.
This morning is an opportunity to mark the progress we are making with those reforms.
Before I do, I want to address the global context and what it means for the Australian economy.
The war in the Middle East is disrupting supply chains, pushing up fuel prices and adding to pressure on inflation, here and right around the world.
Australians understand this. People are not just reading about this conflict in the news, they are seeing the economic consequences in their daily lives.
Not the least of which is, of course, the interest rate increase decision by the Reserve Bank just yesterday.
And it is obvious, but important to say that the longer this war goes on, the more significant those effects will be.
This is the third major shock to hit the global economy, in this decade, already.
And there will be aftershocks.
Even if this is a relatively short conflict, it will have a long economic tail.
Just as the impact of COVID, followed by the Russian invasion of Ukraine have both had an impact on your industry and on the lives of everyone right around the world.
And of course, here in Australia, we're not immune, in spite of our distance, of these shocks.
That is the scale of the challenge the world is bracing for – and that is the scenario we are preparing for.
This is why we have been working to build our fuel security over the last four years.
And why we are taking new action now:
Empowering the ACCC to protect motorists from unfair price rises.
Boosting fuel supply by releasing 20 per cent of the baseline Minimum Stockholding Obligation for petrol and diesel.
Getting more fuels made in Australia, into the Australian market, by temporarily amending the fuel standards.
And working closely with industry and states and territories to ensure fuel gets where it is needed most, particularly regional communities.
And after this, this morning I'm flying to Tasmania. Tomorrow, from Tasmania, I'll convene the National Cabinet of all the Premiers and Chief Ministers to ensure that the coordination that's occurring right across our country maximises the benefit for business, for farmers, for our communities, in our cities, and in particularly, in our regions.
We want to make sure that we do everything we can to shield the Australian economy, households and businesses from the worst of global uncertainty.
That will be a focus of the Budget – but we won’t be waiting until the Budget.
We will have more to say about the actions we are taking in the days ahead. 
This new global challenge demonstrates that we must keep building Australia’s self-reliance and our economic resilience. 
Following on from the COVID pandemic, we spoke about the need for national economic resilience, that we could be impacted by a shock somewhere else in the world.
And we spoke about it being potentially a conflict, as well as health pandemic that had an impact.
And that is something that we've responded to in advance - our fuel reserves aren't in Texas, they're here in Australia.
They're the largest they've been in 15 years, as a result of us making that conscious decision to build them up.
But we've been out doing other things as well:
Boosting skills with Free TAFE.
750,000 young Australians mainly, but others retraining for a future career, with Free TAFE making an enormous difference.
Rebuilding the National Energy Grid.
Producing more clean fuels, here.
Deepening and diversifying our trade ties in our region and in markets where our economic links have been too light for too long - from India and the United Arab Emirates to the European Union.
And investing in a new generation of manufacturing, through our Future Made in Australia agenda.
Because if we are always the last link in the global supply chain, we will always be vulnerable.
And we need to address that, up front.
In the more predictable and more stable world of previous decades, this was less of an issue.
And many of the major economic reforms of the 1980s and 90s were designed to capitalise on that different world.
Opening up our economy through the great reforms championed by Bob Hawke and Paul Keating. 
It's a different world now.
We need to acknowledge that, and we need to respond to that.
And my Government is doing that.
At a time of rapid globalisation: trade barriers coming down, new markets opening and exponential growth in the economies of our region in particular.
We cannot wait around hoping for those days to return.
For Australia to compete, succeed and prosper in this decade – we have to upgrade to a new economic model.
We have to build an economy that is more resilient, more self-reliant and geared to our national strengths.
This is about making more things here.
Making the most of our traditional resources, critical minerals, clean energy – and our services, our skills and research, our digital and tech sector.Areas where we can and often do, lead the world.
That’s the way forward for Australia, our own way.
Not trying to compete by copying from other countries.
Backing our people and ourselves to succeed on our terms.
And in many ways, that is the success story the businesses in this room represent.  
You service a local community but you are dealing with global supply chains.
And your businesses are on the frontline of economic change:
You have adapted to new safety requirements – and new efficiency standards.
A growing field of new manufacturers.
And continuous change in consumer preferences.
Yet at a time where so many businesses are looking to automate or outsource in the name of efficiency, your greatest strength, your value-add is the direct, personal expertise you offer.
There are plenty of items we buy online, on impulse.
Scrolling Instagram, ad pops up, click through, a few days later the delivery arrives and you wonder what on earth you were thinking.
I cannot imagine doing that with a new car.
Buying a new car remains one of the biggest financial decisions Australians make.
A significant moment in its own right, something you never forget.
And more often than not, it’s tied to a significant event in your life.
A couple with a baby on the way, who want a new car to put the child seat in. 
Someone finishing their apprenticeship and upgrading to their own ute.
An Australian starting a small business, or expanding their fleet.
Backing themselves, creating jobs and seeing their car as a statement about their service and standards.
When those are the stakes, no-one wants to just tick a box.
We want to kick the tyres.
See the choice on offer.
Go for a test drive.
And talk things through, face to face.
And that is why you are so important. 
Yours is a relationship of trust, which is why for many of you, whether you be in local communities in our cities or in our regions, that's a relationship that you have with your local communities.
That is a bit like the relationship that people used to have with their news agent or the post office.
Many of those things have changed over a period of time.
Your relationship with your customers and your communities has not.
And I'd argue that it's been strengthened, because that is something people are looking for.
People are really looking for that people-to-people relationship that can't be replaced by something online.
That needs to be melded with trust and through word of mouth through your communities.
The truth is that none of your businesses would survive if word of mouth undermined your businesses.
If people said, 'well, I got this car and I could have done better', or 'people didn't give us the vehicle and the model that I really needed, and I didn't get the right advice', your businesses wouldn't survive.
Instead, you're here in this room because the opposite happened.
Because word of mouth has said, 'I went to City Ford and the people who served us looked after me. They looked after me and I got the right vehicle for the right price, and the follow up in terms of service was very good. So, why don't you go there?'
That's how your businesses have been built.
That's why you are here in this room.
That's why you continue to employ Australians and to succeed.
And I thank you for it, because your industry is such a fantastic model of successful business and what you represent.
And I can't think of any industry where that is as much the case as it is for yours.
And that's why when James gave us the invite to come and speak with you, I immediately said yes on the spot.
And I'm here because I do want to spread those values that you have to other industries as well.
Because in 2026 with our globalised world, with the uncertainty that is out there that we're all dealing with, what we need is some things to hang on to, some certainties in life.
And supporting small businesses who are connected with their community, who are benefitting our national economy at a time of rapid change as well, and dealing with it, not sitting back just saying, 'oh, this is all to hard. There's all these new entrants coming in,' but 'how do we deal with it? how do we shape change?'
Because if you don't shape change, change shapes you.
Because change does happen.
And there'll be some politicians, some of which have risen up recently in polling, who are essentially appealing to 'vote for us and the world will stop'.
Or worse still, we'll go back to the Australia of the 1950s or '60s, with the same population that looked like that.
That's not going to happen.
That's not going to happen, and it's a fool's errand.
What we need to do is to make sure that we acknowledge that this is a rapid period of change.
We need to make sure that governments work with industry and civil society to shape that change in Australia's national interest.
If we do that, we, the greatest country on Earth, can be even more successful into the future.
I'm certainly of that view.
And that is why we're working so closely with your Association.
The truth is that you know more than any politician, from any shape or form about your industry than we do. 
So we need to listen to you and engage with you to make sure that Australian laws deliver a fair value for consumers and a level playing field for dealers.
Because we know that in order to protect consumers from unfair practices, we have to protect dealers as well.
This starts with Unfair Trading Practices.
At the last election we made a commitment to expand unfair trading practice protections to small businesses and traders covered by the Franchising Code of Conduct.
This is about addressing a power imbalance.
Correcting a double standard that the AADA has campaigned strongly against.
And making sure that multinational manufacturers cannot engage in conduct towards dealers that would be illegal if it was directed at consumers.
We gave that commitment – and work is underway to deliver it.
As I’m sure many of you have discovered, Assistant Minister Andrew Leigh is an absolute terrier when it comes to consumer laws and competition policy.
His department in Treasury have commenced the first round of targeted consultation – and will release the public discussion paper in April.
After that, we want to take the next steps in weeks, not months.
And we want any legislation or changes that are required to be done this year.
This will be a win for your advocacy – and a win for your members.
Every bit as importantly it will be a win for small businesses, franchise holders and their customers, across the economy. 
When we came to Government in 2022, we outlawed Unfair Contract Terms for small businesses and consumers.
And – for the first time – gave the ACCC and ASIC the power to seek penalties against companies that breached these laws.
Now, we are building on that.
Expanding these small business protections to include all franchise holders registered under the Franchising Code.
The Government has heard directly from many of you about how difficult it can be for a local dealer to negotiate with a global manufacturer.
As a result, too many dealer agreements include: 

unilateral variation clauses,
excessive audit powers,
termination rights that sit solely with Original Equipment Manufacturers.

Formal consultation on these reforms is complete.
As we move ahead, we will continue to engage with the AADA and directly with business owners, to get these changes right.
We will take this same co-operative approach, with Supplier Indemnification and Consumer Guarantees. 
A dealer should not suffer a financial loss for doing the right thing by their customer.
Yet those are the stories you have shared with us.
Manufacturers delaying approval, denying reimbursements, or trying to claw-back authorised payments.
We want Australians to be able to choose from the broadest possible range of vehicles and manufacturers at the best possible price.
And we want to make it clear to companies new to the Australian market that they also have meet standards around service, not rely on volume alone.
Because if any manufacturers’ default position is to reject a franchise holder seeking reimbursement, then that creates a structural issue for the viability of a small business.
Addressing this imbalance is vital to strengthening Consumer Guarantees.
And we will introduce this legislation to Parliament, this year.
Australian consumers want a system that requires dealers to meet their obligations.
We know that depends on manufacturers meeting their obligations to you.
Working together, we will get this balance right.
Just as we will work through your proposal for the New Vehicle Efficiency Standard to calculate the point of compliance at the point of sale.
I understand that you want this to be resolved as soon as possible.
And the review that our Minister for Transport, Catherine King, is leading is about making sure the Australian market remains a level playing field for dealers and consumers.
The reforms you have campaigned for and the commitments we are delivering - are clear, practical and commonsense.
So much so that they seem obvious.
But these issues made it onto the national radar because of your advocacy.
And these solutions are being developed because of your insights and experience.
I lead a government that listens.
That is why my colleagues and I are always looking to engage constructively with business and industry, as well as civil society.
I don’t treat this process as set-and-forget, or a box to tick every three years.
I think this is the third contact I've had with your Association in a very short period of time in the last year.
The past four years prove that when we work together, we get results – for your members, for business, for consumers, for the economy.
I look forward to us working together, in the years ahead.
I look forward to coming back here, instead of saying we're introducing legislation this year, coming back here and speaking about the legislation that is carried and the impact that it's having on your businesses.
But importantly as well, this is in the national interest for dealers as well as for consumers.
Thanks very much for having me.



I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet, I pay my respects to their Elders past, present and emerging.
Australian food and drinks are the best in the world.
And there’s a reason why the world wants them.
Because our food and beverage industry brings together the best of everything Australian.
Our agriculture and food science, our creativity and drive, our unique Australian tastes and our native flavours.
Our way of doing things – our focus on quality – mean the words “Made in Australia” have become a synonym for excellence the world over.
Almost one year ago, on the first full day of the 2025 election campaign, I visited Bundaberg Brewed Drinks in Central Queensland – who are here tonight.
Uncertainty around global trade was growing, and so against that iconic backdrop of ginger beer and sarsaparilla, I announced our Australian Made campaign.
Encouraging more Australians to buy more Australian products.
An additional measure in our industry policy, backing in our manufacturers and producers.
Twelve months later, and we are facing another shock to the global economy.
This time an unprecedented disruption to global energy markets caused by the war in the Middle East. 
Australian producers, suppliers and consumer are all dealing with the pressure of higher fuel prices and the uncertainty of disrupted supply chains.
And though Australian food and drinks makers had a bumper 2025, the interconnected nature of our world means no one is immune.
But while yet another economic shock has come our way, the resolve of my Government to back Australian industry remains unchanged.
Because Labor knows that central to our national success, is the success of Australian manufacturing. 
It’s why we’ve made sure we are more fuel secure now than we have been for a long time – and why we’ve taken a number of steps to help boost that security.
Under our plan, more fuel made here will stay here for Australians to use, particularly in regional areas confronting big spikes in demand.
We have given the green light to the release of 20 per cent of our domestic fuel reserves, which are now held here, close at hand – not in another country.
The ACCC is cracking down on unfair price rises at the bowser, and we are bringing forward legislation to double penalties when Australians are ripped off.
Through National Cabinet we stood up a new Fuel Supply Taskforce, headed by Anthea Harris, to coordinate our national response on fuel security and supply.
This is particularly important for managing distribution at the state level – so fuel can flow across sectors of the economy where it’s needed most.
And on Monday, Minister Julie Collins will bring government, industry experts and communities together at a meeting of the National Food Council.
Tasked with thrashing out how we can best support our farmers and producers across the whole food system, particularly on future fertiliser supply.
Australian industry is facing uncertainty across the broad, and these measures are not the end of our response.
But they weren’t the beginning, either.  
A clear theme of my Government is securing a Future Made in Australia.
Driving investment in domestic manufacturing so we can make more things here.
Building our sovereign capability and supply chain resilience through the National Reconstruction Fund and Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility.
Recognising that if we always find ourselves at the end of the global supply chain, we are always going to be vulnerable.
And embracing the capacity of new technology – including AI – so more value-adding can happen here, in Australian factories, boosting productivity.
All these things help build up our resilience at home.
But for an open, trading nation like ours, it is not viable to just turn inward.
Our capacity for trade is essential to our growth.
That’s why we continue to advocate for Australian businesses overseas and argue against tariffs.  
And why it is crucial Australia remain agile in diversifying our markets.
We worked hard to secure a Free Trade Agreement with the UAE.
And next week European Union President Ursula von der Leyen will visit Australia as we aim to conclude the Australia-EU free trade deal.
Potentially boosting access for Australian businesses to a growing European market of 450 million consumers who are eager to get their teeth into all the good things that are made here in Australia.
Friends, there are new challenges in front of us, but there are always new opportunities to seize as well.
And when we work together, we are at our best – that is my Government’s focus.
Supporting Australia’s manufacturing and production capacity, so we can make more things here.
Taking Australia out into the world, so we can grow our markets and grow our economy at home.
Making sure our industry policy works in the interests of business, as well as delivering a fair go for employees and consumers.
Working together to secure a bright and sustainable future for every Australian manufacturer, farmer, scientist, engineer and designer represented here tonight.
Helping your industry to continue to go from strength to strength and grow its contribution to our great nation.


Xin chào.
I want to particularly welcome and acknowledge the veterans of the Vietnamese community. 
You showed such courage in leaving the land of your birth to create a better life and freedom for yourselves, but also for the generations to come. 
And I thank you for your courage, your resilience, and I acknowledge the sacrifice that you have made. 
I come from Sydney, where in my local community of Marrickville, there's a very large Vietnamese Australian community. 
And one of the things about the Vietnamese Australian community that is synonymous, whether it be here in Melbourne, or be in Sydney or Brisbane, or every part of this great land of ours, where Vietnamese have made Australia your home for the last five decades, is the leadership of women in your community. 
And I want to acknowledge that as well. 
So, to the wonderful Nicky who, last time I had an event at Kirribilli House in Sydney to acknowledge the 50 years of commemoration and contribution to our nation.
To your founder, Cam Nguyen, as well, it is great to see you both again. 
It is so important to acknowledge the role that your community organisations have done.
Through the dedication and hard work of your members, you are the reason that events like this make it off the drawing board and on to what is an extremely successful event.
In so many ways, whether it is intergenerational care, caring for your elderly or making sure that your culture is handed down to these young boys and girls who are with us here today, the AVWA has been the backbone of your community. 
In the process, you've added strength and cohesion to our country. 
For that, we owe you our gratitude. 
It is a great pleasure to be celebrating Culture Connects Us All. 
What a perfect venue to be marking an occasion such as this. 
The Immigration Museum invites all of us to reflect on and take pride in something that is at the very heart of the Australian story. 
It's known to everyone and every community that have looked to this great land of Australia and seen the possibility of a better future for themselves and their families.
A place of sanctuary, a place of unlimited possibility, a place where new roots can be put down to flourish safely beneath our southern stars.
A continent that unites all of us, for the love of it.
Whether we're Australians by church, choice, or by birth.
And it's important to acknowledge that with the exception of First Nations people, we are all either migrants or descendants of migrants. 
Earlier on, we spoke about the ending of the White Australia policy, so important by the Whitlam Government just before the arrival of Vietnamese refugees. 
We need to be vigilant. 
There are some, including some in political life, want to turn back the clock to an Australia that is no longer who we are. 
And we need to call out those people.
And we need to continue to cherish our diversity as a strength for our nation, which it is.
The fact that people have come from all over the world, and there is no better example than the Vietnamese community.
The Vietnamese community, many of whom came as the wonderful song that we just heard depicted, making sacrifices, coming here with nothing.
The people who are now our doctors, our nurses, our teachers, our academics, our construction workers, our people who've made such an incredible contribution to Australia.
We should not take it for granted.
And today, like every day, we need to be proud of who we are as Australians, acknowledging our culture as the theme of today says - Culture Connects Us All.
And we're all enriched by it. 
Last year, of course, we paid tribute to those early Vietnamese who came to these shores.
And we can never overestimate how hard it was for you to leave your beloved homeland to make those sacrifices. 
But I think in part, because of those sacrifices, you came here with strength and resilience.
And you've shown that every single day.
Australia gave people safe haven, and in return, they gave this country strength. 
50 years ago, as those early Vietnamese Australians set about making the best of all this country offered them, they also set about enriching every part of our national life.
And bit by bit, you have added to the social cohesion that makes Australia at our best, a beacon to the world.
A microcosm that can show the world, where there is so much turbulence and conflict, that people can be enriched by people of different faith, different backgrounds, different cultures, coming together and enriching us. 
And indeed, the performances that you will see today - the performances of song, of national dress, and food, including banh mi, is very important as well, the contribution that you make.
Yours is an inspirational success story. 
It is a bright light in the story of multicultural Australia.
And it is a glow that touches every Australian. 
Thank you so much for giving me the honour of spending this morning with you. 
Thank you so much for giving me the incredible honour of being Prime Minister of the greatest country on Earth. 
It is something that I don't take for granted, something I work hard on each and every day, inspired by the ordinary Australians who put in to build this country, every single day and to make it better as we continue on the wonderful journey, and we write the next chapter of our great history.
Have a lovely day. 


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging. 
I am pleased to be back at your annual dinner and to be joined by so many of my parliamentary colleagues. 
This year’s event comes at a testing time for the world - and a pivotal moment for Australia. 
There are two critical challenges confronting us: 
One, we must navigate the global economic storm that the war in Iran has unleashed. 
And two, we must emerge from it stronger, more resilient, more secure and more self-reliant. 
The Australian resources industry is critical to our nation achieving both of these goals. 
First, the here and now: 
Our Government has been investing in Australia’s fuel security for four years. 
But we do not underestimate what we are up against.  
Earlier today I met with the Executive Director of the International Energy Agency, Doctor Fatih Birol, who joins us here tonight. 
The IEA have spelled out the unprecedented scale of this challenge. 
And we know that a more volatile world demands continuous preparation. 
Indeed, we want Australia to be overprepared. 
That’s why we have taken significant new action in the past fortnight:
Releasing up to 20 per cent of the baseline Minimum Stockholding Obligation for petrol and diesel.
Providing our refineries with the certainty they need to keep making fuel in Australia. 
Temporarily amending our fuel standards so that all the fuel we make here is available for Australians. 
Working with our trading partners to secure supply chains in our region.
And, at National Cabinet last week, establishing a Fuel Supply Taskforce.
A single point of co-ordination with states, territories and industry to ensure that the additional petrol and diesel we have made available, gets where it is needed most.
Our Government will continue to look at every practical option to protect Australia from the worst of this international crisis. 
Putting our faith in the practicality - and patriotism - of Australians. 
Expecting people to do the right thing by each other - and businesses to do the right thing by Australia. 
Because that is the orderly, constructive way we operate as a government.
And because the best way to deal with global uncertainty, is to mobilise all our national strengths. 
Again, that is where the mining industry is so important. 
From the economic and strategic weight of your connections to North Asia, the wider region and our partners around the world. 
To the combination of traditional resources and critical minerals that no other trusted, stable democracy on the planet has in such abundance. 
As well as the infrastructure, technology and practical expertise to help with distribution – particularly for sites and projects in remote Australia. 
What the companies in this room do every day, is essential for dealing with the challenges confronting us. 
And for seizing the opportunities ahead of us.  
I understand that when you are grappling with turmoil in your supply chains.
Unprecedented disruption to petrol and diesel markets 
And local pressure points, as well as global ones. 
It can be hard to look much further than the end of the day, hard to contemplate the future, let alone plan for it. 
But this is precisely the time when all of us need to be thinking about what comes next. 
Positioning ourselves for a decarbonising global economy that will need more copper, more rare earths and more iron ore. 
And preparing ourselves for the economic aftershocks that will follow this conflict. 
Because the disruption we are already seeing in the global economy is not due to arbitrary trade barriers, or sanctions tied to strategic competition.  
It goes deeper than that. 
This is about ongoing threats to the safety of global shipping routes. 
And the physical destruction of oil and gas infrastructure across the Middle East.
So even if we were to wake up tomorrow to the welcome news that this conflict was over, there would still be a long economic tail to reckon with. 
All of this underlines a simple reality.
The stable, predictable world of ever-expanding free trade is gone - and it will not be returning any time soon. 
More than most, your industry helped build that world - in every sense. 
Your resources transformed the skylines across Asia. 
You powered new industries and created new prosperity throughout the region. 
You broke down old trade barriers and built new economic bridges, because what you offered was the best in the world.  
And in doing so, you not only elevated Australia’s presence and reputation in the region, you created new skills and jobs and wealth here at home. 
None of the changes underway in the global economy devalue any of these achievements, far from it. 
In a more volatile world, these strengths are worth more. 
Which is why your industry and our nation can do more than merely withstand, or adjust or react to the change underway in the world. 
We can work together to shape the future, not wait for the future to shape us. 
We can anticipate and create stronger, fairer, more resilient economic growth.
This is what our Government’s plan for a Future Made in Australia is all about. 
Investing in the skills and energy and infrastructure and relationships that mean we can stand on our own two feet. 
Making more things here, by making the most of what we have.
By building on our unique and unbeatable combination of advantages:
The security and space of a continent to call our own, engaged in the fastest growing region of the world in human history. 
A skilled and productive mining workforce that leads the world on quality and safety. 
The clean, reliable, affordable energy to power a new generation of secure jobs in refining and manufacturing. 
The critical minerals and traditional resources that every major economy needs: for next generation defence technology, for the jobs and investment of the digital economy - and to reach net zero.  
And that other precious resource that Australia brings to the table: trust. 
The certainty and confidence other nations take from dealing with our stable democracy, our transparent and robust financial system. 
And mining companies known for quality – and integrity.  
This is why the biggest economies in the world are knocking on our door. 
In just the last six months, we have signed an historic Critical Minerals Framework with the United States of America. 
When Prime Minister Carney was here earlier this month, we joined the G7 Critical Minerals Production Alliance.
Deepening the strong collaboration between the Australian and Canadian resources sector. 
And tomorrow, when we welcome the President of the European Union, Ursula von der Leyen, critical minerals will be at the centre of our discussions. 
At a time when the world wants what Australia has – all of us have a responsibility to ensure that our natural resources continue to deliver a national benefit, true to our national values. 
Creating good jobs with fair wages for secure work. 
Building up our skills base, our infrastructure, our energy grid. 
And re-investing in the communities that support your projects - and the services that empower Australians.  
Over the years, I acknowledge that from time to time we’ve had our differences on policy, just as the companies in this room are not always on the same page as each other. 
I know that because my door is always open for direct discussions with Australian employers, job creators and exporters. 
And because we do not have to agree on every aspect of every issue to build a constructive relationship, in the national interest. That’s what matters - especially right now. 
In uncertain times, Australians expect all of us to put the national interest first, to put our country first.  
That’s my focus as Prime Minister. 
That’s what I mean when I talk about progressive patriotism - the courage and co-operation to deal with global uncertainty, our way, the Australian way. 
Backing our people, investing in their capacity – and trusting our values. 
Working together. Looking after each other. And building for the future.
Right through our 125 years of Federation, the Australian Minerals Industry has been fundamental to our success. 
But the biggest challenges – and best opportunities – are yet to come. 
I look forward to working with you in the years ahead.    


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: Welcome to the President of European Union, Ursula von der Leyen, my friend and your delegation. And you are so welcome here in Australia. And I can't think of a more important time than for you to be here right now, when we are reminded of the importance of friends, engaging economically, socially, and importantly in terms of our personal relations. Here in Australia, of course, many people can trace their origins back to Europe. My name speaks for itself, where that is from, with my Italian heritage. But so many of us can do that. This is a historic day. You will be the 20th leader to address a Joint Sitting of our National Parliament, but the first woman leader. And so it is a very important occasion. And today we have three important breakthroughs. On trade, something that we have been talking about for a long period of time that will benefit both Europe and Australia, at a time where free and fair trade is under scrutiny and under pressure. The fact that our respective economies will work together in our mutual interest will lead to greater prosperity, greater cooperation as well across the board. Our Defence and Security Partnership is so important. We couldn't have envisaged a few years ago that there would be a land war in Europe with the Russian invasion of Ukraine. As you know, Australia, had been a participant in the Coalition of the Willing, defending the courageous Ukrainian people in their struggle against what is an illegal and immoral invasion of their territory. And that is important, not just for Europe, but of course, for the world as well, for the message it sends. We cannot allow a larger, more powerful country to just exercise its brutality in the way that Russia has. Thirdly, of course, Horizon Europe, talking about our investment and participation in what is the world's largest research and development operation, bringing together some of the best minds of innovation, and talking about how we expand human potential and human ingenuity and creativity, is going to be so important that Australia is able to participate in that. So, you are very welcome. We have had a friendship for some time now, and we've spoken about your visit here. And I'm certain as well that Australians will understand the particular effort given the context of the global turbulence that is occurring, you making the effort with your delegation to come here, it says a lot about the importance of our strategic relationship between Europe and Australia.
URSULA VON DER LEYEN, PRESIDENT OF THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION: Thank you very much, it is a pleasure, it is an honour to be here in Canberra and thank you very much for your warm welcome. As you say, it's a long way from Europe to Australia, but it's absolutely worth it, because today we are writing a new chapter in our partnership. Australia is a like minded partner and is a trusted friend. [inaudible] Good friends have to stand by each other to get closer, and that's what we're doing today. The three fields on which we are progressing, the field of trade, where we will bring the Free Trade Agreement over the finish line, the Security and Defence Partnership means to work together in case of the many events or threats that we're seeing worldwide. But Horizon Europe also the negotiations now for Australia to be an associated member of Horizon Europe is fantastic because it brings the brightest minds together. So, it's a joint journey that we are starting today, founded on, grounded on our friendship and partnership over many many years. And thank you very much again for hosting me. Very glad to be here.


President von der Leyen.
My friend.
On behalf of the people of Australia, it is my great honour and pleasure to welcome you and your delegation to our National Parliament.
You will shortly become one of only a handful of international leaders to have addressed our Parliament, adding your name to short list that, among others, includes President Obama, Prime Minister Modi, President Widodo, President Xi and Prime Minister Abe.
Crucially, you are about to make history as the first woman international leader to address this Parliament, an honour that will be forever yours.
Your visit is a defining moment in our bilateral relationship.
The Australia-European Union Free Trade Agreement will be a once-in-a-generation achievement that will create jobs and prosperity for generations to come. 
This was a logical step for two natural partners – but as we know, it was not inevitable.
It took hard work and constructive engagement. And it required both sides to see the bigger picture – the wider horizon of shared opportunity. 
That is the instinct that defines us – and binds us. 
The European Union and the Commonwealth of Australia are both proud modern, democratic creations built on ancient foundations.
Both born in a spirit of unity, in the understanding that we are better and stronger together.
That is the story of the brighter future that Europe chose to seize in the final decade of a century shaped by the devastation of global war, and shadowed by the menace of the Cold War.
And it has been the story of our ancient continent too, which offered a home and a future for so many diasporas from so many corners of Europe.
Through generations of hard work, aspiration and a deep love of this country, European immigrants and their descendants have enriched and shaped modern Australia. 
And, in so many ways, they are a living link between our continents.
Collectively, the member states of the EU represent the world’s second biggest economy.
And you are currently Australia’s third biggest trading partner, with two-way trade already more than $109 billion – and now, thanks to years of patient negotiation, that is set to grow, making you our second biggest trading partner.
Yet there is so much between us that is beyond measure – unquantifiable, yet undeniable.
Ours is a friendship born out of instinct.
A mutual admiration built on respect.
On values and ideals that Europe gave to us – and Australia made our own. 
Ideals that Australians went to fight for alongside Europeans when your great continent was under the shadow of tyranny.
Ideals that we continue to fight for.
There is so much in the bond between us that cannot be counted – but can always be counted on.
We turn to each other as friends and the closest of partners – not because we have to, but because we choose to.
As the world grows ever more uncertain, our best way of navigating the new reality is for us to do more together. 
Not merely as a safeguard against present volatility or future uncertainty, but as the foundation for our future prosperity, resilience, security and stability.
Right now, we are all dealing with the challenges thrown up by the conflict in the Middle East, and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which has brought war to the very edge of the European Union.
Every global shock underscores the importance of the second milestone moment in your visit: the signing of the new Australia-EU Security and Defence Partnership.
The Partnership will bolster our collaboration on defence industry, maritime security, cyber security, countering terrorism, and combatting hybrid threats such as disinformation.
It speaks for our shared commitment to stability and security, anchored in sovereignty. 
The challenges the world holds for us are numerous and ever evolving, but we do not shy away from them, we work to shape them.  
To that end, Australia will join this round of Horizon Europe – the world’s largest pooled fund for research and innovation.
It will bring together the best minds of Australia with those from Europe as we work on new technologies, advanced computing, climate and clean energy, health, and critical minerals.
Research that boosts our resilience, strengthens our economies and makes us more secure. 
Research that builds our future.
Madam President. 
I am proud that Australia has helped lead the world with our social media ban for under 16s. 
And I am grateful that you strengthened this effort with your support and your leadership. 
Your attendance at the event Australia hosted at the United Nations, you being there to hear the wonderful Emma Mason’s story, who took that heartache and grievance into campaigning to ensure that other parents don't go through what she went through, to witness that extraordinary courage of parents channelling their personal grief into a call for action, and for you to speak as a mother and grandmother, as well as a President was a powerful statement, heard by the world. 
Proof that when we work together, there is nothing that is beyond us.
That is the truest spirit that binds us. And which unites us. 
Madam President.
You honour us with your presence.
You are always welcome in Australia.
As a partner. 
And above all, as a friend.


Shlama lokon.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
And today we celebrate the indigenous people of Iraq – the Assyrian people.
I’d also like to acknowledge Hermiz Shahen, President of the Assyrian National Council, representatives of the Assyrian Church of the East, and my colleagues from across Parliament.
It is with great pleasure that I wish you a happy Assyrian New Year. 
For Assyrian Australians, this vibrant festival is a wonderful way to honour your connections to a shared past. And what an extraordinary past it is.
You are part of a remarkable story, one that has made an enduring mark on the world.
Arising out of ancient Mesopotamia, it is the story of a remarkable civilisation and a powerful empire. Most of all, it is the story of a people.
Today is a celebration – of culture, identity and community, and of the proud place Assyrian Australians occupy in the story of our country.
It is also an assertion of resilience and survival.
Through the tides of history and fate, through the shifting of borders and the rise and fall of nations and empires, the Assyrian identity has stood proud and unbowed – against the odds.
That is an achievement built by the generations who have gone before you, and whose flame you carry so proudly in your hearts.
Thanks to the work of so many in your community, particularly organisations such as the Assyrian National Council of Australia, it is a flame that is kept burning so brightly its glow will touch generations to come.
What a powerful demonstration of the love, dedication and devotion that is the beating heart of cultural identity.
The Assyrian calendar is entering the year 6776. With such a rich and long past, you are so well equipped to look to what is coming.
For just as much as this festival about celebrating your history and everything that has brought Assyrians to this point, it is also about strengthening your cultural foundations for the future.
For generations, your community has been writing your chapter in the great story of Australia, sending your roots in this country ever deeper without ever surrendering the birthright of your heritage, and your enduring connection to the land that was its cradle.
Of course, the connection is not a straightforward one. The Assyrian story is one shaped in no small part by displacement, persecution and the struggle for cultural rights and recognition in the lands of your ancestors.
Yet what defines the Assyrian spirit is a strength and resilience that’s up to so much more than just survival.
It is a spirit that has flourished here. Through hard work, aspiration and love of this country, your community has made Australia a better nation for us all.
I would like to express my gratitude to the organisers and to every hardworking member of this community who gives so much of themselves every year to make this festival the wonderful reality that it is.
This festival plays such an important role. That is why our Government pledged to deliver $200,000 – not just to keep it going, but to keep it growing.
To help you keep adding to the success you have been building with such love and care over the years.
I wish you all a wonderful celebration. May it bring you together – and keep bringing you together. 
Basima raba. Thank you for having me. Happy New Year to you all.


I want to acknowledge my dear friend, His Eminence Archbishop Makarios, for his leadership of this community and for his ongoing contribution to our nation.
I want to acknowledge as well all the other members of the clergy who are with us today; my ministerial colleague, the Leader of the Government in the House of Representatives and the proud Member for Watson, Tony Burke; my friend Sophie Cotsis, representing the Premier of New South Wales; other public representatives who are here, the Ambassador from Greece, the High Commissioner for Cyprus, the Consul-General of Greece, other representatives; particularly, welcome to the representatives from the Parliament of the Hellenic Republic who've joined us here today.
I want to give a special shout out to the wonderful young Greek Australians who are here in their traditional dress, celebrating their culture. You look fabulous and you enrich our nation of Australia by celebrating your culture.
Whenever we come to this sacred memorial here, we come solemnly. We gather in respect. We gather in gratitude. Above all, we gather to remember.
We remember all who have stood against darkness and all who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
We remember all who were lost and everyone they left behind.
We remember all who lived to keep fighting and all who finally made it home, but with the battle still echoing in their hearts.
We reflect on all they went through and all they were up against, and we give thanks for the difference they made just when the world needed it most.
This week, we remembered when the Greeks were crying out for freedom, and we remember an honour all who answered that call.
Greek and Independence Day, 205 years since the great revolt in the Peloponnese that saw a people rise to their feet and so decisively put centuries of occupation to an end.
We celebrate a great nation born in liberty and remember the revolutionaries who so courageously put their own lives on the line. They did it armed with one of the most powerful mottoes ever heard around this earth. Eleftheria i Thanatos. Freedom or death.
It was a remarkable moment in the story of a remarkable nation that has given so much to the world, not least of which is of course the gift of democracy and so much of the philosophy that shapes modern Australia today.
Yet perhaps most powerful of all is that hunger for freedom and independence. It was, of course, not Greece's final fight. In time, Australians would join Greeks in their struggle against those who tried to take that precious independence away.
Earlier this month, we marked the passing of the remarkable Les Cook. Les Cook was 104 years old when he passed.
Les Cook marched on Anzac Day at the age of 100. And I spoke to him at the Australian War Memorial after that march. And I said, "You could have gone in a car." And Les Cook, age 100, courageous man that he was, said, "No. I walked just like I fought, going forward with courage and I made it. "
And indeed, he did make it. Because he was one of the last surviving veterans of the Battle of Crete. A place very special for my friend, His Eminence.
He was one of the many Anzacs who took up arms alongside Greeks against the Nazi invaders. Many Anzacs were protected and sheltered by Greek civilians during that bleak time. Many Anzacs were fated to never come home, and they rest for eternity in the earth beneath the Greek sky.
We stood together then, and we stand together today. What else came out of that war was the remarkable story of Greek immigration to Australia, to a land that represented the possibility of a peaceful and prosperous future.
Thanks in no small part to the immigrants who arrived in the post-war years, Australia has what is proudly one of the biggest Greek diasporas in the world, and Little Greece is right in Marrickville, my home.
I will always be proud of growing up with my fellow Greek friends, and I'm proud to be Prime Minister of a country that has a heart which has long had in part a Hellenic beat to it.
Australia without Greeks is beyond imagining. You are cherished, you are celebrated, and well and truly cemented into how we see ourselves as a country.
I thank Greek Australians for all you have added to Australia through your energy, aspiration, and hard work. The small businesses you've created, those small businesses that have grown into very large and successful businesses indeed.
Your love for this country is so perfectly balanced with the love of the land of your heritage, and Australia will always celebrate your contribution to our great nation.
As we gather here in remembrance of those who gave everything, we are once again reminded that the cause of peace and freedom can sometimes feel elusive, but it is a cause that we never stop fighting for.
We give our humble and enduring gratitude to those who so bravely took up that fight and we carefully tend the flame of memory so its glow touches generations to come.
As we say whenever we are at these grand memorials in Australia, lest we forget.


My fellow Australians.
By nature, we’re an optimistic country.
But I understand that right now it’s hard to be positive.
The war in the Middle East has caused the biggest spike in petrol and diesel prices in history.
Australia is not an active participant in this war.
But all Australians are paying higher prices because of it.
I know that you’re seeing this at the servo and at the supermarket.
And I understand farmers and truckies, small businesses and families are doing it tough.
And the reality is, the economic shocks caused by this war will be with us for months.
Tonight, I want to speak directly with you about what the Government is doing to shield Australia in these uncertain times.
And also, what all of us can do to help our country and help each other in the period ahead.
On Monday, National Cabinet adopted the National Fuel Security Plan.
Leaders from both sides of politics, from right around the country, working together to keep Australia moving.
Making sure that we are prepared.
So that if the global situation gets worse and our fuel supplies are seriously disrupted over the long term, we can co-ordinate the next steps together.
Today, we cut the fuel excise in half.
Cutting the tax on every litre of petrol, by 26 cents.
Those savings have started showing up at your petrol station.
For our truckies, we have cut the Heavy Vehicle Road User Charge to zero.
Both these measures will be in place for the next three months.
We are working to bring the price of fuel down.
To make more fuel here and to keep it onshore.
And get more fuel here – using our strong trading relationships with our region to bring more petrol, diesel and fertiliser to Australia.
Now, it’s the Australian way that people want to do their bit – and there are simple ways that you can.
You should go about your business and your life, as normal.
Enjoy your Easter.
If you’re hitting the road, don’t take more fuel than you need - just fill up like you normally would.
Think of others in your community, in the bush and in critical industries.
And over coming weeks, if you can switch to catching the train or bus or tram to work, do so.
That builds our reserves and it saves fuel for people who have no choice but to drive.
Farmers and miners and tradies who need diesel, every single day.
And all those shift workers and nurses, who do so much for our country.
The months ahead may not be easy.
I want to be upfront about that.
No government can promise to eliminate the pressures that this war is causing.
I can promise we will do everything we can to protect Australia from the worst of it.
These are uncertain times.
But I am absolutely certain of this: we will deal with these global challenges, the Australian way.
Working together – and looking after each other.
As we always have.
Thank you and good evening.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge all my wonderful colleagues here with us today.
This is a testing time for our nation.
The war in the Middle East has caused the biggest increase in petrol and diesel prices, in history.
Australia is not an active participant in this war.
We did express support for the original objectives: preventing Iran from ever obtaining a nuclear weapon. 
And degrading its capacity to endanger its neighbours.
Despite its indiscriminate attacks across the region, Iran’s air force is degraded.
Its navy is degraded, its military-industrial base is degraded and so too is its capacity to launch missiles.
That is a good thing.
And now those objectives have been realised, it is not clear what more needs to be achieved – or what the endpoint looks like.
What is clear is that the longer this war goes on, the more significant the impact on the global economy will be.
Not just the price of fuel, but everything that relies upon fuel. Literally everything that moves.
We started seeing those price spikes the day that the Strait of Hormuz closed.
And we will still be dealing with these challenges even after it is open.
This war may be on the other side of the world but it’s causing real pain here, for farmers, truckies, small businesses and families.
Our Government understands this and we are acting on it.
While we cannot control when this conflict in the Middle East will end.
We can determine how we respond here in Australia.
And we can decide how we work together, to help each other through.
We can choose what we build together, so we come out of this stronger, more self-reliant and more resilient.
That is what I want to focus on today.
The immediate actions we are taking to secure our fuel supply and to shield our economy. 
The preparations we are undertaking, as this situation evolves. 
And, every bit as importantly, the changes we need to make to prepare our economy for the future. 
We do not need to wait for this global crisis to be over, to learn its lessons.
We can and we must act now.
To keep jobs here and create new ones.
To strengthen our economic sovereignty, our energy security and our national resilience.
To make the most of our resources and make more things here.
So that Australia is not always the last link in the global supply chain.
That instead, we stand on our own two feet.
We navigate global uncertainty our way, the Australian way.
Looking after people.
Holding true to our values of fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
And holding on to everything that brings us together as Australians and sets us apart from the world. 
Everything that makes this the best country on earth. 
I understand that when people hear the economic impacts of this moment compared to the pandemic they flash back to the harsh restrictions of those times.
That is why I am taking every opportunity – in the Parliament, at press conferences, on social media, in last night’s address and here at the National Press Club, to make it clear to all Australians that while there are significant challenges ahead and commonsense changes required, this will not be like Covid.
Partly because the nature of this global crisis is very different.
But also because we have learned from that time – and we are deliberately taking a different approach. 
You can see that with the National Fuel Security Plan, adopted by National Cabinet.  
Making sure that leaders at all levels of government, and from both sides of politics, are on the same page.
Taking sensible steps now, so we are better prepared for what’s ahead.
And being clear about what we want life to look like here in Australia, even as the global situation becomes more challenging.
So we do not have a repeat of the social dislocation of Covid.
When people’s financial stress and anxiety about the world was compounded by being cut off from family and friends and community.
And trust in government and institutions was eroded by rules that seemed both completely inflexible and constantly changing.
Our focus is keeping Australia moving and keeping Australia open.
Keeping our schools open.
Keeping national and local sport going, major events and community festivals, vibrant and strong. 
Keeping hospitality and all those industries that rely on people getting together, open for business.
Making sure we can still spend time with our loved ones and friends at Easter.
And that we come together as a nation to pay our respects on Anzac Day.
Keeping Australia moving means keeping our truckies on the road. 
Our miners and tradies on site.
Making sure essential workers can be there for the people who count on them.
And making sure our farmers and growers and producers can keep getting their food and fibre into supermarkets and onto ships for export.
We’re encouraging a voluntary, common sense approach.
Take working from home for example.
For many families, this is already an essential part of the weekly routine.
And where it works for businesses and individuals, it makes sense.
We’re also encouraging people who can catch public transport, but currently choose to drive, to make the switch.
Because that builds our reserves and saves fuel for people who have no choice but to drive.
People in areas without reliable public transport, nurses and shift workers commuting at all hours, or tradies who need their ute to do their job.
To keep Australia moving, our Government has moved quickly.
We’ve cut the fuel excise in half, for 3 months.
Cutting the tax on petrol and diesel by 26 cents per litre.
And this morning, we have reached agreement with the States and Territories to deliver a further cut in the fuel tax by returning their GST windfall to Australians. 
This will mean a combined saving of 32 cents on every litre.
The Treasurer, Jim Chalmers has already signed that change into law.
Because we want this added relief to start showing up at petrol stations, straightaway.
For our truckies, we’re cutting the Heavy Vehicle Road User Charge to zero.
We’ve taken unprecedented action to underwrite industry and bring shiploads more fuel and fertiliser to Australia.
We’ve changed the law, so that all the fuel made in Australian refineries, stays on shore.
We have given the ACCC new powers to crack down on petrol stations that do the wrong thing by their customers.
And we will pursue every option to ensure that increases that might be there in coal and gas prices do not flow into electricity prices.
Today I announce that under our Economic Resilience Program we will make available $1 billion in interest-free loans for manufacturing and fuel businesses dealing with the economic costs of this conflict.
Truckies, freight companies – and fuel and fertiliser producers.
These firms are not just being affected by this global crisis, they are essential to Australia getting through this crisis. 
So our Government will extend their credit to help them, and the farmers and producers who rely on these supply chains, to weather the storm.
This is just another way we are acting to get ahead of issues.
No Government can promise to eliminate the pressures this global crisis will impose.
But we can be a buffer against the worst of it. 
A shock absorber, in a time of global shocks.
And we will do everything we can to protect the Australian people from what the world throws at us.
Providing stability and security amidst uncertainty does not mean standing still while the world changes around us.
It means anticipating and creating change, true to Australian values and in Australia’s interests.
Because if people feel like the economy is not working for them, if they’re putting in the effort but not seeing the reward, if planning for the future feels like a luxury, then government cannot provide stability just by keeping things as they are.
There is no security in maintaining a status quo that doesn’t work for people. 
Economic reform that drives growth, boosts productivity, helps tackle inflation and lifts living standards is always necessary.
And in times of uncertainty such as this, it is urgent.
We all know the mindset that left Australia exposed to this global shock.
That said it was ok to cut TAFE and training.
To dare manufacturing and industry to go offshore.
To put multinational firms ahead of Australian gas users.
To close our refineries, store our fuel reserves in Texas and run the national energy grid into the ground.
And that Australia could get away with this because there would always be someone else, somewhere else, who would sell us what we needed cheaper than we could make it ourselves.
This approach put our nation in this position of vulnerability, it will not take us out of it.
That’s why our Government is taking a different path.
Investing in a Future Made in Australia.
Creating the National Reconstruction Fund to back manufacturing. 
Making Free TAFE permanent and creating new incentives for apprentices.
Bringing new energy online: cleaner, cheaper power that we generate, store and control, for ourselves.
Positioning Australia as a destination of choice for the new jobs and opportunities of data centres and artificial intelligence.
Establishing our Critical Minerals Strategic Reserve.
Securing the future of our industrial base, from the steelworks at Whyalla to the Boyne Island Smelter at Gladstone.
Strengthening our defence manufacturing and our security co-operation.
Restoring Australian leadership in the Pacific and deepening our connections in ASEAN and APEC. 
Investing in the jobs and skills and infrastructure for AUKUS.
A landmark security treaty with Indonesia.
A new alliance with Papua New Guinea.
And importantly, diversifying our trade links and economic partnerships too.
Because making more things in Australia doesn’t mean doing less with the world.
That’s why we’ve been engaging in our region.
Stabilising our relationship with China.
And finding new opportunities for co-operation: with India and the United Arab Emirates.
The Critical Minerals Agreement I signed at the White House, the defence technology partnership we are expanding with Canada.
And, of course, our new defence and security partnership and our Free Trade Agreement signed just last week with the European Union. 
Giving Australian farmers and growers and exporters new access to a market of 450 million people.
We were investing in Australia’s economic resilience well before the conflict in the Middle East began.
And for our Government, international uncertainty is not an excuse to delay, or hold back reform, it is the reason we must press ahead.
Because we will not generate the same prosperity or create the same opportunities, if we continue to rely on an economic model designed in a different time and built for a more predictable world.
Nor can we go back to those days.
And any party or leader who promises otherwise, anyone who pretends that the solution to housing or jobs or wages or health is to somehow to recreate the 1950s or 60s, or whatever time they imagine everything was hunky dory, is simply not being fair dinkum with the Australian people.
Australia will not find our future security in the past.
Or by copying approaches from overseas.
We have to invest in it, build it and create it ourselves.
We can, we must, and we will. 
Because the global shocks we have been hit with this decade are not passing storms, they are the extremes of a more volatile economic climate.
Where economic policy and national security are bound together.
And where international supply chains are instruments of economic and strategic competition.
Australia can do better than respond to this reality – we can thrive in it.
By investing in our unique and unbeatable combination of advantages.
Our traditional resources, our critical minerals and our clean energy.
Our trade ties and diaspora connections to our region and to the world.
Our stability, our democracy, our standing as a middle power and trusted partner. 
The investing power of our superannuation funds.
And the skills and capability of our people, from digital technology and advanced manufacturing to agriculture and the care economy.
In a world that is less certain, our national strengths are more valuable than they have ever been.
But only if we continue to be serious and strategic about building on them.
And even as we plan and build for this stronger more resilient future, our number one priority remains helping people with the cost of living.
That is the balance we will strike in next month’s Budget.
It is our Government’s most important Budget to date and it will be our most ambitious.
It has to be.
The scale of the challenge facing us and the breadth of opportunities ahead of us demands that ambition and that urgency.
And our Australian character demands that ambition too.
That’s what I mean when I talk about progressive patriotism.
Uniting to celebrate what we have but working together to make it better.
Recognising that because we live in the best country in the world, we have a responsibility to build for the best.
And to empower every Australian with the opportunity to be their best.
As a matter of national pride and in order to realise our national potential.
Some of you have probably heard me say, that you have to be prepared to learn something new every day.
One of the things I’ve learned in the four years I’ve had the extraordinary honour of serving as Prime Minister, is that no matter how consuming an issue appears, you can’t just drop everything else.
You have to keep the tempo up on other issues, you have to maintain that momentum of delivery.
That’s why, in the same week that we cut the fuel excise in half:
We delivered on our promise to ban surcharges on credit and debit cards.
We backed wage rises for 18, 19 and 20 year olds, who, for the first time, will be paid like the adults that they are.
We legislated against subscription traps.
And today I announce we will build on the reforms we have already delivered to combat gambling harm.
Between 6am and 8.30pm, we will cap the number of TV ads for betting agencies at a maximum of 3 per hour. 
We will ban all gambling ads on radio during school pick-up and drop-off. 
We will ban cross-promotion content that mixes commentary with odds.
End advertising on jerseys and jumpers and in stadiums.
And ban online advertising, unless the user is verified as being over 18 and has the ability to opt out.
Just as importantly, we will block illegal, offshore gaming sites.
And ban online Keno type products, the so-called ‘pocket pokies’, which represent a huge percentage of Australian gambling losses.
And we will keep building on the success of BetStop, promoting and strengthening a program that is changing lives.
We are getting the balance right.
Letting adults have a punt if they want to, but making sure our children don’t see betting ads everywhere they look.
Because we don’t want kids growing up thinking that footy and gambling are inextricably linked.
We want Australians to love sport for what it is, its joys, its heartbreak, its highs and lows, because that is more than enough for any of us.
To succeed in all that is ahead of us, we need to bring people with us.
That’s why when I stood here after the last election, I said the following 12 months would be a year of delivery.
Working through the commitments the Australian people voted for last May – and ticking them off, one by one.
134 out of the 137 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics we promised are open. 
Together with 54 Medicare Mental Health Centres.
And our new Medicare Mental Health Check-In service went live just yesterday.
All 33 of our Endo and Pelvic Pain Clinics will be open by the end of this month.
Over 1,300 more GP Clinics are bulk billing every patient, every time.
Driving the biggest jump in the bulk billing rate in over 20 years.
PBS medicines are at their lowest price since 2004, just $25.
230,000 Australians have purchased their first home with a 5 per cent deposit.
When I came to the Press Club last January, I announced a new $10,000 incentive for construction apprentices.
In the last six months, 11,000 Australians have seized that opportunity.
For the first time ever, full and fair funding for every student, in every school, in every state and territory is becoming a reality.
Over 61,000 nursing, teaching and social work students have benefited from Paid Prac.
There have been nearly 750,000 enrolments in Free TAFE.
More Australians are starting university than ever before.
And 3 million people with a student debt have had it cut by 20 per cent, saving an average of over $5,500.
Over 300,000 homes and small businesses have cut their power bills with a cheaper battery.
The gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
And 14 million taxpayers will get a tax cut on the 1st July.
This year, and again next year.
All these acts of delivery, doing what we said we would do, helping people under pressure.
They also build trust.
Not just trust in our Government, trust in all governments, in our capacity to make a positive difference to people’s lives.
In a more polarised and fragmented media landscape, that is only becoming more important.
Because there is no speech, no ad, no interview that can make a better case for the value of government than someone being able to see a doctor for free, close to home.
That’s the reality our conversation must be grounded in: change that people can see, positive change in their lives.
For a Labor Government economic reform is never an end in itself, it is only the means to an end.
To ensuring more people know the dignity of a good job and fair wages.
Schools and child care that give your child the best start in life.
The opportunity of TAFE, or university.
Health care your family can count on and afford.
A home of your own.
The intergenerational equity at the heart of the oldest and most Australian aspiration of them all, passing on greater opportunity to your children.
That is how we bring people with us. It is also where we want to go.
To an economy that is stronger and fairer. Stronger because it is fairer.
Because people have a share in our nation’s success.
A meaningful stake in our economy and a stake in their future.
And a society that is stronger because everyone knows they are part of it.
People in every part of our country, from all faiths and backgrounds, valued for who they are and for all they contribute.
That has always been the key to the success of the Australian model.
It is how we have been able to avoid the worst of the economic and social divisions that have taken hold elsewhere.
We take pride in that, because we know it’s not down to luck, or distance or natural immunity. 
It’s because of what we have built here for ourselves.
A strong minimum wage, universal Medicare, dignity and security in retirement through superannuation.
A democracy where nearly every citizen casts a vote, the first place in the world where women could vote in elections and stand for Parliament.
And just as our national unity is built on respect for each other, it also depends on people knowing the nation respects them.
That your effort is worth it.
That if you work hard and back yourself, government will have your back.
And nowhere is that more important than the great Australian aspiration of home ownership.
The foundation on which you can build a better life for yourself and your family.
This is an enduring mission that demands constant renewal, continual reform.
New effort and urgency to break down the barriers of disadvantage.
Open the doors of opportunity.
Liberate the talents and capacity of the Australian people.
And ensure that every part of our economy nourishes aspiration and rewards hard work.
That is the Australian way.
It is our way through this global crisis.
And it is how we make our way forward.
With no-one held back and no-one left behind.


Thank you very much for that warm introduction.
And I do want to thank Robyn as well for the wonderful Welcome to Country that we just received. It uplifted all of us, didn't hurt anyone. It's about bringing people together. And I thank Robyn and her son for that very warm welcome to her country.
It is always a pleasure to be here in Perth and I’m grateful for the invitation to join you this morning.
This isn't the first time that I've addressed you here, but it is indeed my first in the lead up to a Budget. And this is the largest speech I will give in the lead up to the Budget, due on May 12.
At a time of global uncertainty, this room represents jobs, industries and investment that are crucial to Australia’s economic security – and our future prosperity.
It has been just under nine weeks since the war in the Middle East began.
And it seems like every other day brings a different report as to what comes next.
What we know for sure is that even if peace is secured tomorrow, there is no quick or easy road back to normal for the global economy.
The damage that has been done to energy infrastructure across the region and the risk of mines in the Strait of Hormuz means it will take some time before shipping in that region returns to anything like its usual pattern.
And the economic disruption and cost of living pressures caused by the biggest spike in petrol and diesel prices in history, will be with us even longer than that.
Those factors – and the timing - are outside of our control.
None of us here can determine when this war will end.
But all of us can choose how we respond to the economic challenges it is creating.
We can choose what we learn from this global crisis, even before it ends.
And we can choose what we are going to do differently, as a country.
What we will build and change and reform, so that Australia does more than weather this storm, we emerge from it as a stronger, fairer and more resilient country.
Building and strengthening this national resilience will be a key focus of the Budget we deliver in 13 days’ time.
It will be our Government’s most important Budget to date - and our most ambitious.
The challenges confronting our nation right now demand that ambition – and so too do the opportunities ahead of us.
I want to emphasise that point about opportunities.
A straightforward lesson of the past decade is that distance no longer isolates us from global uncertainty.
But that’s only half the story.
Western Australia stands as proof that distance is also no longer a barrier to prosperity.
Yes, the world is changing, profoundly and rapidly.
But here in Australia we have the resources, the people and the capacity to make that change work for us.
It is true that we can no longer accept with complacency that we are the last link in the global supply chain.
But a country like ours, with our skills and smarts and innovation and resources, should never have settled for that in any case.
For decades, we were told that it was somehow efficient and rational to cut apprenticeships and TAFE, offshore manufacturing and close refineries, because in the end Australia would be able to rely on someone else, somewhere else to make things cheaper than we could ourselves.
That equation has changed. Fundamentally.
And we should embrace the chance this gives us to move up the international value chain.
To make more things here, to see our world-class mining industry draw on a new generation of science and research and technology, and catalyse a new generation of manufacturing in clean energy and critical minerals and rare earths.
That optimism and determination is at the centre of our resilience agenda.
Because building resilience is about much more than shielding our country from the worst.
A resilient economy is one that enables Australia to be our best.
That means building on our national strengths – and broadening them out.
Making the most of our resources and our relationships, deepening and diversifying our trade with the region and beyond.
Making the most of our energy advantages: with cleaner, cheaper renewables and storage backed by gas - sovereign energy that we generate and control.
And empowering more people with a stake in our economy, a place in our national project, a share in Australia’s success.
Opening the doors of opportunity through education.
Backing Australians to start or grow a business.
Helping more young people realise the dream of home ownership.
Resilience is absolutely an economic imperative - for skills and energy and jobs and growth and productivity.
But there is a bigger national purpose to this as well.
Building our resilience is about protecting ourselves from the economic division and social dislocation we have seen take hold in other parts of the world, where people feel like the system is broken beyond all repair.
Guarding against that requires more than talking about Australian values, it’s about giving those values meaning in people’s daily lives.
That’s what strengthening Medicare, cutting taxes and Free TAFE are all about.
Making sure that fairness, aspiration and opportunity are visible, are real and are within reach.
Put simply: to preserve everything that makes this the best country on earth, we have to make the economy work better for people.
That means rebuilding - and strengthening – the connection between hard work and fair reward.
Helping Australians earn more and keep more of what they earn, so they have the security to save for the future.
And making it easier for businesses to build and invest and employ and innovate.
We want our resources and manufacturing sectors to be able to seize the opportunities of our Future Made in Australia plan.
For Australian firms and tech workers to secure the benefits of a new wave of investment in data centres and artificial intelligence.
And for businesses across our country to be able to rely on a skilled workforce that drives growth and productivity.
At the beginning of our second term, Jim Chalmers and I both identified boosting productivity as a key reform priority for the Government.
Global uncertainty has not put that on hold – it has only underlined precisely how important it is.
This year’s Budget will contain a substantial set of new measures to boost productivity, across our economy.
Clearing away barriers to investment and cutting through regulations that are holding back new housing, energy and jobs.
And – every bit as importantly – creating more headroom in our economy, enabling economic growth to lift wages and living standards, without adding to pressure on inflation.
Australia’s productivity challenge has been decades in the making.
And it won’t be resolved by a tired old argument about government being bigger or smaller – this is about government working better.
We have made important progress on this front already, including reforming Australia’s broken environmental laws.
Twenty years ago, the median approval time for a project under the EPBC Act was 48 weeks.
When we brought our reforms into parliament, the median timeframe had blown out to 118 weeks.
Too often, that means investors simply walk away, communities miss out on jobs and people miss out on new energy or housing.
We took action to fix this - and we are building on it today.
Today I announce our Government is committing $45 million in our Budget to speed-up and simplify approvals into a single-touch process.
This will fast-track new energy, housing and resources projects by combining federal and state approvals - effectively removing an entire layer of bureaucracy from the process.
If a state government signs one of our new bilateral approval agreements, they will be empowered to conduct assessments and approvals on the Commonwealth’s behalf.
So instead of a two-stage, two-track process, with that all the cost of delays and doubling up that occurs, this will be a one-step process, with one, clearer, faster, yes or no.
After too many wasted years, this can be a circuit breaker - if the states step up and sign up.
And I am pleased that Premier Roger Cook has been the first to sign a MOU to begin formal negotiations for a bilateral assessment agreement.
The intention is to then negotiate a bilateral approval agreement – and our Budget funding will facilitate this.
Every Budget we have delivered has invested in WA infrastructure - and you will see that again on the 12th of May.
Back in 2024, we partnered with the Cook Government to support the initial planning works for Westport.
A new container port at Kwinana is a vital piece of economic infrastructure for the state - and the nation.
It sits alongside the generational $12 billion investment our Government is making in the Henderson Defence Precinct.
Funding that will support continuous naval ship-building and sustainment.
Creating 10,000 direct jobs in the West – and a whole new ecosystem of opportunities for local manufacturing.
This will be the industrial heart of Western Australia.
And we want to make sure that road and freight rail connections are there from day one.
We’ve backed the blueprint – and now we will partner with the WA Labor Government to lift it off the page.
Today, I announce that we will co-fund the $1.1 billion upgrade of Anketell Road.
These upgrades will help reduce traffic and improve safety on Rockingham Road and surrounds.
Get more trucks off residential streets.
And ensure that the freight corridor to Westport is ready to go.
Next month’s Budget will build Australia’s resilience by investing in our fuel security, for the long term.
It is the nature of the global fuel market that we only have a clear picture of the next four to six weeks.
And from this, we know supplies to Australia remain steady and at the volumes expected.
Indeed, the new powers we have given to Export Finance Australia to underwrite the purchase of shiploads of diesel and fertiliser, as well as the direct engagement we have undertaken with our partners in the region, means we are currently securing fuel above and beyond our normal levels.
In just the last week our government has secured 400 million additional litres of diesel on top of our regular supply: bound for WA, far north Queensland and our east coast.
But there is absolutely no room for complacency.
Because we know the global outlook is inherently unpredictable - and we have to be prepared for the situation to remain unstable.
That’s why our priority remains fuel supply.
Making more fuel here and keeping it onshore.
Co-operating with the states and territories to co-ordinate our response.
We continue to engage with our partners in the region, so Australia remains at the front of the queue, even if conditions deteriorate.
And we are working closely with industry on all of this.
Drawing on the connections and expertise you have built over decades - both as Australia’s largest users of diesel and as companies embedded in our region.
The great Labor Governments of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating had the vision and the courage to recognise that Australia’s economic future lay in our region, the Indo-Pacific.
And the businesses and workers of Western Australia were crucial to bringing that vision into being.
WA resources helped build and power the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
You showed that buying Australian meant getting the best.
And not just our resources, or our food and fibre.
But our expertise and ideas, our technology and our services.
Your presence and contribution to the region helped forge a new and deeper level of trust in our nation.
And over the last four years, as our Government has worked to rebuild and deepen Australia’s engagement in the Indo-Pacific:
Strengthening our ties with ASEAN nations.
Stabilising the relationship with China.
Signing an historic defence treaty with Indonesia.
Broadening our economic and security partnerships with Japan and the Republic of Korea.
And creating new areas of co-operation, from our clean energy partnership with India to the historic Critical Minerals Agreement I signed at the White House last year.
Time and time again, your industries have been vital to the success of these efforts.
This ongoing, consistent and constructive engagement both in regional forums such as ASEAN, APEC and the Pacific Islands Forum, and in bilateral discussions, means that our neighbours and partners understand that under our Government, Australia is not one of those friends that only rings up when they want something.
They know that when Australia makes a promise, we honour it.
We back our words, with actions.
And maintaining and strengthening our standing as a reliable trading partner, doesn’t make us old-fashioned or naïve about the change going on around us.
We all understand that the global environment is volatile.
That the safeguards of shared norms and rules are proving less reliable.
But that only makes the trust that our region places in Australia, more valuable and more powerful.
Our reliability is an economic and strategic asset in itself.
And it is delivering for us in this global crisis.
In Singapore and Brunei and Malaysia.
In our ongoing discussions with the Republic of Korea.
And in next week’s visit from the Prime Minister of Japan.
The quality and reliability of Australian agriculture, Australian resources and Australian gas, has been critically important to the assurances we have received for future supplies of petrol, diesel and fertiliser.
In other words, our gas exports are directly linked to our national fuel security.
And the middle of a global fuel crisis is the worst possible time to jeopardise these partnerships, or the investment that underpins them.
This is why I can confirm that the Budget will not undermine existing contracts on gas exports.
The people of Australia have every right to expect Australian gas to be affordable for our economy – for industry and households alike.
This is why we are creating a Domestic Gas Reservation for the east coast, building on the success of the WA model, to ensure that future gas projects contribute to our national prosperity.
Australians also have every right to expect a fair return for our country’s resources.
That is why we have reformed the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax.
It’s why we continue to support fair wages and secure work, in every sector.
And it is why we capped gas and coal prices in 2022, to shield businesses and households from those global energy price spikes.
That’s how our government operates: we adapt and respond to the challenges the world throws at us.
We deal with the global reality - and we act in the national interest.
On Saturday, Australians came together to pay our respects to all who had served, suffered and sacrificed for our nation.
I attended the Dawn Service at the Australian War Memorial.
That iconic building was designed to remember what that generation called ‘The Great War’.
Yet even before construction was completed, Australia was already in the grip of a Second World War.
On the day he opened the War Memorial, the proud member for Fremantle and Australia’s finest wartime leader John Curtin, spoke of Gallipoli and everything that followed as:
‘the first great crisis in Australian history’.
Think about that.
A bold new social democracy, leading the world on the minimum wage and the eight hour day, the first country where women could vote in elections and run for parliament.
A Federation only 14 years old, plunged into a conflict that proved longer and infinitely more devastating than anyone could have imagined.
The loss and the trauma could have stopped that young nation in its tracks.
Instead, 111 years on, we still find inspiration in Anzac Day.
In what that first great crisis revealed about Australia's character: their courage and resolve, the humanity and the humour they held onto, even in the toughest of times.
And the sacrifices they made, to look after each other.
Those same qualities have steered our nation through conflict and hardship and disaster, down the generations.
And no matter what the world throws at us in the months ahead, as long as we hold true to our values, trust in our people and back ourselves, we will come through this stronger, more resilient and ready to seize the opportunities that the future holds.


Thanks very much Ben, and I thank the young graduate who was here welcoming us to country. And it's great to have someone from beautiful Thursday Island – it's a long way from Thursday Island, from TI to Western Sydney.
I also want to acknowledge Premier Minns and members of his team who are here.
The Leader of the Opposition Angus Taylor who is here.
Ben, I'll single him out of all the people here, because The Daily Telegraph are of course sponsors of this forum, but more importantly, they have been advocates for this airport for a long period of time.
And he's quite right, it's been on, off, on off.
But consistent is the fact that The Daily Telegraph played an incredibly positive role, and a central role in advocating for this airport here.
Not as something that was about giving something bad to Western Sydney, because people around Kingsford Smith didn't want it, but the opposite.
Just as I'm an advocate for the importance of Kingsford Smith Airport as a major employer in my electorate of Grayndler, what this airport will do is be a major catalyst for economic investment here in Western Sydney.
And it will be extraordinary, as we have seen.
I am absolutely delighted to be here once again, back at the airport today.
An airport that proudly will bear the name as well of Nancy-Bird Walton, a great Australian trailblazer whose very name represents the courage and the conviction to boldly leap into the future.
We are surrounded by the fulfilment of a dream many decades in the making.
When the first passengers begin streaming through this beautiful terminal in October, it will be the first major airport to open in Australia in more than 50 years.
And 40 years since Prime Minister Bob Hawke had the foresight to begin setting aside land at Badgerys Creek.
And we should remember that all those years ago, there was a sod turn at this airport – under the Hawke Government, construction began.
Then there was the Lindsay by-election.
By-elections are dangerous things, as we will see in eight days' time.
After all that, we are now just half a year from the first bags on the carousel.
And I am absolutely rapt to be here as PM, having championed the airport and worked across the Parliament to turn the vision into a reality.
And at the risk of singling people out, I will single out Joe Hockey, who's not here.
I worked with Joe across the Parliament really closely to go through the Aviation White Paper, and then to go through the processes in the lead up to the election to make sure that there was bipartisan support for this airport.
There is nothing quite like seeing a promise delivered so emphatically, especially one that is going to make such a powerful and ongoing difference.
Western Sydney International is a reminder of the role of government and how it can work productively with business to deliver for Australians.
Powered by $5.6 billion in Government investment and careful work with 360 separate local businesses, this is a bold vision turned into reality by the energy, talent and dedication of architects, engineers, builders, and an army of tradies.
I say to them: this is an extraordinary credit to every single one of you.
And the power that those workers will feel when they watch every plane going overhead – something I'm very familiar with – will remind them of what they have done, of what they have achieved here at this airport.
This airport is a great example of what Australia is capable of when we dare to dream.
When we work together. When we face challenges together. When we seize opportunities and shape the future together.
The future that Western Sydney International represents is one of supercharging the local economy – in a way that delivers benefits to residents and businesses alike.
The Aerotropolis around Western Sydney International, when combined with Moorebank Intermodal just down the road, will drive investment and new businesses, which are innovative and will drive future employment growth.
Yet it is also part of something bigger and even more ambitious.
This is nothing less than an ambitious and timely reimagining of Sydney and what our city represents.
A city that no longer has its focus locked on the CBD and Sydney Harbour, but is increasingly looking here to where most residents live.
Just look at how the airport has driven other infrastructure investment.
Including the M12, which opened to traffic in March.
The new 23-kilometre Sydney Metro-Western Sydney Airport rail project.
Planning for the Southwest Sydney rail extension.
And the Liverpool to Airport Transit Corridor.
That is just part of the difference an airport can make.
What we are doing across Western Sydney, though, adds up to more than just a story of roads and rail and runway – as vital as they are.
It is a story of delivering for the people of Western Sydney – and that is the story that will continue to be told in the Budget in a little over a week’s time.
Making the decisions that help people out.
Shaping the policy that makes a real difference.
Alleviating the pressures, giving people that greater sense of security they need in order to plan their own futures.
We know that right now, people in outer suburbs are particularly feeling the impact of rising fuel costs and increased cost-of-living pressures.
Even if the conflict ends tomorrow, it will have a long economic tail. That is why our Government is working day and night, here and abroad, to shield Australians from the worst of the impacts of a war on the other side of the world.
We’ve reduced the price of fuel by 32 cents a litre through the temporary halving of the fuel excise, and the agreement of States and Territories to forego windfall gains on GST. We’ve been securing fuel supplies – from unleaded to jet fuel – through our many friends in the region.
In just the last week, our Government has secured 400 million additional litres of diesel on top of our regular supply.
And today I can announce that we have secured an additional 100 million litres of jet fuel for Australian use, and another 50 million litres of diesel through an agreement between Export Finance Australia and BP Australia.
So, three additional shipments in addition to eight separate shipments already announced in partnership with Ampol, BP Australia and Viva Energy, arriving this month and early June.
They represent the first two shipments of additional jet fuel secured under the Government’s new Strategic Reserve powers.
This is on top of the agreement that I reached with Premier Li in a conversation, which was then backed up by Penny Wong, the Foreign Minister, with her visit to China, making sure that we get jet fuel from China in a very important agreement.
And Premier Li, I thank him for that.
Very important in a country like ours.
So, combine this amounts to 450 million litres of additional diesel and 100 million litres of additional jet fuel on top of the normal arrangements that apply.
More shipments are expected under these agreements in the coming days and weeks.
And we'll continue to make announcements, but our focus is unashamedly about fuel security at this point in time.
Yet our work to find solutions to the ever-evolving fuel challenge is just one component of making life easier across Western Sydney.
Our Government has opened seven Medicare Urgent Care Clinics across Western Sydney – and they have already received around 120,000 visits.
That is making a real difference in the lives of Western Sydney residents, just as 1800 Medicare has been since it came online on 1 January.
And both are helping to alleviate pressure on the hardworking staff in the local public hospitals and emergency departments.
There is no shortage of compelling examples of just how practical Western Sydney residents are when it comes to embracing fresh opportunities.
Thanks to their carefully considered choices, Western Sydney is one of the regions driving Australia’s energy transformation.
When we look to the already more than 345,000 homes and small businesses across Australia that have cut their power bills with a cheaper battery, we see that it is Western Sydney leading the charge.
There are eight times as many home batteries in the electorate of Greenway than in the electorate of Sydney.
There are more solar panels in Blacktown than Bondi.
And more electric vehicles in Penrith than in Paddington.
Western Sydney residents are making rational decisions driven by their hip pockets, facing the future with clear eyes and seizing its opportunities.
So much of our ability to face the future is built on the powerful foundation of our sense of home – from the roof over our heads, to our sense of belonging in the community that surrounds us.
That is why we are providing funding to community infrastructure in Western Sydney through programs including Thriving Suburbs and Investing in Our Community.
Whether it’s green spaces, playgrounds, community centres or better facilities for veterans, it’s about enhancing liveability and strengthening social cohesion.
On which note, it’s gratifying to see Western Sydney International’s investment in community through sport, a commitment that’s just been bolstered by a partnership with Western Sydney Wanderers FC. And it's great that they are here with us this morning.
At heart, what we are doing is about building a sense of neighbourhood – brick by brick, resident by resident, family by family.
Every year, the dream of home ownership draws families to Western Sydney.
Because this is a place where people see themselves building a life – and one day becoming a local.
And that sense of home, that feeling of stability and belonging builds community too: in schools and sporting clubs and local events.
But for more and more Australians, particularly young Australians, the truth is that the dream and the security of home ownership feels out of reach.
They’re doing everything right. Making sacrifices, doing their very best to save.
But they feel like the system is working against them.
That all the effort they are putting in simply isn’t adding up.
That erodes trust in our economy – and indeed, in our democracy.
Which is why, as a Government, we have to ensure that intergenerational equity is a focus.
And you'll see that in our Budget on May 12, particularly when it comes to home ownership.
Because the best way to make our economy stronger, is to make sure that everyone has a stake in it.
The people of Western Sydney deserve nothing less than a Government with their courage, their resolve and their ambition.
Shortly after we last met, the Australian people returned our Government and entrusted us with continuing the agenda we had outlined.
During our time in office, we’ve seen the biggest jump in the bulk billing rate in over 20 years.
PBS medicines are at their lowest price in 22 years.
The gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
More than 240,000 Australians purchasing their first home with a 5 per cent deposit. Today I announce that the Budget will provide $72.5 million to the NSW Government through our National Productivity Fund to speed up the zoning and planning reforms.
This is work we're doing across the Commonwealth, working with state and territory governments.
And in Premier Minns, you've got a Minister who's had the courage to take on some of the naysayers who say, 'no, you can't build housing here'.
And to take that on and to make sure that we do get more homes built here.
Whether it be social and affordable homes, or whether it be private rentals, or indeed right across the spectrum.
And it's good to work with him and his Ministers in New South Wales to deliver.
These are incentives to get vital new housing projects through planning and into construction.
Crucially, in the last six months alone, we're working as well to make sure that we have the tradies to build it, through making sure that we have the $10,000 incentive for construction apprentices, of which 11,000 Australians have already enrolled and are participating in that.
More students are finishing high school for the second year in a row after nearly a decade of decline.
And I know that Prue Car will be particularly rapt in that.
Every student in every Western Sydney school is seeing our commitment to full and fair funding for every student becoming a reality, partnering with every state and territory government.
More than 740,000 Australians have taken up the opportunity of free TAFE.
More Australians are starting university than ever before.
And 61,000 nursing, teaching and social work students have benefited from Paid Prac.
I reckon most people would be surprised that someone doing nursing had to take time off and do it essentially as a volunteer to do Paid Prac in order to become a nurse. 
All promised. All delivered. And all of it changing lives for the better.
And that is what guides our approach to Western Sydney.
To return to a theme from when we met last year, Western Sydney has grown and changed almost beyond recognition during my lifetime – and it’s continuing to grow and evolve in profoundly exciting ways.
Yet what never changes are the values that Western Sydney residents have always held.
Western Sydney – like our nation – has been built by generations of people, drawn from every corner of the world.
But the story of their aspiration is thoroughly, powerfully Australian.
Because here in Australia, aspiration is not narrow or exclusive.
It’s not limited by where you live, or what your parents earn.
It’s not a far-off dream you hope might one day come true.
It’s a goal you bring closer in reach with your hard work, every day.
And something else that sets Australian aspiration apart is that it is broader and deeper than the individual.
People aspire to a better life: for themselves and their families.
But they also aspire to a stronger and safer community, a healthier environment.
A better society – and better opportunity for the next generation.
That is what unique – and powerful – about Australian aspiration.
It holds no-one back – and leaves no-one behind.
Backed by an economy that works for people – not the other way around.
As we plan and build for a stronger, more resilient future in Western Sydney and beyond, our priority remains helping people with the cost of living.
That will be at the heart of the Budget in 12 days' time.
It will be our Government’s most important Budget yet – and, without question, our most ambitious.
But as we are reminded so powerfully here today, in this great new chapter in the story of Western Sydney, ambition is how we can truly get our ideas off the ground and make the future take flight.
Congratulations to everyone who has been involved in this extraordinary project.



Your Excellency, the Governor General of Australia. Premier Jacinta Allan. My Deputy Prime Minister, Richard Marles, and members of the team who are here. Members of the Federal Parliament, including the Speaker of the House of Representatives.Other distinguished guests who are here. Particular congratulationsto the first leaders – elected leaders of the assembly here in Victoria. 125 years ago, formalities commenced here with the singing of God Save the King. Today, we begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, celebrating the privilege we have to share this ancient continent with the oldest continuous culture on earth. On the 9th of May 1901, the autumn sun spilled through these windows onto 12,000 faces. The people who had packed this magnificent building and the cheering crowds lining the streets outside, were proudly celebrating two historic firsts.An Australian first: the opening of the new Commonwealth Parliament. And a world first: the first country on earth created by the free and peaceful vote of its people. As the Leader of Australia’s oldest political party, I am proud to say that there were Labor MPs here in 1901. And indeed, we had the first Federal Parliamentary Labor Party caucus the day before, 125 years ago.But there was certainly no-one in the House of Representatives with a surname like Albanese. There were no Senators called Wong. No Victorian MPs called Abdo or Ananda-Rajah, Ciccione or Khalil, Fernando or Ng. No Senators like Jana Stewart, a Mutthi Mutthi and Wamba Wamba woman. Indeed, the only woman with a role in the proceedings that day was the Duchess of York.Yet for all the lifetimes of change that separate that crowd from this one and their world from ours, what binds us and unites us is more meaningful and more powerful. Because they were Australians, just like us. They loved their country, just as we do. And they loved it because they believed it could be different.  Better, fairer, more equal and more united than the old divisions of the old world that they and their ancestors had left behind. That was the great national project the Australians of 1901 began, the foundation they laid, and it is the task that every generation has taken up, built on and passed to the next. Australians have fought – and died – in the service of those ideals in war. And worked to preserve and expand them in peace.  Through prosperity and hardship, global crises and national disasters, we have kept faith with that founding endeavour - and with each other. We have held on to that oldest and most Australian aspiration of them all: giving those who come after us a better life with greater opportunity than we enjoy. Now looking around this extraordinary space, it is hard to believe that there was ever any doubt about where the ceremonial opening would be held. Yet for a time, it looked like the event would take place at Victorian Parliament House in Spring Street. This would have meant, to quote the front page of The Melbourne Herald: “there will only be room for federal and local members of Parliament, and their wives and daughters” And it went on: “the people will be shut out.”The people will be shut out. A simple fact, a practical point.But also, a democratic argument, an egalitarian one. And there is something in that combination that is perfectly, uniquely Australian.After all, Federation was the people’s movement. It had been given life by the people’s vote. And for the work of the new Parliament to carry weight and meaning, it had to belong to the people as well. We could not start with a small room and a select few. We had to begin as we intended to go on: worthy of the bold ambitions and big dreams and broad horizons of the architects of this new ‘nation for a continent’. 125 years ago, they made the right choice, they took the Parliament and the moment to the people.  And there, on our democracy’s first day, we find a lesson that has held true ever since. That Australia is always at our best, when we choose to lift people up – not shut them out. Every time we have followed that national instinct for unity and fairness, we have been better for it. Every time we have broken down barriers of disadvantage or discrimination and opened up the doors of opportunity, we have been stronger and richer for it.And every time our people have chosen to engage with the world, indeed, to lead the world, we have all gained from it. By nature, Australians are not much given to grand civic celebrations. If you compare the way we mark of our 125th anniversary to what we will see in the United States this year for their 250th, I think the contrast says a lot about our two cultures. But as Australians we can – and indeed we should – take real, patriotic pride in our enduring democratic achievement. Both in the Commonwealth that our forebears created in 1901, and – every bit as importantly – in what we have done to make it better and stronger, together, over generations. By making our democracy more true to our Australian values.And by ensuring that our democracy values every Australian. That is the spirit of our century-old system of compulsory voting, the understanding that citizenship carries rights and responsibilities. And it is our evolving and growing national story. Leading the world: the first country where women could vote in elections and stand for Parliament.Changing the world for working people: with the 8 hour day and the minimum wage, Medicare and universal superannuation.  Opening ourselves to the world: by doing away with the White Australia policy and enriching our society with the hard work and aspiration of people drawn from every faith and culture on earth, united by their love of this country, their home. And learning from the oldest continuous culture on Earth. Owning and understanding the full truth of our history, so we can work together for a more reconciled and equal future.My fellow Australians.In the early months of 1901, this ceiling was redecorated to celebrate Federation. Beneath the dome were painted Latin mottoes to offer inspiration to the new Parliament and to the people it served. They are still there. You can see, above us: Carpe Diem.Seize the day. That is the optimism and the determination that brought Australians together, 125 years ago. And that is the hope and the purpose we carry with us still. Taking inspiration from our past. Grasping the opportunities of the present. But sharing a future worthy of our people, our values and our home – the best country on Earth. In that spirit, let us seize the day, every day, together. 


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past present and emerging.
It’s an absolute pleasure to be here for the re-launch of the Chifley Research Centre.
And there is no better or more important time for the labour movement to have its ideas and interests represented in the national conversation.
Because in 2026, as we have seen, the public debate is not shaped by a handful of trusted media outlets alone.
The terms are not set solely by what the papers say in the morning or the TV news says at night.
Our media landscape and our political debate has never been more diverse and more fragmented, more self-selecting and more polarised.
That means there is a greater need and a bigger role for the advocacy of informed, thoughtful progressive organisations like yours.
Above all, it means governments embarking on economic reform cannot sit back and assume people will come to us, to hear our arguments.
I've just been out with the Treasurer and the Housing Minister and the Member for Canberra, Alicia Payne this morning, putting a face to the reform of what we have achieved.
In this case, Matt and Mika and their dog Pikelet, at their flat in Kingston here, who are one of the 250,000 people, families, who have benefited from our five per cent deposit scheme.
Making an enormous difference, putting that human face on what is a really important reform.
It does mean that we have to take our case to Australians, everywhere and every way we can.
And that goes deeper than the platform we use, it’s about the policies we deliver.
At a time when people feel like the economy isn’t working for them, that their hard work isn’t adding up to fair reward, that the great Australian dream is out of their reach.
We cannot wish that sentiment away, by trying to defend a system and a status quo that people know is simply not delivering.
Instead, we have to demonstrate the power of government to change the system, to change the country and to change people’s lives for the better.
That sense of purpose and urgency is at the centre of our Government’s agenda.
And it was at the heart of the Budget that our Treasurer and – of course a proud former Chifley Director, Dr Jim Chalmers - delivered on Tuesday night.
Of course, the war in the Middle East has created new challenges – and underlined existing ones as well.
The biggest-ever spike in global fuel prices, is pushing up inflation and putting Australians under pressure.
And the strain on international supply chains is exposing structural problems in our economy brought about by decades of sending manufacturing offshore, hollowing-out TAFE, closing-down refineries, because, we were told, there would always be someone else, somewhere else, who could make things cheaper than we could here in Australia.
The stable, predictable world of ever-expanding free trade that enabled such a mindset has gone – and it’s not coming back.
Again, this presents Australia with a clear choice.
We can look back – or we can back ourselves.
We choose to back ourselves.
We can cling to the remains of the old model - or we can build a new one.
We can seize this opportunity to build a stronger, fairer, more productive economy.
An Australia that is more resilient, more sovereign and more self-reliant.
Because we make more things here.
Because we make the most of our national advantages - not just our traditional resources or our critical minerals and clean energy, but our skills and services, our ideas and research.
The aspiration and innovation of our small businesses and start-ups.
The investing power of our superannuation funds.
And our international relationships too: our trade ties to the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
Our defence and security partnerships – from AUKUS and our new agreement with the European Union, to our historic treaty with Indonesia and our Alliance with PNG.
Every one of these relationships is reinforced by the family connection that our diaspora communities give us to every country on earth.
Our Budget builds on all of this.
With new investments in our fuel and energy security, to keep Australia moving:
A $7.5 billion fuel and fertiliser facility, helping shield our farmers, miners and truckies from the worst of the global oil shock, and to safeguard our economy against the flow-on effects.
$3.2 billion for a permanent, government-owned fuel reserve.
We are establishing a domestic gas reservation, so Australian industry can access affordable Australian gas.
We’re delivering new measures to support small business too:
Making the $20,000 instant asset write off, permanent.
Introducing two-year loss carry-back for all companies up to $1 billion.
And reforming the Research and Development Tax Incentive as well as the Performance Test, so we get more investment flowing into the drivers of productivity.
Building our national resilience is also about empowering more Australians with a share in our national success.
Making sure people have a stake in our economy and a stake in their future.
That’s where reforming – and rebalancing – our tax system is absolutely critical.
For too long, governments have taxed wages and work too heavily.
That’s why we cut income taxes for every single taxpayer on the 1st July, 2024.
We will cut them again on the 1st July this year – and again next year.
That's why we intervened in 2024 to make sure that we took the tough decision to change our position on Stage Three, and to say, 'well, people on my income didn't need all the support, while people on lower and middle incomes missed out'.
We intervened to make a difference there.
That's why the fourth element of our tax cuts were done in a short period of time.
We’ll back that in with our new $1,000 Instant Tax Deduction.
This will benefit around 6 million low and middle income earners.
If you listen to some of the commentators, they would think that those people simply don't exist because they get written out of the equation.
But people who don’t have an accountant to help them navigate the system, track their expenses and claim deductions they are entitled to, they deserve this break.
It's also a productivity measure, of course, as well, in simplifying the system.
And on Tuesday night, we continued this work, with our permanent, $250 Working Australians Tax Offset, benefiting over 13 million Australians.
Helping Australians earn more, keep more of what they earn – and get more back at tax time as well.
Five significant reforms, making a difference.
The other area where we need to rebalance the tax system and rebuild resilience is home ownership.
At our campaign launch last year, I quoted from the report that Ben Chifley commissioned during his time as Minister for Reconstruction.
That report said that housing was:
“not only the need but the right of every citizen”
That same belief drives our Government’s policies on housing – and home ownership.
Because we know that home of your own is about more than a roof over your head.
It is the secure foundation on which you can build a life and start a family.
We know the best way to help more Australians buy a home, is to boost housing supply.
And we've thrown everything at it.
Over the last four years, we've been working to build more homes.
The new funding in this week’s Budget: to speed up approvals and to build connecting infrastructure like roads, power and sewerage, will make a difference.
It takes the total investment in our Homes for Australia plan to $47 billion.
We have thrown everything at supply:
Free TAFE and our $10,000 incentive for construction apprenticeships and electrical apprenticeships to train more tradies to build those homes.
100,000 new homes being set aside for first home buyers.
New social and affordable homes being delivered through Build to Rent and the Housing Australia Future Fund.
Both programs that the Coalition last night said they would get rid of.
The mob that had 370 social housing homes being built during their almost decade in office, now has opposed the HAFF, opposed Build to Rent, wants to wind it back, back again.
We have new incentives for states and territories to unlock land for development.
And we are making progress.
The home this morning in Kingston that we went to, one of 250,000 homes bought with just a 5 per cent deposit.
And that young couple told us - they just got married earlier this year, they would have had to put that off.
But they've been able to get their dog, Pikelet, and plan for the future, that they simply weren't able to do.
Matt grew up in Victoria.
Mika grew up in Sydney.
They met through work.
And are building a life together.
And it was just delightful to be with real people who actually understood the difference that government decisions can make, and to see firsthand what they've been able to do.
Their pride in the bookshelves that they got someone to come in and put into the wall.
Because it's their home, and they want to make it as liveable and as wonderful and as reflective of their character.
Because they know they won't be just there for a week or a year.
They'll be there for as long as they want to be.
And that is what it is about.
Thousands more are taking up Help to Buy.
A shared equity scheme based upon a scheme that's been operating in WA for 50 years now.
But they want to get rid of that as well.
But the truth is that we know there are still too many Australians missing out.
Because the tax system is working against them – and has been for decades.
Aspiring first home buyers are being locked out of the market by tax breaks that favour property investors.
Last Saturday there would have been auctions where first home buyers were there bidding against investors.
And investors have an advantage, because they know that if they have to kick in that extra tens of thousands of dollars in order to win the bidding process, that will be a deduction.
This will level the playing field for existing homes.
The distortions have become entrenched, widening a gap between the generations - and eating-away at aspiration.
Since 1999, when the changes to capital gains were introduced, house prices have risen by more than 400 per cent.
More than two times as fast as average incomes.
So let’s be clear, this generation are not imagining things.
They don't say it's harder for you than it was for you, for my generation, because they're imagining it.
It's because it is.
And I wasn't prepared as Prime Minister to say, 'all that's true, if only there was something I could do about it', and just stand still.
Because it really has never been more difficult for young people to buy a home of their own.
They’re working hard, making sacrifices, doing everything right, and after months, even years, of going around inspections and missing out on auctions, they’ve gone beyond talking about buying their first home being ‘difficult’.
They are this close to giving up, altogether.
That was the choice for our Government.
Would we sit back and watch the Australian dream that we talk about, colloquially, owning your own home.
And would we see that just disappear and become something of history - or would we take action, would we take responsibility?
You can make real change that makes a real difference, even if that carries a political risk.
That is the choice we made in our Budget.
That’s what our reforms are all about.
Importantly as well, contrary to the questions asked in Parliament this week and the chaos that was behind the train wreck that was behind last night.
It didn't make it through the first interview and 7.30 without completely collapsing in the public.
No costings, no answers to anything at all.
What we're doing, it's still allowing negative gearing.
People can invest.
But the difference between investing in an existing home and investing in a new home, a new build, is simply this:
If people, investors, want to negatively gear and invest in growing their future assets and wealth, that's fine.
If they're doing that in an existing home, then they're competing against first home owners, in particular.
People who want that roof over their head to live in the home.
And they have an advantage, by definition - the tax system.
But that is simply unfair, and it has entrenched a division which is there.
But from now on their investment will also deliver a return for the country - by boosting housing supply.
The difference is, if they're investing in a new build in order to build their assets and their future wealth, they're also investing in the nation's future assets and future wealth.
Because they're building supply.
And that's why our reform is pro-supply, pro-aspirations of people both investing and owning their own home.
And that's why we will be out there each and every day arguing for what the policy is, and the criticisms are all about what the policy isn't.
Including on the front page of a couple of papers today, talking about things that just aren't there, going forward as well from the usual sources.
So this will be an enormous difference.
Within less than 24 hours of our Budget outlining these generational reforms, the Liberal and National parties declared that not only would they oppose them – they intended to repeal them.
Sound familiar?
The last election campaign, they said they'd repeal our tax cuts as well.
Angus Taylor went to the last election promising higher taxes for all 14 million Australians.
Now, he said he would go to the next election saying he'll repeal our housing reforms.
He has staked his leadership on a plan to bring back a system that Australians know is broken.
And that tells you everything about the cul-de-sac the Liberals have driven themselves into.
On every issue that matters – not only are the Coalition in denial about the challenges facing Australians, they are actively campaigning against the solutions.
And that is a choice that will define the next two years.
The Liberals seeking to entrench unfairness.
The Liberals focusing solely on fighting One Nation.
Labor fighting to build our nation for everyone, for all Australians going forward.
Only the Labor Party are fighting to expand opportunity and to support aspiration.
And in the Budget Reply last night, just one of the little nuances that were there, to show where their focus is, a distinction that I haven't heard any serious political leader in mainstream politics use before - he spoke about Australians and migrants.
I was born here. I'm a proud Australian, but I also know that people who come here and build a life in business, in politics, in civil society, in communities right around this great country are proud Australians as well.
And it's a distinction that frankly diminishes Angus Taylor in this country, and in my view, simply discounts his legitimacy to lead the whole of Australia.
A country that, with the exception of First Nations Australians, are all migrants or descendants of migrants.
In the Government he led, Ben Chifley served as both Prime Minister and Treasurer.
A bit like Scott Morrison…except that people actually knew about it.
In 1949, Chifley concluded his final Budget speech by saying:
“I believe also that our present problems of fuel and power can be solved, opening up immense industrial possibilities.
Housing, difficult though it has been in recent years, will be steadily overcome if we keep up our efforts.”
A reminder to us all that in the life of a nation, challenges come and go…and sometimes they come back.
But the resonance of Chifley’s words goes beyond coincidence.
Because he backed that note of optimism, with a call to action.
He went on:
“We should accept as a common aim the future greatness and security of Australia, and as a common responsibility that it rests with us in our own generation to do our utmost to achieve these things.”
Eight decades of change separates Ben Chifley’s Australia from ours.
Yet the Budget we delivered this week holds true to those same values.
The same imperative to build our national resilience, to invest in our energy security and make more things here.
And the same ambition for Australia’s future.
The same confidence in our people and their ability to solve the problems confronting us and seize the opportunities ahead of us.
And – every bit as importantly – the same sense of responsibility to the next generation.
The oldest and most Australian aspiration of them all: passing on a better life with greater opportunity to those who come after us.
In a time of global uncertainty, these are the enduring Australian values that shaped our Budget.
They are the values that drive our Government.
And they are the values that will shape and secure our nation’s future.
I wish you all the best for your conference.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their Elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge Dame Quentin Bryce, former Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Victorian Premier Jacinta Allan and my parliamentary colleagues.
Director of the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Professor Kathryn North.
Professor North is an absolute champion for innovation in Australian medical research – and for young people.
I’d also like to extend my thanks MCRI Board and Committee Members, including Co-Chairs Sarah Murdoch and Patrick Houlihan.
And of course, MCRI staff and research associates.
It is such a pleasure to be with you – in a room filled with intelligent, compassionate Australians – to celebrate 40 years of the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute.
40 years of positive and substantial impact.
At a similar event four decades ago, at the launch of what was known then as the Murdoch Institute for Research into Birth Defects – the great Bob Hawke gave a speech.
In doing so, he drew the nation’s attention to the budding ambition of the Institute and its already vital work.
In his words, the Institute’s mission was to “protect future generations of Australian children from suffering.”
It was a worthy vision back in 1986, just as it is now.
And as we come together tonight to survey and celebrate the intervening 40 years of work and success, it is clear that the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute has delivered on that primary and essential vision – to protect children from suffering.
It has done that by driving an agenda to improve children’s health outcomes across the breadth of the medical field.
The development of an oral vaccine for rotavirus that can be administered at birth.
Pioneering stem cell and gene therapy research.
Improving our understanding of concussion and its impacts.
Developing cutting edge in-utero diagnoses.
And the vital work of taking Australian research out into our region.
Helping to advance the health of children within our Pacific family.
These are just some accomplishments, drawn from a long list.
But they illustrate why it is no surprise the MCRI has been honoured among the top three child health research centres in the world.
That is an incredible achievement.
But international rankings are only one half of the story.
Because tonight we also see – and celebrate – a very human legacy.
Four decades of young lives changed.
Of children saved.
Of families given new and better chances.
Eight days ago, I saw that difference for myself firsthand.
Visiting the Institute, I met a brilliant boy of sixteen, James. He’s here tonight – and we will have the privilege of hearing from him later.
James lives with a difficult condition – he was born with only half a heart.
Hearing him describe the difference the MCRI has made to him and his family was so powerful.
The visionary impact of its stem cell researchers.
The compassion of its doctors.  
Today, James not only has the gift of life – but he is living it to the full.
There are so many stories like James’.
And they all begin with the contribution of two great Australians.
Dame Elisabeth Murdoch and Professor David Danks.
Two people who combined science with philanthropy.
And research with compassion.
Furthering a shared commitment to making a difference.
It was their foresight that transformed a handful of researchers into a world class centre of medical excellence.
And – from the outset – provided it with the confidence and agility, to adapt and evolve and grow, to meet new challenges.
Because the nature of the health risks we face today are not what they were in 1986.
In part, that is because of the work of institutes like the MCRI.
Leaps and bounds in progress mean breakthroughs in treatment and prevention, have reduced the prevalence and severity of some conditions.
But it is also true that in 2026, threats to public health are more complex.
We see that in the MCRI’s investigations into the impact of obesity.
Into the prevalence of severe allergies and chronic genetic diseases in children.
The challenge of mental health in young people, and its insidious connection with the digital world.
These shifting health risks remind us why our public health response needs to be dynamic, evidence based and centred on prevention.
That is something my Government takes seriously.
It is why we legislated a world-leading social media ban for under-16s.
Because we know there can be a corrosive link between young people’s use of social media, and the state of their mental and physical health.
And it’s why in the Budget on Tuesday, my Government committed to increase disbursements from the Medical Research Future Fund to $1 billion by 2030.
Because like the MCRI, we recognise that the gold standard of healthcare is the prevention of future harms.
That’s also why I am so proud that tonight I can announce the Australian Government will commit $5 million to establish a Distinguished Fellow for Prevention and Early Intervention in Child Health, based at the MCRI.
This funding will also support the work of postdoctoral fellows, PhD scholarships and research costs.
It’s about honouring the 40-year legacy of the Institute.
And securing its future as a hub of world leading research.
Aiding its contribution to stopping illness and suffering before it starts.
So the health challenges faced by young Australians don’t grow with them as they grow up.
Just as it did 40 years ago, today Australian medicine leads the world.
And I lead a Government that is proud to be investing in the key pillars of Australia’s health system.
Making Medicare stronger.
Securing the future of the NDIS – including with a new Thriving Kids program, built on the expert advice of the Institute.
We’re training more midwives, more nurses and more doctors.
Because quality, affordable health care is a measure of our national character and a marker of our national values.
That Australian sense of equity, of fairness and dignity.
An ethos I know that is echoed at the MCRI.
Friends, as we look back over the last forty years and ahead to forty more.
It is clear no one in this room could ever say, “my work here is done.”
Like those who built the MCRI, you can only pass on the torch to the next generation.
Because there is always another challenge to grapple with.
Another child in need.
And in that child, a future to secure.
A future for that one young soul.
But also, a healthier and brighter collective future for our nation, and the world.
With one eye down the barrel of the microscope, and the other firmly fixed on the horizon, for forty years the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute has been forging that better future.
Each of you can be proud of the legacy you have shaped.
The lives you have saved.
And the promise of what you are yet to achieve over the next four decades, and beyond.


Well, thanks very much, Robbo. I'm very pleased and honoured to be here, and I acknowledge all the special guests who are here, but particularly the family of Ruth Kenny, who are here.
Thank you, Andrew Lancaster, for your passion. 
You pitched up pretty hard for this project to receive federal funding and it's worth every dollar of it, because this is an investment in this region, as well as this club. 
And St George Dragons, of course, have such a long history, have a short history as the united club that now you can become under one roof, which will see you – I’m in West Tigers territory, and I see that when you don't have everything under one roof with one direction, that can cause some issues. 
I have no doubt that this will be the day in which people look back and say that's where the Dragons went from where they are today, into the success that historically they have been. 
It's important to acknowledge the history of your great club.
Eleven consecutive Premierships make this club for a forerunner, St George, the most successful team club in any team sport in history in Australia, and indeed the world.
Unbeaten – and that is a great history. 
And the prize when combined with the Rugby League nursery that the Illawarra has been going back to 1908, this is a region that has produced some of Australia's finest footballers over many, many years. 
And the Bruce Gordon Centre will be a magnificent new home for it. 
It brings together the highest standards in elite sporting infrastructure with the very best of community sport facilities.
Because at its heart, that's what Rugby League is about. It's about your identity and being able to, no matter how your club's going, people will back you in. 
And the passion that I've seen from Andrew, but also from Alison and her fellow team in state and federal who are here, and local government indeed, is something that I've seen over a long period of time, and something that you can't replace. 
Clubs go through tough times.
I was on the board of Souths when we struggled to put a team on the field when we came back after our dismissal.
And every day, though, that passion comes from fans. 
Rugby League is something more than just a sport, it's about who people are. 
People support their team because their mum or dad did, or because someone they knew played for the club.
And you can't change teams. 
You’re passionate about the way that you go through, and that is so important. 
It's also really important at a time where we look at young Australians, and we worry about the rising issues of mental health, the rising issues of physical health as well. 
The role that team sports can play in getting people off their devices and onto the fields is so important as we go forward. 
But it's also important that this club will be able to promote junior sport here as well. 
The connection with the University of Wollongong is so important as well, and the pathways that are created.
Young people playing team sport teaches them to win, it teaches them to lose. 
It teaches them the value as well that you can have the best player in the comp, but unless you’re part of a team doesn't count for much. 
Pretty hard in Rugby League, in spite of Damien Cook being robbed of an absolutely great try on the weekend. 
It is very rare that someone scores a try one out like that. 
Normally you need a great team, and you need to have got the pass, or someone to have kicked through in that way, someone who had made the tackle.
So, it is so important.
We've got our social media ban that the Minister for Sport and also in charge of is the Minister for Communications – that is literally about making a difference to young people's lives. 
Getting off the keyboards and off their screens and onto the fields, and being able to come here to this facility that we had a sneaky look at this morning.
Kids will come down and watch the heroes. 
They’ll watch their heroes, they’ll watch them train, they'll be able to talk to them. 
And one of the things I find about Rugby League as well, the toughest bloke on the field is always just so generous with their time. 
And this club I've seen that firsthand as we go forward.
On that note, I do want to acknowledge that Jai Arrow is going through a really tough time. 
He is a general giant off the field. I met his Dad after an Origin game. A very proud Queenslander as well, and I think all rugby league followers thoughts are with Jai and his wonderful family at this difficult time, as well.
The new High Performance and Community Centre does everything as well with its connection with the university and students and researchers, all the partnerships and connections it has right across the region. 
This will be a hub for the great Illawarra community – function rooms and space to come together, as well as creating pathways for the next generation of Dragons. 
And one of the things that is remarkable is how fast change can occur.
When I was playing rugby league, badly, that’s why I had to go into politics, the idea that elite Women's Rugby League would be where itis is just amazing. 
In a very short period of time, 10 years ago, we weren't talking about State of Origin. And I watched Game Two, and it was a cracker. 
It was a cracker, and that is so important as well. 
So, these facilities will also make women and girls feel welcome and part of the club from the moment that they walk in the door.
This is a great day for the Dragons. 
I wish you all the very best, both on the field and off the field as well. 
All Australians can back every team versus the Warriors the on the weekend. 
And for the Dragons, I do want to say though, something like this doesn’t just happen. 
I'm coming in at the business end here, but something like this happens because people are really passionate and people work so hard to turn what is a vision into a reality. 
And there's no doubt in my mind at all that this will make for an extremely successful time, which is what this region deserves. 
And something that the Dragons certainly, now today, start a new chapter in what is a very proud history. Well done, thank you.


I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their Elders past, present and emerging.
And I want to say that last night I did one of the best things you can do in Melbourne, The Long Walk to the MCG.
Delegates, it is an absolute pleasure to be here in Victoria, among so many true believers.
I acknowledge the Premier of Victoria, my friend Jacinta Allan who will address you this morning. I acknowledge her family, who I got to meet earlier.
Jacinta is defined by her enthusiasm and by her determination to make Victoria stronger and fairer – stronger because it is fairer.
JA loves this state: from the growing regions she calls home, to the great global city her infrastructure has transformed.
That pride in Victoria, that belief in Victorians and their capacity and that investment in Victoria’s future success is the story of her Labor Government.
And that’s why, with your help and hard work and dedication and passion, Labor will win again in November.
I acknowledge all my parliamentary colleagues, led by the best Deputy Prime Minister anyone could ask for, Richard Marles. 
I also want to acknowledge the Victorian members of the Class of 2025, who joined the Labor Caucus on 3rd of May last year.
It is a privilege to see all of you here together, one year after Australians put their trust in Labor.
After 2022, many commentators said we’d reached our high-water mark in Victoria.
But then Mary Doyle won in Aston.
And Jodie Belyea won in Dunkley. My second favourite Jodie on earth.
And then in 2025, we didn’t just hold every seat.
Matt Gregg won Deakin.
Gabriel Ng won Menzies.
Sarah Witty won Melbourne.
And Michelle Ananda-Rajah won a third spot on the Senate ticket – the first time at a half Senate election since 2007.
None of that happened by accident.
It happened because we had outstanding candidates, terrific volunteers and dedicated supporters who worked tirelessly, passionately advocating for our plan to build Victoria’s future.
To build Australia’s future.
Delegates,
Today marks exactly four years since I had the extraordinary honour of being sworn in as Australia’s 31st Prime Minister.
Four years ago, the Australian people rejected the politics of division and denial that defined a wasted decade of Coalition government.
And backed our plan for a better future, a stronger economy and a fairer society.
Where hard work is rewarded and opportunity is expanded.
With no one held back, and no one left behind.
In those four years, the world has thrown a lot at Australia – and we know that uncertainty in the world is still putting people under pressure here at home.
But in the face of global challenges, we’ve held true to Australian values.
And we’ve kept our focus on delivering for the Australian people, each and every one.
Demonstrating the power of Labor governments to change things for the better.
That’s why we’re strengthening Medicare: with record funding for our public hospitals.
And delivering a network of 137 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics – right across the country.
Including 29 we promised in Victoria – every one of which is open, right now, including every weekend.
Those Urgent Care Clinics have been visited more than 620,000 times by Victorians accessing the free healthcare they need, closer to home.
411 Victorian GP clinics have now switched over to bulk-billing every patient, every time.
This takes the total number of fully bulk billing GP clinics in Victoria to over 1,030.
And we’ve opened new Endo and Pelvic Pain Clinics – from Werribee to Dandenong – because our Labor Government takes women’s health seriously.
Now something that in the lead up to 2022, we didn't promise, but we've done it anyway. 
For the first time ever, in the Education State, we are putting every student in every government school on the path to full and fair funding.
Investing an additional $2.5 billion in Victorian schools.
Together, our governments are planning and building the suburbs and cities of the future.
Transforming Melbourne’s transport infrastructure with projects like the North East Link and the Western Freeway Corridor.
And as part of our generational investment in Airport Rail – as part of SRL – together we are expanding Sunshine Station, and electrifying trains out to Melton.
So we can connect the Airport to the CBD – but also, so we can better connect the CBD to the West.
And of course, I am proud of the Commonwealth’s commitment to the transformational Suburban Rail Loop, including an additional $3.8 billion in last week’s Budget.
Just a few weeks ago, I was out at the site where tunnel boring machines are being assembled and will be in the ground by the year’s end.
The SRL will join up railway lines in four different directions.
Including V/Line services.
Charting a course for Victoria’s future.
Slashing travel times and taking cars off the road.
Delivering thousands of jobs.
Fostering the development of new homes close to the schools and jobs in the urban centres that people want to live in. 
Reshaping the flow of Melbourne’s public transport network so commuters who want to get between suburbs don’t have to travel into the city – and then back out again.
This is the sort of project that defines the public transport infrastructure of global cities.
London, Paris, New York.
And through the Suburban Rail Loop, Melbourne will join those peer cities as a modern, future-looking global centre.
Because Labor will deliver it.
Together, federal and Victorian Labor are building more homes.
And together, we are helping more Australians to buy them.
Faster approvals, better planning and more new homes closer to the city – so young Victorians can buy a home in the same neighbourhood where they grew up, close to family and friends.
And greater investment in social and affordable homes, so essential workers can live closer to their vital jobs, school and public transport.
Victoria is also the first home buyer capital of the nation.
Since coming to government, our 5 per cent deposit plan has helped over 80,000 Victorians buy a home of their own. 
And through our $47 billion Homes for Australia Plan, we are throwing everything at housing supply.
That includes Help to Buy and Build to Rent.
The National Housing Accord.
And the Housing Australia Future Fund.
Last weekend, I visited a HAFF site in Rosanna with Kate Thwaites and Clare O’Neil.
When I first visited during the election campaign, it was a construction site.
Now, there are 45 new social and affordable homes – right there, where they’re needed – next to the train station, right near the shops.
That’s what we’re building on, all over the country.
And the Liberals want to stop in its tracks.
They have spent four years trying to block every single housing policy we have brought to Parliament.
At the last election, they promised to abolish the HAFF, Build to Rent and Help to Buy.
And last week, they committed to do it all again.
Because they have learned nothing.
Their plan on housing is tools down.
They want to stop construction of tens of thousands of homes across Victoria and the nation.
To remove the Commonwealth’s leadership in unlocking new housing supply.
And to make it harder for Australians to get into a home of their own.
Remember this – for most of their time in government, they didn't even bother to have a housing minister. 
They are the blockers and the wreckers – we are the builders and we’re getting on with it.
Together, we have thrown everything at housing supply.
But it is clear we need to make a bigger difference.
Because it has never been harder for young people to buy a home of their own.
Even though so many of them are doing everything right:
Working hard.
Saving hard for a deposit.
Going to dozens of inspections and auctions.
For so many, it feels like they are paddling furiously, but going nowhere.
And they are right to feel that.
Because the truth is, the system isn’t working.
Since 1999, house prices have risen by more than 400 per cent – more than twice as fast as incomes.
And every Saturday, just like every Saturday, young people are out there. They've been missing out. They go to an auction and they're there bidding away for the home that they want to live in. The security that comes from that roof over your head, but the person next to them has got someone else on their side – the Australian taxpayer. And because of the tax breaks that are there, it's not an equal process. Because if it's a matter of an extra $20,000 to bid or $30,000 to bid, they know that they can do that in the comfort that that will be an increase in their tax deduction, that all of you and every Australian taxpayer is their partner here. But if you're trying to buy your own home, you don't have that.
That’s why, put simply, we are reforming negative gearing and capital gains.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I refuse to stand back and say, 'We know it's a broken system. We know it's locking the entire generation of the Australians out of the housing market, but if there's only something we could do."
We're doing something. Not the easy thing, but it's the right thing.
Because I want to make this very simple point to the people in this room, but most important, to the people out there: Labor is the party of aspiration and we will not allow Australia to become a country where aspiration is only for some.
Our reforms are about backing aspiration for all.
Bringing the great Australian dream of home ownership back in reach for a new generation.
Our changes are pro-aspiration, and pro-supply, so we can help people get into a home of their own.
We also back aspiration for people to invest in increasing their wealth and their assets. That's a good thing. If people want to invest in property, use negative gearing and build their wealth, good on them.
But from now on there'll be a distinction. They will also be investing in new housing supply.
And that changes the dynamic because when they invest in the property market, they will be investing in their future assets and their future wealth, but they're also investing in the future assets and wealth for our nation.  Friends, we want Australians to earn more and keep more of what they earn.
That’s why we have backed 5 consecutive increases to the minimum wage.
There's a really easy figure when you're in your workplace to remember when you're discussing these issues of how many times the Liberals have ever made a submission to the Fair Work Commission supporting the maintenance of real wages or a real increase.
A big duck egg, zero. Has never happened. Really easy to remember. One of the great distinctions in Australian politics.
As a result of the measures we've taken already, the lowest-paid workers are more than $175 a week better off compared to when we took office in 2022. 
A few years ago I came to one of these conferences in another state for the north, and then I went to National Conference, and I spoke about junior pay rates, spoke about the need to lift them up. Why was it that you were discriminated against if you were an 18- to 20-year-old and paid less, as I was at that time, working at all sorts of jobs, at Maccas or Grace Brothers or Pancakes on the Rocks or various jobs. 
Now, we have done something that you have all helped with through the mighty trade union movement. We have abolished junior pay rates. This is the result of a long, hard-fought campaign. Fought for by the people of this room, I'm sure, not just for years, but over decades. Although, it wasn't that long ago that I was in Year 11.
Finally, 18- to 20-year-olds get paid like the adults that they are.
It’s also why in our first term we cut income taxes not just for some, but for every single taxpayer.
And why we will cut them again on the 1st July this year – and we'll cut them again on the 1st July next year.
Our $1000 instant tax deduction will put more money in the pockets of over 6 million taxpayers – especially those on low and middle incomes.
Now, in the Budget we announced our new fifth instalment of our income tax cuts, the Working Australians Tax Offset. Delivering a permanent tax cut of $250 for every Australian wage earner.
Now, all up, these changes mean the average worker will be $2,800 a year better off under Labor.
Now, that's about delivering real, lasting cost-of-living relief into the future.
Taking pressure off households who are doing it tough right now.
But it’s also about rebalancing and reforming the tax system so that it better rewards hard work and aspiration, making it fairer into the future.
Because for too long, income from wages – from your labour – has been taxed too heavily compared to income derived from assets.
And that’s why the changes we are making to negative gearing and capital gains, to trusts, and to income taxes add up to a better tax system.
Because the fact is that most people are working their guts out for a wage so they can provide for their family and build a better life.
These Australians, millions of hardworking people, will never be able to access a trust. Never sat around a kitchen table and thought, have we thought of setting up a trust? I mean, seriously.
The biggest investment the majority of Australians ever make – and the biggest hope they have – is to work hard and buy a home of their own.
That’s what generations of Australians have aspired to. That sense of security. That stake in our economy and our nation’s future. 
But they want something else as well. They want their kids to have more opportunity than they had. And that's why, when you know that the next generation are doing it tougher than my generation, that you've got to do something about it.
And that's why we're rebalancing the way working Australians pay tax by better aligning income from work with income from assets.
We can open up that aspiration, giving more people a chance to get ahead.
Friends, this is the positive agenda we are arguing for, it’s the case we are making all over the country.
The big reforms that only Labor Governments ever deliver. Because we are not in Government to occupy space, to count the years and pass the time.
We are here to change the country for the better. I see the responsibility I have as leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party to the people here, not only the delegates, people here who are the observers, the people who ask for absolutely nothing, except they know in their guts that it's only Labor that does the big things that make a difference to the people who really need a government to make a difference to their lives.
My mum was a life member of the Labor Party. She never held a position as a delegate to the FEC or the SEC or let alone the State Conference. She handed out how to votes, sold raffle tickets, did what she could. She's the sort of person who built our movement, and she's the sort of person as well who lived in one house, public housing. Her whole life. Born and died 65 years later. And she drummed into me, as working class people do, when you get a chance to buy a home, get a roof over your head. 
And the message that we're sending through our Budget of just a week ago is a message that's consistent with that which working class people has said to their sons and daughters through generations in this great country. Aspire to a better life than we had. And that's what my Government is doing.
Deepening aspiration. Broadening opportunity. Building our collective economic and social resilience.
We seek to do that for all Australians, not just some – no matter their background, or where they live.
That has always been a fundamental difference between us and our opponents in the three right wing parties and their allies.
And never more so than right now. The Liberals talk Australia down, we’re here to build Australia up.
The Liberals want to undercut opportunity, our plan creates opportunity.  
The Liberals want to compete One Nation.
We’re focused on building up our Australian nation.
One of my opponents is going around talking about the difference between ‘migrants’ and ‘Australians’ as if someone cannot be both.
As if somehow, people who work hard and choose this as the place to raise their children and build a better life aren’t quite Australian enough.
They have never heard a serious mainstream political leader use that sort of language.
Talking down the contribution of generations of migrant communities.
Parents, grandparents.
Generations of Australians.
That tells you how low the modern Liberal Party have sunk. How far they have drifted from the political centre – and from reality – in their pursuit of the far right.
Delegates, this makes our task all the more important.
It’s up to all of us to make the case for positive change.
To deliver the progress that people deserve.
To bring Australians together.
By rewarding aspiration.
Making sure people get a fair crack.
Creating the conditions where people can work towards something that is better because it is shared.
That is what Labor stands for.
That is what Victorian Labor stands for.
It is the future that the people of Victoria deserve.
And it is worth fighting for, together.


Can I welcome you, Travis, here to Parliament House, to the centre of our nation's democracy.
Next year, just down the road there, we’ll celebrate a century since Parliament first met here in Canberra.
And at that time, it was of course, the First Nations man walked here, because First Nations people weren't included at that time, of course.
And we know that back in 1901 there was no one from First Nations people at the Royal Exhibition Hall in Melbourne, where just a couple of weeks ago we celebrated the formation of Australia as a Federation, when we came together.
But it is unfinished business, the business of reconciliation.
We, those of us who are either descendants of, who've come to Australia as migrants or are descendants of people who've come here, share a great privilege, that sharing this continent with the oldest continuous culture on Earth.
And today, like every day, I pay tribute to the Traditional Owners of the land on which we're meeting, and pay my respect to elders, past, present, and emerging. And Auntie Violet, my friend is here as well, as such an important person here in Canberra.
We have a long way to go.
The journey of reconciliation, though, does advance.
There are bumps in the road.
It's not a straight journey, as progress never is.
But I assure you that we'll continue to walk with you.
I had the privilege on Friday night of walking with Michael Long near the G, and that was a very uplifting experience, the celebration that occurred there, recognition of First Nations people in the Sir Doug Nicholls Round.
Something – I was there and Richmond hosted the event.
There was absolute respect.
And we'll be a stronger nation when there is proper and full recognition of First Nations people, and of course a full acknowledgement of our history, the pluses and the negatives.
But First Nations people are the core, the central part of the Australian story going back 65,000 years.
So, I thank you for your leadership.
I thank everyone who's come from far and distant lands here, from different countries.
I was with Marion and Malarndirri in Alice, just, seems like a long time ago, but just last Wednesday as well with family and elders there for what has been a very difficult and traumatic experience for First Nations people everywhere.
So, my government will continue to engage with you, and I thank you for being here today.
You've got a fantasti, I'm very proud of the Minister that we have following along from the work that Linda Burney did.
Pleased to see so many of my colleagues from the government here.
And we will continue to have engagement and dialogue with you on how we continue to walk towards that objective, which is in the interest not just of First Nations people, but in the interests of uplifting all Australians as well.


Can I also begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging, and thank you for that wonderful Acknowledgement of Country. 
This is the fourth time that I’ve had the opportunity to address this Conference as Prime Minister of Australia.
Looking back on the discussions we’ve had here is a reminder of just how much the world has thrown at our nation and our economy in that relatively short period of time.
In 2023, the conversation was dominated by the ongoing inflationary impact of the global supply shock which had followed the pandemic, combined with the international energy crisis brought on by what is unfortunately ongoing, the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
By the time I was with you last year, the focus was on the global fallout from the United States’ tariffs and the support our Government was providing to Australian industry and agriculture.
Now, back then, if you did a survey in this room and asked people to show you the Strait of Hormuz on a map, if it was more than half of you, then you would have been doing pretty well.
But we know, we are all acutely aware, that the effective closure of what is one of the world's most important shipping routes has created the biggest spike in the price of petrol and diesel in history. 
It is extraordinary to think that story has fallen off the front page – but we know the situation is far from resolved.
Which is why our Government is working every day to secure shiploads of petrol, diesel, jet fuel and fertiliser, above and beyond normal volumes.
So that we have the supply in place to support our farmers, our truckies, our miners and our regions if things get worse.
The nature, and the cause, of each of those global shocks has been different.
But they are not a disconnected sequence, their impacts overlap – and they add up.
And they have taken a compounding toll on wages, inflation, investment, productivity – and of course on people.
Indeed, in some ways the pattern of the 2020s has been that just as workers and employers are dusting themselves off from the last international shock, the next one arrives.
These headline events – pandemic, conflict and crisis – are not passing storms. They are the extremes of a more volatile global economic climate.
We see that in the breakdown of the predictable world of ever-expanding free trade and globalisation.
Ongoing strategic competition in our region.
Artificial Intelligence disrupting and re-shaping the future of work in ways that all of us are yet to fully quantify.
And the global shift to clean energy, the biggest economic change since the industrial revolution.
It is a powerful tribute to the resilience of Australian business and the Australian people that that over the last four years, 1.2 million new jobs have been created, with the lowest average unemployment for 50 years. Wages growth over three per cent in every quarter. The gender pay gap at an all-time low. And gross debt over $170 billion lower than we inherited – saving $70 billion in interest costs over the decade.
This national resilience was underlined in Wednesday’s National Accounts.
Where the Australian economy continued to grow faster than almost every major advanced economy. Growth driven – overwhelmingly – by business investment.
Indeed, as a share of our economy, business investment is now at its highest level in a decade.
That resilience is remarkable.
But it is not natural, or inevitable – it is structural.
Which is why the Budget that the Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, delivered last month, focused on both resilience and reform.
That combination – and that balance – drives our Government. 
We do not view global uncertainty as an excuse to delay – we see it as a reason to act.
They say the best time to fix the roof is when the sun is shining – but the work we have to do cannot wait for blue skies.
Hard decisions cannot be put on hold for easier times.
The challenges confronting Australia are too urgent to hang back.
And the opportunities ahead of us are all too important to miss.
Our approach is about dealing with the immediate concerns here and now – but in a way that builds for the future.
So we don’t settle for just getting through this current crisis.
We learn from it – and change for the better because of it.
That means building up our fuel security and our energy sovereignty.
Broadening and diversifying our economic base and our manufacturing capacity, through our Future Made in Australia agenda.
Strengthening our trade ties in our region – and securing new market access for Australia in Europe, India and the UAE.  
Capitalising on the global investment in AI that is flowing into Australia.  
By making sure that new data centres bring cleaner, cheaper energy into the grid and put downward pressure on bills for industry, small business and households.
And in everything we do, pushing for a long overdue turnaround in productivity.
Our Government knows how important it is that we keep working to boost Australia’s productivity so that our economy has the headroom to grow, without putting pressure on inflation, and so that the sacrifices Australians have made through this decade are repaid with lower taxes, higher wages and a better standard of living.
This is a longstanding challenge – and it is one that business and government can only solve together.
Last month’s Budget demonstrates we are determined to do our part.
We are speeding-up approvals on housing, energy and resources – combining state and federal processes to cut out a whole layer of process and paperwork.
Permanently introducing two‑year loss carry‑back for all companies up to $1 billion in turnover.
Delivering loss refundability for start‑ups, to help new businesses invest and grow in their first two years.
Expanding tax incentives for venture capital and making it easier for Australian firms to commercialise their breakthroughs.
Improving our Research and Development Tax Incentive to support businesses that invest in innovation.
And breaking down outdated state and territory divides on skills and standards that make it harder to find and hire essential workers.
Our Government’s agenda for growth and productivity is about investing in our national strengths and broadening them out.
Incentivising business to create jobs in our nation – and engage with our region.
Empowering workers to learn new skills and embrace new technologies.
Backing small businesses that back themselves.  
And – above all – building on the values that unite us, as Australians.
The deliberate choices we have made, over generations, about the kind of country we want Australia to be.
Where wages provide fair reward for hard work.
A world-class education system where your opportunities are earned on merit, not limited by wealth. 
Health care that doesn’t depend on your employer’s plan, or how much you earn.
Universal Medicare that every family can count on and afford, wherever they live.
Universal superannuation, not only providing working people dignity and security when they retire, but also making every worker an investor in our economy, a shareholder in our national success.
And home ownership.
Not as a distant dream but as an aspiration that working people on average incomes can save for – and achieve.
More than just a roof over your head, the foundation on which you can build a good life for yourself, start a family and plan for your future.
That’s the Australian way to build resilience.
A model for growth and prosperity that gives our citizens a stake in the economy – and a stake in our nation’s future. 
Now, all of us take pride in that.
We recognise this is part of what makes Australia different to the rest of the world.
And we should never discount that the rest of the world recognises this too. 
There’s a reason that young expats come home to start a family.
Or people who come here to study want to come back as citizens, to live and work and give their children an Australian education.
There’s a reason that so many members of the Singaporean diaspora call Australia home.
Or that 1 in 8 of all New Zealanders live here in Australia.
I put that in because I'm meeting the New Zealand Prime Minister later today.
And whenever I meet with investors in New York, or Abu Dhabi, or Jakarta, or the EU, they want to do business here in Australia.
Because whether they are building a data centre or opening a retail chain, they recognise that investing in this country means buying-in to a stable democracy with a skilled workforce.
With an abundance of clean, cheap energy.
Every natural resource that will shape the future of the global economy.
And trade partnerships with the fastest-growing region of the world in human history.
Building our resilience is about building on our strengths – and addressing our vulnerabilities.
The disruption to global supply chains we saw during pandemic and now again in this fuel crisis have laid bare the fiction that Australia could run as a just-in-time economy.
That our country could offshore manufacturing, cut skills, close refineries, privatise assets and narrow-down our industrial base, and still get by as the last link in the global supply chain, because someone else, somewhere else would be there to sell us what we needed cheaper than we could make it ourselves.
That mindset left our economy exposed.
It also took good, secure jobs away from regional communities.
It hollowed out suburbs built around industrial centres.
And it fed a perception that economic change was something imposed, something that happened to people.
A wave that eroded old certainties, without creating new opportunities.
For years, the housing market has been feeding that same sentiment.
The changes the Howard Government made in 1999 to Capital Gains Tax were supposed to boost investment in the share market.
Instead, they turbo-charged property as an investment vehicle.
And that fundamentally altered the equation in a bad way for first home buyers – and for young Australians.
Since 1999, house prices have risen by over 400 percent.
More than twice as fast as average incomes.
And in the same period, home ownership rates for Australians aged between 25 and 34 fell by 7 percentage points.
It is no wonder that more and more young people – and indeed their parents and grandparents – have been worrying they will never own a home.
That feeling of having the deck stacked against you is only magnified when young Australians turn up to an auction and get outbid by property investors being given a leg-up from the tax system. If you're there at an auction as a first homebuyer, as a young couple, and you're competing against an investor. And the investor knows they've got a partner there with them, every taxpayer. So, if they're going to go next to $20,000 or $50,000, they can do so now, and that will lead to a reduction in their tax in which they pay. It is no wonder that people have felt frustrated by that personal and very real experience.
Our reforms to negative gearing and capital gains tax remove these distortions.
Bringing more first home buyers back into the market.
We’re preserving negative gearing for new builds – to boost supply.
And investors – across the board – will still get a discount, but one based on inflation.
Around 90 per cent of small business owners will still be eligible for four existing concessions, which remain in place.
Meaning if they do decide to sell their business in the future, they will pay less tax or even zero tax on their capital gain.
What we're doing is we're are rebalancing the system so that investment decisions are driven by economic reasons, not tax outcomes.
So we better align the way Australia treats income earned from work, compared to income derived from assets.  
This matters for all of us.
For Australia’s economic outlook, for business confidence, for growth and productivity and living standards.
And importantly, for our democracy and social cohesion more broadly.
Because when Australians feel like the economy isn’t working for them.
That their hard work isn’t adding-up to fair reward.
That they’re worried their children or grandchildren will have less security and fewer opportunities than they did.
This sentiment hasn’t come out of nowhere.
It is pressure that has built up, over years.
And it’s not just a vague feeling – it’s a reality that working Australians are up against, it’s something they can see for themselves.
It is a logical response, not just an emotional one.
And it deserves practical solutions, not slogans.
You might be able to build a brand of politics out of amplifying frustration and seeking to harvest it – but that doesn’t take our country forward.
What counts, what matters, what makes a difference, is whether you have a plan to do something about it.
That is why our Government does not stop at acknowledging Australians are under pressure – we're acting on it.
By delivering real change that makes a positive difference to people’s lives.
Whether it is Medicare, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, the housing market, our skills and migration system, our energy grid, employment services or the tax system, this kind of meaningful, structural reform is hard work.
If big change was easy, Australia would not be two decades into a national conversation about why we urgently need tax reform.
We do not doubt the challenges we are up against.
But we approach them with optimism, with determination and with the clear understanding that doing nothing is simply not an option.
If you look around the world, you can see what happens to countries and economies when people make up their minds that the system is broken beyond repair.
The decision for Australia is clear.
We can choose whether the social and economic dislocation we see overseas is a warning that we act on, or a preview of what is to come.
Our Government has no intention of standing around and wringing our hands about the consequences of a system that isn’t working for people.
Instead, we are acting to fix it.
You saw that again this week:
A real increase in the minimum wage.
The $250 Working Australians Tax Offset.
The $1000 Instant Tax Deduction.
And our reforms to give more young Australians a fair crack at the opportunity of home ownership.
The framework for these changes passed the House of Representatives yesterday.
As we have said all along, we will engage in good faith on the detailed design of the legislation that will follow.
Over the last four years, my door has always been open to discussions with business.
But this is not going to be a long, drawn-out process that ends with fiddling around the edges of the status quo.
Because this moment presents a bigger opportunity for deeper co-operation.
Our Budget – with its productivity reforms and its tax reforms – is further proof that our Government is not here to occupy the space, or pass the time.
We are determined to deliver real change.
We are serious about economic reform.
We will make hard decisions to make it happen.
We will put the long-term national interest, ahead of short-term politics.
And I look forward to continuing to work with the businesses in this room, continuing to engage with the media organisations hosting us here as well.
To build a stronger, more productive and more resilient Australia.
Thanks very much.


For the second time in just three days, the mighty MCG belongs to the memory of Neale Daniher.
In footy’s tribal world of fierce loyalties, there are very few people who have had this whole stadium barracking for them.
Neale Daniher was one.
In a place that has known its fair share of champions and legends, we come together today to remember someone who was so much more than that.
Neale Daniher was a hero.
When confronted with an adversity that most of us cannot imagine, facing odds that could not be beaten, Neale chose to fight.
In doing so, he gave new hope to thousands of Australians living their own struggle against Motor Neurone Disease.
And he inspired all of us with his courage and his determination, his humour and his invincible optimism.
On behalf of all Australians, I offer our nation’s heartfelt condolences to those who knew and loved Neale best.
To Neale’s beloved wife Jan, to his mother Edna, your children Lauren, Luke, Bec and Ben and all the members of the remarkable Daniher family.
And his army of friends.
I hope you have been able to take a measure of comfort from the fact that right across our great country, so many people who never had the privilege of knowing, or even meeting, this wonderful man, loved him and admired him so deeply.
Over the last 12 years, as Neale threw himself into making each Big Freeze bigger than the last, all of us could see how much his battle against the Beast was stealing from him.
Yet none of it diminished him – it enlarged him.
When he lost his voice – his words became more powerful.
When he could no longer walk – more and more Australians put on their beanies and marched at his side.
Because what that brutal disease could never touch, what it could not take away, what remained clear for all to see was the very essence of Neale Daniher.
His incredible mental toughness.
His unshakeable positivity.
And his selflessness.
In 2013, Neale was told to measure his future in just months, yet he dedicated every day of what would turn out to be 13 years to the search for a cure.
Beyond the extraordinary feat of endurance and resilience that represents, the most remarkable thing about the battle Neale fought so bravely, was that it was not for him.
He was truly one of the most positive people I have ever had the honour of meeting, yet not even he imagined that a cure would be discovered in time to save his own life.
Finding a cure was always about saving the lives of others.
It was the same when he was awarded Australian of the Year in 2025.
Neale didn’t see that as an accolade for what he had done – he treated it as a platform to continue his work and share his call to action. He asked us to, in his own words:
“Imagine a world where families don’t lose their loved ones to this cruel disease. 
And imagine the power of what we can achieve together, when we each take small steps to make a difference.” 
That is the world Neale Daniher wanted us to imagine.
It is the future he gave everything to try and bring into being.
And it is the final gift of inspiration he leaves us with.
A choice each of us can make.
A fight that all of us can win.
We will play on, for him. 
May this great Australian rest in eternal peace.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
It is a pleasure to be here among so many incredible people – researchers, clinicians, health workers, support staff.
As together, we celebrate the opening of this new home for the Institute for Musculoskeletal Health.
Into the future, these rooms will serve as the launchpad for your vital work.
The place where each of you will continue to contribute to expanding what we know about musculoskeletal conditions.
And how, as a nation, we can provide the best standard of care for the Australians who suffer from them.
Often unseen, seven million Australians of all ages battle with the burden of these diseases every single day of their lives.
Not just in aged care settings, but at home and in hospitals, in rehabilitation centres and across general practice.
But is your work combining frontline care with quality research that has a huge, real impact on the lives that diverse cross-section of our community.
It is a difference that doesn’t just matter to millions of Australians – it matters to the world.
And that is why today, I was proud to announce the Commonwealth is delivering a record investment into a new Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Conditions Research Mission.
A $100 million commitment delivered through the Medical Research Future Fund, turbocharging research into arthritis and similar diseases.
Because as Australians grow older and as our health needs grow more complex.
It is investments like this that help us to develop a thought-out, national response to health care.
So those Australians who find themselves at risk of developing conditions like arthritis in the future benefit from better prevention.
And so the millions of Australians who live daily with these conditions receive the care and the relief they deserve, to live fuller lives.
As the son of a mother who suffered from rheumatoid arthritis, that mission is particularly close to my heat.
I saw the pain and difficulty of that disease, and how it can make a person suffer.
But I also know that those conditions do not define an individual.
And with the right care and support from those around them, they do not have to limit them, either.
That is why your work is so important.
Because with sharp minds and dedication, you give hope and health to those who need it most.
And you capture the best of the Australian tradition and the Australian spirit – co-operating, driving breakthroughs and making the world a better place.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I also acknowledge Her Excellency the Governor-General, Sam Mostyn; Australian Defence Force leaders; Australian War Memorial Chair Kim Beazley; Australian War Memorial Director Matt Anderson; and my colleagues from across the Parliament.
I extend my respects to all serving Defence members and all veterans here today. You honour us with your presence.
Each year, we begin the Parliamentary year with the Last Post ceremony.
From across the Parliament and across the political spectrum, we join here in solemn remembrance of generations of Australian sacrifice.
We join in gratitude for the difference Australians in uniform have made in the world when it was so desperately needed.
We reflect on the courage and strength of character that, for decades, has defined those who have served in our name.
And, bonded by the power of Lest we forget – that most unadorned of sentences that dwells within us like a heartbeat – we vow to keep the flame of memory burning so brightly that its glow reaches future generations.
Today we adjourned the Parliament so that everyone who wished to could come mark the opening of this Atrium and Anzac Hall, an addition to the Australian War Memorial that makes that flame burns so much brighter.
What a sublime and powerful addition it is. A bold vision turned into a reality that enhances the institution of which it is now part.
It amounts to an act of profound respect from the nation to all who have served in our name, and all who serve now.
The fighters for peace, the keepers of peace.
It honours all who went and all who fell. It honours those who came home, including the many whose hearts never knew peace again.
It is an act of remembrance that also acknowledges that while our troops are supported, not every conflict has been – and that, too, is part of our hard-won freedom.
So much here is on a profoundly human scale.
From the fluffy dice that Captain Lukas Wilds took from his V12 Monaro and carried with him to Afghanistan, to every window on G for George, each one an invitation to imagine the face on the other side as they flew against the odds, ever deeper into enemy skies.
Amid the array of artefacts, read all the words. Listen to the voices.
Look at the faces and get lost amid the smiles, the hope and camaraderie – the counterpoint to war’s relentless, inhuman arithmetic. They are its true cost.
Yet, amid this loss and sacrifice, what pulses so powerfully is life, and an abiding sense of what is worth fighting for. As Australians. As human beings.
It pulses with the hope that drives every peacekeeping mission.
And it pulses with love – along, inevitably, with the grief that is love in the face of the final absence.
I’d like to quote from one letter displayed here. It was written by Hilda Barnes on the 30th of June 1945, about her son Pilot Officer Keith Osmond Barnes, reported missing over Germany in January 1944.
It is a reminder of the forms that hope can take. And I quote:
“… we are still hoping he may be found in hospital somewhere … he may have lost his memory or even disfigured by burns.
“I am enclosing a photo of him. I thought it might help if he has lost his memory. You will have an idea of what he looks like. He was 20 years and 10 months of age at his presumed death.”
Then the following line:
“He is our baby.”
Next week it will be 81 years since Hilda Barnes wrote that letter. Here in this place of memory, her words call to us still – as does the face of the son she longed for in vain.
Along with so many others, generation after generation.
When the Australian War Memorial opened during World War II, nearly a year before G for George was delivered to No. 460 Squadron, Prime Minister Curtin said it would bring our nation closer to the meaning of Australian courage, sacrifice and faith.
Even as we move further away in years, the Atrium and Anzac Hall bring us even closer.
And as they do, that heartbeat within us grows louder.
Lest we forget.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
I’d also like to acknowledge Australian Local Government Association President, Mayor Matt Burnett and ALGA Board and Vice Presidents, Councillor Darriea Turley and Mayor Stuart James.
As well as councillors, mayors, shire presidents, delegates and distinguished guests, including guests from remote and Indigenous councils. I know that for some of you it’s been a long journey coming here and I thank you for it.
And, of course, our terrific Minister for Local Government, Kristy McBain.
It’s an honour to be with you as a Prime Minister who has always recognised the vital role that local government plays in the life of our nation, and the fact that a crucial ingredient in the strength of our nation is our two tiers of government working together.
And a crucial ingredient of that is local government having a seat at the table, where it is listened to.
That is why, as Minister for Local Government in 2008, I established the Australian Council of Local Government.
And that is why we reinstated it in 2023 after a decade in which the Coalition government dismissed as surplus to requirements.
I am proud of the role I played both times. 
And I am proud that the spirit that drove those initiatives is a spirit that continues to drive our Government. 
A Federal Government with a track record of backing local government with real funding, a record we have continued in this year’s Budget.
A Government with a long, proud roll call of members and who have had the privilege of serving their communities on their local councils.
As councillors, as mayors, absorbing all that it means to be on the ground and to be the first port of call for their communities.
Exhibit A, of course, is Minister McBain, who is a former mayor – in so many ways the perfect choice as Local Government Minister.
Since we last met, the Government’s ranks of local government alumni have been bolstered by four more members: 
Trish Cook – the new member for Bullwinkel and former Mundaring councillor;
Kara Cook – the new member for Bonner and former Brisbane City councillor;
Claire Clutterham – the new member for Sturt and former Norwood Payneham and St Peters councillor; and
Ash Ambihaipahar – the new member for Barton and former Georges River councillor.
They understand that you are delivering for your communities every day.
They know you are the level of government that Australians most practically interact with every day.
I’m very pleased that we have with us tonight a couple of remarkable individuals who truly embody that spirit.
I want to start with a long-standing elected member of the City of West Torrens in South Australia. 
He is 92 and is the oldest serving councillor currently in local government in the Southern Hemisphere.
Please give a very big hand for Councillor George Demetriou.
Councillor Demetriou has served the City of West Torrens community as Morphett Ward Councillor since 1989.
He exemplifies the very best of local government service – thoughtful leadership, strong community advocacy, and a deep understanding of the needs of the people he represents. 
Tonight, we celebrate his lifetime of dedication to public service and community leadership.
I’d also like to make a special mention of Michael New.
Michael has worked for ALGA for nearly 20 years.
Officially, Michael is ALGA's Finance Manager, but he is also the organisation's go-to for everything – a search engine in human form, who remembers every councillor and mayor. And, I am reliably informed, all the good stories. 
If you know ALGA, you know Michael.
Speaking of friends and supporters of local government, many of you know I worked as a young adviser in the office of my friend and mentor, Tom Uren. 
Tom spent time as Minister for Local Government, and it was a mission he truly believed in. Tom’s passion rubbed off on me.
Like Tom, I firmly believe that to serve in local government is a noble calling.
And it is profoundly encouraging to see a new generation answering that call, putting up their hands and devoting their time, energy and talent to their communities. 
Local government is what makes it possible to turn a neighbourhood into a community.
Not just somewhere you live – but somewhere you love living.
Somewhere you have that all important sense of belonging, alongside others who feel the same way.
Somewhere that has everything that adds up to a sense of home.
Local government is at the heart of it all, in the good times and, crucially, the bad. As we have seen so often, when disaster strikes, the role of the local council is vital. 
They are the frontline and they are where I turn to first. I will always try talking with the mayor in the disaster zone first to find out what’s actually going on. What’s working, what isn’t, and what is needed.
Councils have told us that the current disaster funding arrangements are too slow and complex. We will continue to support councils like we always have, in partnership with the states and territories. 
The funding relationship between the Commonwealth and councils will not change. Minister McBain has commenced consultations on disaster funding arrangements to make the process simpler and faster for councils to navigate. 
We want to speed up that process because no council should be out of pocket.
No matter what is happening in the world – no matter what challenges the world keeps throwing at Australia – you are there, keeping your communities ticking.
That is why I am determined that the councils of Australia have a Government that has your back.
Our support for local government is instinctive, and it is meaningful.After years of stagnation, investment in local government is not merely growing – Commonwealth investment in local government is at record level.
Through the 2026-27 Budget, our Government is providing $3.6 billion in untied Financial Assistance Grants.
Real money that local governments can spend on their own priorities. 
This includes bringing forward payments of $2.9 billion – or 80 per cent of the 2026–27 FA Grant estimate – to assist with immediate cost pressures during this period of unpredictability in the global economy. 
We have been restoring support that councils across Australia can rely on.
In stark contrast to what the Coalition managed in their last five years in power, Labor is delivering more than two-and-a-half times the growth in Financial Assistance Grants.
To back community infrastructure, we are providing $750 million over four years from 2026 for further rounds of the Growing Regions and Thriving Suburbs programs, expanding delivery of competitive grants to fund capital works for community infrastructure across our communities.
As part of strengthening your communities, we not only want you to build more housing, we want to help you do it.
That is why we are making $2 billion available for the Local Infrastructure Fund under the Housing Support Program to help local governments and state-owned utilities build the critical ‘last mile’ infrastructure needed to support new housing developments, and to help unlock development-ready land by fast-tracking enabling infrastructure such as water, sewer and electricity connections.
There will also be funding over 4 years from 2026-27 to modernise environmental information, data and digital systems, enabling simpler, faster approvals under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act.
We also need you building more roads. So, we have doubled funding for the Roads to Recovery Program, committing $4.4 billion nationally over the current five-year funding period. 
Councils have access to new infrastructure funding opportunities including:     The 10-year $500 million Active Transport Fund
$750 million under future rounds of Growing Regions and Thriving Suburbs
And the existing $200 million per year Safer Local Roads and Infrastructure Program
Figures show that in 2023-24 alone, almost $6 billion flowed from the Commonwealth to local government, supporting local jobs, local infrastructure and local services.
This partnership is continuing to grow. 
Every dollar invested in local government helps councils deliver the services and infrastructure Australians rely on every day, from every local road and bridge to every community facility, every park and, of course, every example of that great building block of a better, brighter future: the local library.
I am proud to lead a Government that is backing councils to build stronger communities based on local priorities.
A Government that recognises the critical role councils in delivering the services Australians rely on every day.
And together, we’re making the best country on earth even better.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Every year, CEDA’s State of the Nation Conference invites all of us caught up in the busy rush of a Parliamentary sitting week, to take a breath. 
To zoom out from the day to day, hour by hour, minute by minute political contest, and look to the long term.
CEDA frames its work around the Australia of 2050.
In our democracy, where three-year terms are short and the media cycle is much shorter, when there are always new challenges emerging and different issues competing for attention, a quarter century into the future can seem impossibly distant.
But the Australia of 2050 is not a remote prospect.
Our future prosperity, growth and productivity will be shaped by changes underway around our world right now.
The global shift to clean energy.
The transformative impact of Artificial Intelligence.
The use of international supply chains as instruments of economic and strategic competition. 
And, every bit as importantly, the Australia of 2050 will be defined by how we respond to this changing world.
Because if we act now, if we back ourselves, if we work together to shape the future, rather than waiting for the future to shape us, then Australia can do more than find a way through this period of global uncertainty, we can emerge stronger, fairer, more resilient and more prosperous.
We can build on our global leadership in clean energy and use it to power a new generation of Australian manufacturing.
We can bring our national values of fairness and opportunity to AI, so that it grows our economy and strengthens our sovereignty, without fragmenting our society or damaging our environment.  
And we can own our place in the architecture of the fastest region of the world in human history.
Stabilising our relationship with China, deepening our investment in South East Asia, elevating our ties with India.
Making ourselves the security partner of choice for the Pacific.
And the report that CEDA published this week is right: Australia cannot drift our way into those opportunities, we have to seize them.
And just as the choices we make today will shape the decades ahead.
We must also deal with the consequences of choices made decades ago.
The changes that John Howard and Peter Costello made to capital gains tax and its interaction with negative gearing were supposed to boost investment in the share market.
Instead, they turbocharged property as an investment vehicle.
So while the percentage of Australians who own shares has actually fallen compared to a quarter century ago, house prices have risen by 400 per cent in the same period, more than twice as fast as incomes.
We know supply is a key part of the solution - which is why we have thrown everything at it over the past four years:
Our $47 billion Homes for Australia plan, has provided:
New incentives for the states to speed up approvals and unlock land.
New funding for connecting infrastructure.  
Free TAFE and $10,000 payments for construction and electrical apprenticeships.
Building new social and affordable housing, through the Housing Australia Future Fund.
Help to Buy, Build to Rent - and 5 per cent deposits.
All of this has made a difference.
Yet there were still too many young Australians who were doing everything right: working hard, making sacrifices, but missing out at auctions because property investors could outbid them, knowing they had those tax breaks giving them an advantage over owner-occupiers.
The easy political option in that situation is to kick the can down the road.
To try and explain away, or work around, a system that isn’t working.
And while that might be the easy choice – it’s not the right one.
The privilege of serving in Government demands more of you than that.
It is not enough to acknowledge people’s frustration – you have to act on it.
You can’t just nod along while young Australians tell you that the deck is stacked against them, you have to do something to give them a fair crack.
That is the choice our Government has made.
And when we embarked on this journey, we did not imagine for a moment that it would be all smooth sailing.
We knew there would be the usual political attacks.
Some of us remember the campaign that argued the introduction of Fringe Benefits Tax would shut the doors of every restaurant, pub and hospitality venue in the country.
Equally, we understood there would be consultation required and improvements to make.
We specifically flagged that in the Budget papers.
Which is why in addition to retaining all four capital gains tax concessions for small business.
We have also expanded the threshold for the most frequently used carve-out, to cover all businesses with up to $10 million in turnover.
That represents 98 per cent of all active businesses in the nation - and every active small business in Australia.
In addition to this, in the months ahead, we will continue to consult with the start-up sector on a new Innovative Business CGT Concession.
All of these improvements are a credit to the constructive engagement of the business community.
That’s the way our Government operates – and it is the way reform should work.  
Consensus does not mean beginning with 100 per cent agreement – or arriving at it.
It means listening, negotiating - and moving forward to an outcome.
That’s what we will continue to do, across our agenda.  
Yet as with last year’s reforms to the EPBC Act, where it was obvious the system was not working for anyone, the Opposition have chosen irrelevance, they have dealt themselves out of the process.
And this time around they have gone beyond defending a status quo that is failing people – they are now promising to re-impose it.
To bring back the distortions that have locked young people out of the housing market.
They want to repeat the mistakes of decades past, we are fixing them - in housing and across the economy.
Because the global turbulence of the 2020s has exposed the mindset which told Australians it was smart and rational and efficient to offshore manufacturing.
To cut skills and TAFE. 
Close refineries.
Narrow our industrial base.
And privatise national assets.
Because the stable, predictable expansion of globalisation would pick up the slack.
That someone else, somewhere else, would be able to sell us what we needed cheaper than we could make it ourselves.
It is crystal clear that this old economic model is not suited to the world we are in, nor fit for the future ahead.
The Australia of 2050 will be shaped by what we build in its place.
By the lessons we learn from what the world has thrown at us.
By the action we take to seize the opportunities the world holds for us.
And by the reforms we drive to deliver real change.
Boosting productivity is critical to this.
That’s why we are cutting red tape, speeding-up approvals and abolishing hundreds of nuisance tariffs.
Creating a single, national market for skills, so state borders don’t stand in the way of businesses finding and hiring the right workers.
All of this is about incentivising business investment – and converting that into stronger growth and better wages.
The National Accounts show that business investment as a share of the Australian economy is at its highest level in nearly a decade.
Australia is growing faster than almost every other advanced major economy – and that growth is being led by the private sector.
We’re building an economy that is more productive – and more resilient.
So we are better prepared for the next global shock and better placed to make the most of our natural advantages.
Combining Australian ideas and Australian skills to turn the traditional resources, critical minerals and rare earths that the world needs into products the world wants.
Above all, our goal is to build an economy that works for people, not the other way around.
One that upholds our national values of fairness, opportunity and aspiration for all.
That is the optimism, the determination and the belief in Australia that underpins our Government’s agenda, even in these times of global uncertainty.  
It is extraordinary to think that in the 2020s, Australians have already had to deal with four global crises in six years:
A once-in-a-century pandemic.
The highest global inflation since the 1980s.
A land war in Europe, leading to the biggest international energy crisis since the 1970s.
And the biggest spike in petrol and diesel prices, ever - which we know is putting pressure on inflation here, and around the world.
I understand that for workers and businesses trying to manage the combined impact of these economic shocks, planning for the future can sound like a luxury.
But in a world of rapid change, our country cannot wait and hope for a moment of calm and quiet before we look ahead.
Instead, we have to deal with the challenges of the here and now – in a way that anticipates and creates the future we want to build.
That is the approach that defines our Government.
You’ve seen it again through this global fuel crisis.
Helping Australians under immediate pressure - by working with the states and territories to cut fuel taxes.
And now extending that relief through to the 2nd of August.
But also stepping up our engagement with our partners in our region.
And empowering Export Finance Australia to secure shiploads of additional petrol, diesel and fertiliser for our farmers, miners, truckies and tradies.
If this Conference had been held in March, there would have been questions about when we would move to fuel rationing.
That’s what was being asked in the Parliament, on an almost daily basis.
There is more fuel in Australia today, than when the conflict in the Middle East began.
And our Budget built on those efforts by investing over $10 billion in long term fuel security, storage and production.
Our action on the cost of living continues next Wednesday, the 1st of July:
Another real increase in the minimum wage.
Another tax cut for every single taxpayer – with more on the way next year.
When we were elected, the first marginal tax rate was 19 cents on the dollar.
Next year it will be down to 14 cents.
That will work together with our $1000 Instant Tax Deduction, which not only simplifies the system and boosts productivity, it also means millions of low and middle income earners will get more of their money back at tax time next year.
And these tax cuts will be followed by our new $250 Working Australians Tax Offset.
Part of the work we are doing to rebalance the tax system.
Better aligning the way we treat income earned from work, compared to income derived from assets.  
Because most Australians have nothing to sell but their time, nothing to give but their hard work.
That’s how they earn a living, that’s how they put food on the table – by going to work, every day.
And they deserve a tax cut – and the opportunity to buy a first home.
On the 1st of July, we are also expanding Paid Parental Leave to a full six months.
And making the 137 Urgent Care Clinics that we promised – and have now opened – a permanent part of Medicare.
Taking pressure off public hospitals and ensuring more Australians than ever can get free healthcare, close to home.
Next week will also mark one year since the launch of our Cheaper Home Batteries program.
Our initial goal was one million new batteries by 2030.
We have already seen an extraordinary 450,000 installed.
Families and small businesses taking up the opportunity to permanently cut their power bills.
And – across the nation – it is overwhelmingly the regions and outer suburbs leading the charge.
Australia was already the world leader in rooftop solar.
Our scientific breakthroughs made it possible – and our sunny skies make it practical.
We are now ranked third in the world for battery storage too - behind only the United States and China.
On a per capita basis, we are way ahead.
And the benefits of Australians embracing this technology are beginning to flow through to the energy market as a whole, reducing demand in the evening peak.  
The three right wing parties have been pushing the same arguments against renewables, with the same slogans, for two decades now.
And every year, as the technology gets more efficient and more affordable, that ideology becomes less convincing.
Because on roads and rooftops right around our country, people are making practical choices, not political statements.
And it is not just individuals voting with their feet.
Some of the biggest users of energy - from the Boyne Aluminium Smelter in Gladstone to Microsoft's new data centres in New South Wales - are embracing and investing in reliable, affordable renewables.
We are determined to ensure these large-scale projects contribute to our national energy security – and drive downward pressure on power bills, for everyone.
We will continue to look at every responsible option to shield Australians from global uncertainty and help people doing it tough.
At the same time, we recognise that the frustration many Australians are feeling runs deeper than any particular cost pressure.
It is the bigger sense that the economy isn’t working for them.
That their hard work isn’t paying off.
And that their children, the next generation of Australians, won’t have the same opportunities that they did.
That it will be harder for them to find a rewarding career, buy a home, start a family, build a good life.
That sentiment hasn’t sprung up overnight. It’s built up, over decades.
And while there might be some who treat it as a political opportunity – I take it as a practical challenge.
Because Australians’ frustration with the system is more than an emotional reaction, or an ideological one.
It is practical, it’s tangible – and so are the solutions we are providing.
That starts with a wage you can live on, a job you can count on, being able to pay your bills, afford the medicine you need and provide for your family.
And it is the economic and social fabric that we take pride in, as Australians.
The things that bring us together as a country – and set us apart from the world.
Bulk-billing through Medicare.
Quality public education, at every stage of learning.
Dignity and security in retirement.
The aspiration of home ownership.
That’s the true test for parties of government.
The capacity to deliver real change, when and where it really matters.
Making a positive difference to people’s lives by undertaking the hard work of structural reform.
And tackling the big changes that have been put off for too long.
That’s why we are reforming the energy market, aged care, education, employment services, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, skills and migration - and the tax system.
So they are right for the times – and ready for the future.  
People can go a long way in politics, for a long time, by raging against the system that they are a part of.
But none of that takes our country anywhere – or changes anything.
Real change means boosting wages and cutting taxes.
Powering new jobs and backing small business.
Making it easier to see a doctor for free – and making sure every Australian child gets the best start in life.  
Investing in the skills and technology that will enable our workers and businesses to shape the future.  
And helping the next generation put a roof over their head.
This is the real change that matters to Australians.
It is the real change we will continue to deliver.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I acknowledge the Premier of New South Wales, Chris Minns and state parliamentary colleagues.
Minister for Climate Change and Energy, Chris Bowen.
His Excellency Mirna Khawly, Ambassador of Lebanon.
And I thank Vitex Executive Chairman Dr Elie Chami and his son, CEO Dr Aniss Chami, for welcoming us so warmly today.
It is a pleasure to be with you to celebrate both the legacy and the future vision of Vitex.
The facility we are opening today stands as an incredible testament to the ingenuity, intelligence and hard work that drives Australian industry.
In business and commercial terms, there is no doubt that what you have achieved here is a huge success.
This facility triples the production capacity of Vitex.
Leveraging investment in new technology, more complex and vital medicines will be made here.
Today Vitex cements its standing not only as one of the most significant manufacturing outfits in Australia, but as one of the largest pharmaceutical facilities in the entire Asia Pacific.
That is a significant success.
But it is worth taking a moment to reflect on the story that built it.
A truly Australian story that we can all take pride in, that we can share – that reflects what makes our nation the best in the world.
It was a young Elie that came to Australia as a migrant from post-war Lebanon in the 1970s, aged just 16.
In 1989, together Elie and Aniss set up Vitex to make pharmaceuticals here in Western Sydney:
Based on the conviction, as Elie says, “that Australia could make medicines as well as anyone in the world.”
From that point production climbed and expanded in volume and type.
Vitex exported to new markets and grew.
And now, some 37 years later – and just a few kilometres from where the business first started – we stand here opening a new facility representing a $250 million investment.
It is an incredible journey of a company that at the beginning ran on little more than the ambition and dedication of a family that saw Western Sydney as the place for them.
As their new home of promise.
That is not just an example – but a lesson – in the power of equal opportunity.
Of what Australian aspiration can achieve as it is passed down between generations.
Living proof that no matter where you come from, no matter what your background is, when you work hard and when Australia is your home – this great nation we all share will back you to succeed.
Of course, these days Vitex doesn’t just support the jobs and livelihood of one family.
But many families.
1,200 high skilled, well-paid jobs – right here in Western Sydney.
Each one of them contributing to a Future Made in Australia, galvanising our national resilience.
For my Government, strengthening that resilience and growing those capacities drives us – across the broad.
Because amidst global economic uncertainty, and in an environment where our economic security is increasingly linked to our national security, we cannot afford to rely on the old assumption that global supply chains will guarantee our prosperity.
The belief that someone else, somewhere else will sell us what we need cheaper than we could make it ourselves.
Even if that were ever the case, that old world is not coming back.
But despite that, the truth is there is nowhere you would rather be than Australia.
We have all the resources that will power the next century under our feet.
The talent of our people is second to none.
And we live in the middle of the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
As that region continues to grow and prosper, demand for the high-quality products we make here in Australia will continue to boom.
Because there’s a reason that 1 in 4 Australian jobs depend on trade.
There’s a reason Vitex exports to 26 countries all around the world.
Because the world knows that Made in Australia stands for quality.
That’s as true for the pharmaceuticals we make as it is for the beef we raise and the barley we grow.
And that pursuit of excellence – that very Australian desire to be the best – is all around us today.
This investment in Western Sydney, in our nation and in our capacity for dynamic manufacturing and growing trade is truly exciting.
It is a story of success built on aspiration and innovation.
And I thank you for inviting me along to share it with you today – congratulations.


I acknowledge Prime Minister Rabuka.
Ministers and Members of Parliament.
Chair of the Great Council of Chiefs.
Members of the Diplomatic Corps.
And Ms Djapirri Mununggirritj, a senior Yolŋu woman from the Gumatj clan from North East Arnhem Land.
First Nations Australians and Fijian communities share a deeply historic and cultural connection.
One that is shaped by resilience, community leadership, and relationships with land and sea.
Ladies and gentlemen –
We come together today to celebrate the proud story of our Vuvale Reunion – and the new chapter of our Alliance
Above all, we gather as family.
A connection deeper than geography or history.
A bond anchored in our truest strength: our people, our values and our shared aspirations.
Because just as the people we serve: Australians and Fijians work hard to build a good life for their families.
To pass on to their children a future of greater security and more opportunity.
That same determination, that same pact between generations, brings our Vuvale together.
Two nations, one family, dedicated to building a future those who come after us will be proud to inherit.
I especially want to thank Prime Minister Rabuka for his generosity and his commitment to that shared goal.
The Fiji-Australia relationship means a lot to him – just as it does to me.
Because we know how much it means to our citizens.
We see that when our police and military personnel train together.
When our communities work together.
When our students learn together.
And when our businesses trade together and grow together.
As Prime Minster Rabuka has said in the past, the relationship between our two nations is one:
“Where mateship and Vuvale – the family – rest on trust, loyalty, respect, understanding, and responsibility.”
That trust and responsibility is important.
Because together, Australia and Fiji play a critical role in the region we share.
That’s why in 2023 – and again in 2025 – we chose to deepen our partnership in the Vuvale Union.
We chose to strengthen our commitment to promote peace.
We chose to go further in building our collective economic resilience.
We chose to fortify our bonds in the interest of upholding democracy, stability and sovereignty.
And of course, as is tradition, we chose to celebrate the fact we are two nations and two peoples that love of our sport.
Our partnership – and our obsession – with all things rugby spans decades. 
And I am delighted to announce at this reunion that under Vuvale, Australia will increase our investment in the formidable Fijian Drua.
Sport has a special power to reach us, to move us, to inspire us and unite us.  
In joy and sadness, in victory and defeat, it brings us together.
And I’m proud that Australia is helping the Drua showcase Fijian talent at the elite level – and inspire the next generation at the grassroots.
Distinguished guests
For our family, the Blue Pacific is home.
And for our stability, our security and our prosperity, we must work together to ensure it is an ocean of peace.
That is Prime Minister Rabuka’s vision.
And it is Australia’s determination. Now under our new Ocean of Peace Alliance, Australia and Fiji are joined in this cause as allies.
This is a historic step for both of our great countries.
Through 125 years of Australia’s Federation, Fiji is only the fourth country with whom we have signed an alliance. 
And every Australian will take pride in the fact that our nation is Fiji’s first ally.
Your choice honours us.
This new Alliance builds on strong foundations.
A shared resolve to see peace and prosperity flourish and a common understanding that security in our region must come from within the Pacific family.
That’s what our mutual defence obligation is about:
Increased interoperability.
Closer communication and cooperation.
Skills and information that will be shared into the future, safeguarding the sovereignty of both our nations.
The Ocean of Peace is an Alliance that is right for the times and ready for the future.
As we navigate the rough seas of global uncertainty.
This agreement keeps our eyes on the horizon
If we hold to our course, if we trust in our mateship and Vuvale, we can secure the Ocean of Peace for both our nations, for all our neighbours and for the future of the Blue Pacific.


Thank you, Minister Tuisawau for hosting me here today.
It’s a great pleasure to be here in Fiji to officially launch Australia’s new regional skills program in Fiji – Pacific Australia Skills – and to open the refurbished Vuvale Union Skills Hub.
These facilities are an example of the great things that can happen when Australia and Fiji work together.
The best investment any nation can make is in its people.
That is why investment in education and skills are a foundational part of the Vuvale Union that Prime Minister Rabuka and I signed this morning.
As part of the Pacific Australia Skills program, Australia and Fiji will develop TVET Centres of Excellence here in Suva to build the skills that drive economic growth.
These centres will back in Fiji’s goal to become a regional leader in the digital economy.
Through the Vuvale Union, we have committed 145 million Fijian Dollars to support the key building blocks for this digital transformation.
Similarly, I know that Prime Minister Rabuka is ambitious to make Fiji a ship maintenance and repair hub for the Pacific.
We will work with leading Australian training partners to support this.
Pacific Australia Skills will build on two decades of work.
Over that time, thousands of Fijians have gained qualifications, improved their skills, and built successful careers.
Technology is rapidly changing the world of work, with new opportunities emerging every day across our region.
Australia’s partnership with Fiji will help us navigate these changes together, to create more opportunities and brighter futures for our people.
Vinaka vakalevu.


Governor-General Reverend Sir David Tiva Kapu.
Prime Minister the Honourable Matthew Wale.
Honourable Ministers and Members of Parliament
Distinguished guests
Church and community leaders
Ladies and gentlemen
On behalf of the people of Australia, it is my great honour to congratulate you and your country on 48 years of independence.
We gather today to commemorate those whose vision made independence possible, half a century ago.
To celebrate the change and progress those five decades have brought to the life of your nation and the lives of its citizens.
And to dedicate ourselves to building on what has gone before us.
To realising a future of greater opportunity, stability and prosperity for all.
It is an ongoing source of pride for Australia that we were the first country to formally recognise Solomon Islands through the establishment of diplomatic relations.
And that occurred on the 7th July, 1978.
Day one.
Because Australia already knew the kindness and the courage that lived in these lands.
We had learned this amidst the devastation of war.
And we had pledged to remember it always in peace:
The bravery, skill and sacrifice of Scouts and Coastwatchers.
And the selfless humanity of Solomon Islanders who risked their own lives to rescue and shelter Australian sailors and airmen.
Australia was proud to count Solomon Islands as a friend long before your first day as a member of the international community.
And we are proud to have Solomon Islands as a neighbour, a partner, a friend and a cherished member of the Pacific Family, every day.
It is fitting that 12 members of the Australian Army Band are performing together with the Royal Solomon Islands Police Force Band.
Learning from each other and moving forward together, in harmony.
Friends
Independence for Solomon Islands was formalised by an act of British Parliament but independence was brought to life by a thousand different acts of leadership, imagination and co-operation, from the people of these islands.
Because the sovereignty of independence is not a condition that one country can bestow on another.
It is a right and a responsibility.
Sovereignty, stability, prosperity and peace are not born of one moment in time.
They are built, maintained and secured down the generations.
Not just in the high principles of global forums but in the universal building blocks of a good life.
A healthy family, a secure home, a safe community.
The opportunity of education and the dignity of work.
The connections to region, culture and the great blue Pacific.
These are the continuing acts of independence that bring power, progress and sovereignty to individuals and nations alike.
I have been impressed by Prime Minister Wale’s vision to build a better life for each and every Solomon Islander.
And as we celebrate the past, we look forward to the future.
A future with a stronger, peaceful and more prosperous Solomon Islands.
As you continue your journey we also look to our own shared future, negotiating a new comprehensive treaty that will bring our great countries even closer together.
Forty eight years ago today, the Union Jack was respectfully lowered and a new flag was raised.
A flag shaped by the nation it served:
The green of its forests.
The gold of its sands.
The blue of the ocean that all our Pacific family call home.
And the stars that have guided the people of these lands for tens of thousands of years.
Long may the flag of Solomon Islands fly.
Happy Independence Day.
Tagio tumas.


Today, with pride and optimism, we gather to hand-over the magnificent new Naha Birthing and Urban Health Centre to the people of Honiara.
And we entrust its future to the Ministry of Health and Medical Services and the Honiara City Council.
In doing so, we pay tribute to the dedication, skill and hard work of everyone who has helped turn a remarkable vision, into a transformative reality.
And it is my honour to be joined here by Prime Minister Wale.  
On a day when your proud nation celebrates independence, this centre is a celebration of the partnership between our citizens and our nations.
This place is proof of what Australia and Solomon Islands can achieve when we work together.
When we create local jobs - and empower locals with the skills to do them – from construction to health care.
When we build for local conditions, with reliable clean energy and the resilience to handle extreme weather so that if disaster strikes, these essential services are there when people need them most.
And this place also demonstrates what we can do when we trust in community.
When we build from the ground up, bringing together the comprehensive, high-quality care that every citizen of Solomon Islands deserves - especially the youngest Solomon Islanders, the future of this nation.
It is wonderful to think that there will be happy and healthy children who get immunisations and care here and go on to grow up and bring their own children here one day.
That is the positive and practical difference we can make when we build to last.
That is true for this extraordinary facility.
And it is true for everything that Australia and Solomon Islands are doing together to build a more stable, peaceful and prosperous Pacific.
Our efforts are not just a partnership between nations – they are a pact between generations.
So that we pass on a healthier and stronger future to our communities and our countries.
Tagio tumas. 
And God bless Solomon Islands.


Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, my brother, the Honourable James Marape whose leadership and support has helped make the PNG Chiefs possible.
Tongan Prime Minister, Lord Fakafanua who is such a passionate advocate for the young people of his nation and the difference rugby league makes to their lives.
Samoan Prime Minister Honourable Laʻaulialemalietoa who is a keen supporter of Samoa’s national rugby league teams and their contributions to Samoa. 
And Chairman Peter V’landys who was central to bringing this partnership together.
Representatives of the national rugby league federations.
Excellencies, distinguished guests one and all.
I am delighted to join you as we launch the Pacific Rugby League Partnership.
A partnership between nations, leagues, clubs and schools but above all between peoples.
A partnership built on the Pacific’s deep, shared passion for rugby league.
For all us, more than a sport: a language, a culture, a connection that is both family and faith.
A bond that unites communities and inspires the next generation.
I have no doubt if you went for a walk around Brisbane today, you’d see a lot of children in jerseys.
But I can tell you, you see them in villages along the Kokoda Trail too.
Papua New Guinea alone is home to more than 800 languages but everyone speaks rugby league.  
From the proud island nations of the Pacific, to the suburbs and regions of Queensland and New South Wales rugby league unites us and inspires us.
The first signing for the PNG Chiefs, Jarome Luai is a powerful symbol of that: a premiership player, origin winner and an Australian who takes pride in his Samoan heritage.
The Partnership we launch today celebrates these connections.
It also recognises that the power of sport runs deeper than the joy that it brings us, it is about what sport teaches us.
Children learn how to win, how to lose, how to work together as a team.
They learn those essential life lessons of resilience, routine, discipline and hard work.
As community focal points, sporting clubs offer a pathway to jobs and training.
What’s more, sporting clubs can be a safe space for young people.
They place where they feel most comfortable talking with their teammates, or their coaches about big issues: their mental health, problems at home, or concerns they might have for a friend.
It is so important that these opportunities and this security is open to women and girls as well.
The growth of women’s rugby league here in Australia and across the Pacific is truly inspiring.
It shows what is possible with a commitment to access and equality, from grassroots facilities all the way to the elite level and this Partnership will build on that too.
Today, our Pacific family draws closer together.
We bond around a shared love of this great game, a shared investment in our young people and their future and a shared commitment to the region we call home.
This is a great day for rugby league, for all our nations and for the next generation.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Well, Prime Minister, you are most welcome in Brisbane at what is going to be a very historic day in the relationship between our two nations, but also our relationship across the Pacific family as well - quite a gathering. So many things bring us together. Geography, of course, means we are part of the family and the blue continent, but more importantly than that is our people-to-people relations, the exchanges that have occurred over a long period of time, between going back to our First Nations people for the exchanges in the Pacific, as well. We're economic partners, we're partners in acting against the challenge, but also the opportunities that come from acting on climate change. We're partners in sport, where Samoa punches way above it’s weight, of course, in our National Rugby League competition, and in the international game as well, which we are pleased to support you on. The diaspora and the Pacific Labour Mobility Program is very important, dealing with challenges that we want to work with you on, on transnational crime, on climate change, on all of the opportunities as well. We also want an ocean of peace. Together, the Pacific Island Forum will make a very strong statement soon about the missile testing that occurred in the Pacific. And we work together, I think, closer and closer. I was given the enormous honour of being made a Chief during my visit as well. It was one of the honours of my life. It was one of those very special occasions that one. I regard it as a great honour. So you're very welcome here. And I hope this afternoon we will have another meeting, and then we'll be at the football, but then we have the Pacific Island Forum meeting and the Pre-Cop meeting in Fiji. We will see a lot of each other over the coming months, and I really look forward to elevating our relationship, making it even stronger than it is today. Thank you, Prime Minister.
LA’AULIALEMALIETOA LEUATEA POLATAIVAO FOSI SCHMIDT, PRIME MINISTER OF SAMOA: Thank you, Honourable Prime Minister. Please allow me, on behalf of our people, our nation, and our Government of Samoa, to convey our sincere appreciation for inviting me and the Associate Minister of Sports. We are no longer friends, we are family now. Our people might live here a long time ago - the second, the third, the fourth generation already here in Australia, so we have a very strong connections in all aspects, as you convey Honourable Prime Minister. We thank you for the support, not only for Samoa, but for the Pacific. We consider Australia as one of the strongest partners to protect us all in the Pacific region and Samoa. It's not enough time, but we have so much to express our sincere appreciation of your support for our government, our budget support, and everything in the development, and most of all the completions of our parliament. We are very grateful for that, and we had a very good time with your Governor General when she was there with us. And thank you for allowing her to come and celebrate our independence celebration. I know there's a lot to discuss in all areas, but particularly this trip, we are just so grateful to have the opportunity for the future development of sports. I'm glad to learn that Rugby League is your passion, and I can assure you there are more superstars in the Pacific that needs to bring up here.
PRIME MINISTER ALBANESE: As long as it would be possible for me to have some say over which team they play for.
PRIME MINISTER LA’AULIALEMALIETOA: I know - you select. We are very grateful for the funding. It's all about developing from somewhere, as you can see all our boys playing in NFL now. They start from home, they start from only a 50 metres square playing field every evening and all night. But now the opportunity is available now, we are so thankful for that. And not only for Rugby League, but also for Union - we're trying to sort out some of our local issues. But rugby is rugby and good for the nation.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Prime Minister Fakafanua, you are very welcome here in Australia. This is our first meeting, but, of course, Australia and Tonga have such a warm and long friendship. We're all part of the Pacific family and that is why I'm so pleased to welcome you here. Indeed there is, of course, the people-to-people connections are so strong, including in my local electorate in the inner western suburbs of Sydney, where there's a substantial diaspora as well. The relationship that we have in dealing with climate change, we will discuss at the pre-COP meeting that will be held in Fiji, and then, of course, again at the Pacific Island Forum meeting in Palau, just a couple of months later. Climate change, economic relations, the opportunities that come from the exchange of people, as well, including the contribution that we can make through the Pacific Labour Mobility Program, is important. But also our standing together in the Pacific on security, economic development, climate action - all of these issues are ones in which our relationship can be even stronger, I think, and I want to elevate that relationship to a higher level in the future. I look forward to working with you. You are still relatively new since your election, and I just want to conclude by congratulating you on your election.
LORD FATAFEHI FAKAFANUA, PRIME MINISTER OF TONGA: Thank you very much honourable Prime Minister, it's definitely a pleasure and an honour to meet you for the first time. As you're aware, my government was only elected recently in November, and we are very keen for the relationship that's under discussion, and we're very grateful for the way that you have received His Majesty the King in his recent state visit late last year, as well as the formal relationship between your Governor General and our Royal Family. This is backed up by interconnected relationships. I'm not sure if you're aware, but my late father was involved in the conception of Tonga’s Companies Act with your Deputy Prime Minister back in the 90s, so these personal relationships populate what we're formalising in terms of the two pathways that we're looking at inspiring some progress between Australia and Tonga. The Mobility Scheme has been largely successful and has contributed immensely towards Tonga's GDP, given that 39 to 40 per cent of our GDP is from Mobility Visas. And I understand the latest economic data shows that in terms of remittances into the country, Australian dollars have exceeded US dollars as well. So we hope that planning for the future we can deepen our relationship, look at more two-way pathways, strengthening our economic ties as well as security concerns that are common across the Pacific. Tonga subscribes to the Pacific leaders proposal for an ocean of peace. This is very important for us, and we will be joining a joint statement that's currently being discussed by the forum leaders.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
Prime Minister Modi, my friend, welcome to marvellous Melbourne.
As a true friend of Australia, and a very dear friend of mine, it is an honour to host you this evening.
I also welcome each and every one of you out there in the stands. 
Over the years, this stadium has seen some loud and legendary events – and none more significant than this.
The energy we feel in here tonight defines the Australia – India partnership.
It is an enthusiasm and a dynamism that drives the positivity and promise of our two nations and peoples.
As Prime Minister, I have twice had the great privilege of visiting India.
Each time, I have been bowled over by the beauty and vibrancy of the land.
And humbled by the generosity and warmth of its people.
When Prime Minister Modi hosted me three years ago, we did a lap of Ahmedabad’s Narendra Modi stadium in a chariot.
That was an experience I will never forget.
And I can say that without a shadow of a doubt the depth of affection that I felt between our two peoples in Gujarat in 2023 is just as palpable and present tonight among this incredible, beaming crowd.
It is a warmth I have known since well before I became Prime Minister of Australia.
My first trip to India was as a backpacker in 1991.
I spent six weeks backpacking around India - which was a fantastic experience.
I learned there something very simple and clear that I have communicated to my fellow Australians - if you want to understand India, get on a train.
Wherever I went, I ate delicious food and was told wonderful stories.
And I was welcomed into the homes of the people I met, and into the richness and depth of Indian culture.
On this stage, all these years later, it is an such a privilege to have the chance to extend our own Australian hospitality to Prime Minister Modi.
Because this evening, we all come together to celebrate the bond that unites our two peoples.
Two great democracies.
Two great multicultural societies.
The mutual respect we share. 
The strength of our friendship. 
And the profound contribution to our great nation of the more than one million Australians who trace their roots, proudly, back to India.
Your generosity of spirit shines through in every way.
In times of trouble or national crisis, I have told Prime Minister Modi this in private before many times, but today I say it publicly as well.-  it is the Australian Indian community who are the first to volunteer their help, and to lend a hand to their fellow community members.
It is a generosity that extends to building the prosperity of our nation, too.
Whether through boosting skills in critical industries like healthcare and IT.
Growing Australia’s dynamic small business sector.
Or the contribution that so many students from India make when they choose Australia as their destination to invest in themselves and their education.
That’s especially true here in the Education State of Victoria.
It is an exchange of educational enrichment that runs both ways.
Because it was Deakin University, based here in Victoria, that became the first foreign university to open a campus in India.
And I’m proud to say it was the first of many.
Friends,
Over generations, your commitment to Australian aspiration and your love of this country has made it better, stronger, and more vibrant.
Australians of all backgrounds have been enriched by your bringing your culture here, and adding it to our multicultural character.
We are a better nation because we have you in it.
You are the living bridge between Australia and India.
Thank you for being here this evening – and please join with me in welcoming my friend, Prime Minister Narendra Modi.


Thank you to the Centre for Australia-India Relations and Ryan for organising this reception.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land we’re meeting on and pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
Can I also acknowledge our guest of honour, my friend, the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi.
Ms Swati Dave, Chair of the Centre for Australia-India Relations and distinguished guests, one and all, including all of my ministerial colleagues that I see here as well.
Towards the end of the 20th Century, both Australia and India underwent a period of profound change and reform.
From a narrow foreign policy, to creative multilateral diplomacy.
From inward-looking, high-tariff economies to a new prosperity powered by trade and growth and engagement in our region.
Yet while both Australia and India embarked on similar journeys, with shared objectives at the same time we were making these changes in parallel, not in partnership.
For all the natural affinity of our histories and cultures, for all broad affection between our peoples the relationship between our countries was underdone, under-explored and under-examined.
In the last decade or so, that has certainly changed for the better.
Prime Minister Modi, your leadership and your personal engagement with Australia has been absolutely central to this change.
And so has the drive and determination of the business leaders in this room.
You are the “living bridge” between our nations.
And your ambition and vision has helped to reshape the Roadmap for Australia’s Economic Engagement with India.
India is on track to be the world’s third largest economy by the end of the decade.
It is the world’s largest democracy.
We want Australian business, Australian ideas, Australian expertise to help build and power and shape that growth that is occurring faster than any nation on Earth.
Today I am pleased to announce that the Business Council of Australia will be leading a senior business delegation to India during Australia Week in December this year.
And Austrade and the Australian High Commission in New Delhi will bring together a new investment roundtable in Mumbai.
And investment is certainly growing. I welcome the announcement we have had this morning from Australian Super that they will invest an additional $500 million into India’s National Investment and Infrastructure Fund.
This is about building on and broadening out the four key priorities in our roadmap: clean energy, education and skills, agribusiness, and tourism.
In every one of those sectors, new work to deepen our engagement is already underway.
When I made my first trip to India as Prime Minister in 2023, Deakin University announced they would be building a campus in Gujarat.
The first foreign university to open a campus anywhere in India.
And as of today we now have approval for eight Australian branch campuses, with Flinders University being just the latest.
This morning, our Education Minister, Jason Clare hosted a roundtable with Australian universities who have invested significantly in cooperation with India, including through Indian branch campuses.
Opening new centres of learning and opening the doors of opportunity with higher education, one of Australia’s great exports.
In that regard, I certainly welcome Monash University’s announcement of its $75 million investment into expanding ties with India including to fund scholarships and study assistance for Indian students and exchange programs for Australian students to visit India.
In agribusiness, companies like Perdaman show how Australian-Indian businesses are adding value and building resilience in both our nations.  
When it opens next year, Perdaman’s Project Ceres urea manufacturing facility in Karratha will be Australia’s largest, producing around 2.3 million tonnes of urea a year.
World-leading Indian technology and machinery, producing the fertiliser Australian farmers use to feed the world.
Already, Project Ceres has created 2,000 jobs in construction.
And it will strengthen Australia’s manufacturing capability and fertiliser supply chains.
I am pleased to announce that my government has awarded Project Ceres Major Project status, helping facilitate the development of the facility and building on almost $750 million in support provided through loans from Export Finance Australia and the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility.
This is one of countless examples, big and small, of Australian-Indian companies contributing to the growth and success of both our nations.
Central to every one of these success stories is the bond between our people.
Every time I have visited India, whether it be as a backpacker in 1981, or as Prime Minister, where I stayed in slightly better hotels, I have been welcomed with extraordinary warmth and generosity and engagement with people.
Those same bonds of friendship shine through in our Australian-Indian diaspora and the businesses here today.
More than a million Australians trace their heritage to India.
And, this great global city, Melbourne, has been enriched by the hard work and aspiration of our nation’s largest Indian diaspora.
People who have come to Australia seeking a better life for themselves and their families and have made this a better country for all of us.
But always hanging on to the heritage of your country of your birth and being proud of where you have come from, as well as being proud Australians.
That's what Australian multiculturalism is - not a theory, not something up for debate, just something which is. 
Your entrepreneurship and innovation makes our economy more productive and dynamic.
Your kindness, your community spirit and your love of this country, your home, lifts us all up.
As leaders, Prime Minister Modi and I are always looking to deepen and diversify the connections between our nations.
We negotiate and sign agreements, we design and update plans.
But in the end it is our people, the people of Australia and of India who make the words a bond.
You are the custodians of the India and Australia relationship.
And everything we see here today is proof that the future is indeed in very good hands. Welcome.


It is an incredible honour for me to be here today in the Sydney Opera House to celebrate the life of Richard Scolyer AO.
United within the walls of one great national treasure to celebrate the life of another national treasure. And what a truly remarkable life it was.
In the great constellation of the Australian story, Richard was without question one of our bright stars.
A medical revolutionary in the service of humanity.
A man of courage, curiosity, generosity and kindness.
A man grounded in the love of his family.
We mourn a life cut far too short – yet we also give thanks for every life extended and every life still being lived, thanks to the work of which he was such a central part.
Richard became a household name in 2024, when he was named joint Australian of the Year – alongside his Melanoma Institute of Australia co-director, Professor Georgina Long.
As he took his place in the spotlight, this saviour of lives was already in the fight of his own life.
Richard described glioblastoma – the brain cancer with which he had been diagnosed – as a, to quote him, “a straight path to death”.
As he faced up to his new reality, no one would have begrudged him retreating into the shelter of his family and friends.
Yet that is not what he chose.
Instead, he opened his big heart to us all. And what Australia got to see was a man absolutely determined to change that straight path.
Maybe that was part of the meaning of the title of his blog, My Uncertain Journey – Richard fighting to make that “straight path” just that little bit less certain.
And determined to make it possible for future generations to follow a different course.
Richard shared his triumphs and his setbacks.
He allowed himself the gift of hope. And whenever that hope was dimmed, he let us see the strength of his character.
He shared the joy he took in every extra day he was granted, and his profound gratitude to everyone around him.
And I join with others in thanking those who provided Richard care over the recent period.
Richard travelled his uncertain path with determination – and a grace that never ceased to be extraordinary.
The way he shared it with us was an act of generosity – and a courage every bit as profound.
I will always regard it as one of the privileges of my time as Prime Minister that I got to spend time with such an extraordinary, outstanding, remarkable human being.
I got to count him as a friend. And, for a happy stretch of my life, as a neighbour. For that, I feel blessed.
In his final letter to Australia, he reminded us:
'We all have a responsibility to try to change the future for others and leave the world a better place.'
So much said in so few words.
How to handle that responsibility is something he showed us every day through the power of his own example.
I have been moved to hear Richard’s family describing his zest for life and his enthusiasm, and how he strove to ignite it in others.
Now this brightest of stars has set – yet his glow remains around us.
At the Chris O’Brien Lifehouse, the Richard Scolyer Chair will always bear his name – and it will play a part in the better future he was working for.
Richard did so much to push back the shadow of melanoma.
And one day, when a cure for brain cancer is at last found, his name will be spoken. All of us will be able to say we knew him – and he gave us hope.
But for now, in what are still the very raw days of Richard’s absence, the hearts of all Australians are with his family.
So to Katie, Emily, Matthew and Lucy, may you draw some comfort from how much Australia truly  loved him.
May the love that shone so brightly between you light up all of your days.
And may Richard Scolyer rest in peace.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respect to elders past, present and emerging.
It’s great to be back at Sydney University, a place that holds so many fond memories.
When I was studying economics here in the 1980s, the world was being taught the meaning of economic rationalism. 
Thatcherism in Britain, Reaganomics in the United States.
Yet here in Australia we were making a different choice and moving in a different direction.
Because while other nations were being remade by a philosophy which held there is ‘no such thing as society’.
Australia was building what has become one of the truest expressions of our society, and the duty we owe to each other as members of it, I speak of course of Medicare.
That was an act of economic reform, of social justice – and a statement of national ambition.
In creating Medicare, Australia didn’t beg or borrow from elsewhere.
We built for the best, by building for ourselves.
That thread runs through our national story.
As innovators and inventors, in science and research, in agriculture and energy.
And in democracy, progress and fairness too.
Back when the industrial revolution was fundamentally altering the shape of the economy and the nature of work the minimum wage and eight-hour day were radical experiments.
Today, those Australian ideas are rights that workers have fought for and won around the globe.
We were the first country in the world where women could stand for Parliament and vote in elections.
And these were free and fair elections, conducted by secret ballot - something other democracies called ‘the Australian ballot’.
In the 1990s, universal superannuation was controversial.
Today, in nearly every meeting I have with foreign leaders and international investors alike, they raise our super system as world-leading.  
In September 2024, when I announced that our Government would be implementing a Social Media Ban for Australians under the age of 16 that too was seen as radical.
We were told it was too late to act and too hard to implement.
That its opponents were too powerful to listen, or change.
We understood the difficulties we were up against.
But we also knew that our action would send a signal and set a standard.
It would start conversations within families and friendship groups.
It would help parents and teachers talk to young people about the harmful impacts of social media, with government and the law as back-up.
Australia’s social media ban started these same conversations right around the world.
By the time I was at the United Nations in September last year, countries were seeking us out to learn about the approach that we were taking.
Today, more than 20 nations have implemented or are implementing social media age restrictions of their own.
And many more are having the discussion.  
That is a credit to the courage of Australian parents, people who channelled unimaginable grief into a selfless call for action.
And it is proof of what Australia can do, when we back ourselves.
When we apply our enduring values to the challenges that are presented by new technologies.
We can set a standard that changes the way the world looks at an issue and deals with it.
And to take that example of social media one step further, imagine if the world had acted a decade ago.
Imagine the difference it would have made if these limits had been put in place when the world first grasped the risks of these platforms.
When we first understood their reach and indeed their power.
That is the opportunity – and the choice - we have now with Artificial Intelligence.   
From smartphones to rooftop solar, Australians have always been enthusiastic adopters of new technology.
And AI is of course already part of our daily lives.
Not as a novelty, or a search tool.
It’s changing the way our universities teach and the way students learn.
It’s helping small business owners cut the time they spend on paperwork.
It’s driving productivity and it's driving discovery.
It’s building new screening tools for cancer and disease.
It is a critical – and urgent - innovation priority for our defence force and security agencies.
No Government can turn back the clock, or press pause on all of this.
Nor would we want to.
That would only mean cutting ourselves off from the opportunities which are there to be seized and leaving ourselves open to risks created elsewhere.
The fact that we cannot stop change, does not render us powerless, far from it.
Our power, our agency, our choice lies in embracing change and shaping it.
Not just adopting or accommodating AI.
Designing it, making it, building the capability right here.
And building our sovereignty – and our economic resilience as a result.
That’s why we are serious about attracting frontier AI investment to Australia.
Because we want AI to support and create good jobs, not replace them.
All of this is a bigger challenge - and a bigger opportunity - than social media, no question about that.
But not only are we coming to the issue earlier, we have more than time on our side.
We have the advantage of geography.
The expansion of AI requires a physical, material footprint.
It needs our land and energy and computing power to operate.
That means we can set the terms, we can determine AI’s social licence.
But we have to do it now.
We cannot revisit this issue after companies have built whatever they want, wherever they want, and try and then re-open negotiations. 
This is our time to decide what AI looks like here in Australia.
It is not a question of ‘if’ or ‘when’ AI will transform our economy, we are past that.
The question that matters, the choice that we have - is how.
How we apply our enduring values of fairness and opportunity to make this technology work for us. 
For workers and communities, for our economy and our environment, for our creative industries and media.
This is about Australia shaping the future, rather than letting the future shape us.
Our nation is home to global leaders in AI - and I am pleased so many are here with us today.
But you do not need to be an expert in AI to have a say or a stake in it.
We are all involved.
Because the real issues AI presents are not technical ones - they are economic ones, legal ones, social ones, and as Pope Leo has made clear in his superb first Papal Encyclical, Magnifica Humanitas, there is also moral and spiritual ones.
They are tests of our national values and our national interests.
And tests of our national resolve, co-operation and ambition.
If we act now, if we mobilise our resources and co-ordinate our efforts.
If we move with the urgency that the speed of this change demands.
If we build to match the scale of the opportunity that this moment presents.
And if we do it the Australian way, true to our values and our standards.
We can make AI work in Australia’s National Interests.
Last week, the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations published real-time, data-driven analysis of AI’s impact on the labour market.
The first research of this kind by any government anywhere in the world.
It found that while some roles are changing, graduate employment is high.
Software and tech jobs are growing.
Nationwide, unemployment remains of course near historic lows.
And participation is at record highs.
Our skilled and diverse workforce is just one of the reasons that the world is queuing up to invest in Australia.
Consider what international investors look for – and then think about what we have:
World class universities, producing skilled graduates and high-quality research.
The traditional resources, critical minerals and rare earths that are essential. 
The space to build.
The sunlight to power affordable, renewable, reliable energy.
Strong bonds with the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
A legal and financial system at the top of the global ladder for integrity, the security of transactions, timeliness of payments and smart use of technology.
And – underpinning it all - a stable democracy.
Truly, there is nowhere else you’d rather be than Australia.
Just as our Government’s Future Made in Australia agenda is about making the most of these national strengths making more things here, to make ourselves more resilient and more sovereign we must bring this same ambition to the opportunities of AI.
We cannot settle for a short-term boom in capital expenditure and construction.
We must create a new generation of good, secure jobs for our economy.
And while the world is looking to us, we know it won't wait for us.
If we hang back, or stand still, this will run right over the top of us.
And if we descend into self-doubt, or wander out into the global market as a disparate collection of states and councils and companies and firms, rather than one country, then others will write the rules and - maybe - they will play by them.
That would not only risk the integrity of Australian artists and journalists.
It would mean subcontracting our sovereignty and security to the control of foreign monopolies.  
And relegating our workers and our economy to the last link of the digital supply chain.
We cannot - and we will not - accept that for Australia.
The inescapable lesson of the global instability of the 2020s, is that if we are always dependent on someone else, somewhere else, we will always be vulnerable.
This is true for resources and technology alike.
It is why we legislated to keep the NBN in public hands.
So that even as communications technology is increasingly distributed amongst different networks and overseas interests, Australians retain sovereignty over our high-speed internet.
Our great country can be much more than a data warehouse for AI products made overseas.
We can do much more than manage investment in ideas from elsewhere.  
We can lead in everything from cybersecurity and biotechnology to advanced manufacturing.
This is why we want Australia to have more of a stake in where AI is made – and how it is made.
We want great universities like this one, leading the way.
And we want more Australian companies and global firms developing AI here.
To boost our sovereign capability.
To strengthen our national security.
And build our economic resilience.
Today I announce that to seize and shape and share the generational opportunity that AI represents our Government will establish a set of Australian Standards for AI.
In March this year, we announced a set of expectations for large AI data centres.
This will bring them into one regulatory framework.
Clear, consistent and mandatory.
I will seek agreement on this approach from Premiers and Chief Ministers at National Cabinet I'm convening next month.
We will aim to bring the legislation to Parliament early next year.
We will consult closely with industry and our trading partners to design a framework for faster decision-making, better supporting infrastructure and genuine community engagement. 
It is not our goal to try and legislate for every possible eventuality or risk.
That only creates the risk of Australia missing out on investment altogether.  
This is about having the flexibility to keep pace with change – and get out in front of it.
So Australia can draw on and learn from what other countries are doing.
And deal with issues in real time, without the bureaucracy having to contemplate every modification.
This is about building Australians’ confidence and trust in AI and our nation’s capacity to manage it.
Ensuring that our national interests and our national security are protected.
And providing the certainty for growth, for jobs and for investment.
Setting the terms means we can put in place the strongest possible protection for Australian artists and Australian media.
As a Government, we make a wide range of important, factual information available online.
Whether it is disaster warnings or travel advisories, we want it to reach the widest possible audience.
So that even if Australians aren’t going directly to Disaster Assist or Smart Traveller, they are still getting up to date, accurate information.
We will continue to do this - as will many other businesses and organisations.
But let me make this crystal clear: not everything produced in Australia is up for grabs.
Not at all.
Australian writers, musicians, artists and journalists must retain ownership and control of their work.
Our laws will spell that out, plain as day.
An artist’s creative endeavour is their work and their property.
No company should use Australian books, music, art or news to build or train AI without the artist’s control.
That includes the artist’s control of the price and value of their work.
Anything less, is theft.
No country has got this right yet.
Nowhere do artists or rights holders have sufficient control of their work, when it comes to AI training.
That is why the best way to secure the strongest copyright protections for Australian artists is for Australia to be active and involved.
To build the best possible solution for ourselves.
And to preserve the creativity that is fundamental to who we are to our national identity and the journalism that is essential to our democratic society.
Our Australian standards will also set clear rules for large data centres: where they are built – and the power and water they use.
We have a continent to ourselves, one of our big advantages.
We have more than enough room for new data centres, without them competing with new housing.
And we will work with every level of government to see common sense prevail.
We know that companies will need to invest in skills and training to be successful.
And we know they will need energy too.
We will create a legal obligation for the next generation of large-scale data centres to underwrite new power supply.
To pay their full share of grid connection, so no costs are passed on to homes or businesses.
And to put at least as much energy into our grid as they take out of it.
To be net-generators, not net-users.
To build new renewable generation – and firming – to strengthen our national energy resilience.
And ensure data centres do not increase power prices for Australians.
Australia is the sunniest continent on earth but we're also the driest.
Which is why our rules will require data centres to minimise their water use, maximise their energy efficiency, and pay for any additional water infrastructure required.
These location, energy and water obligations take in every level of government and their overlapping powers.
Which is precisely why we need national standards.
So every level of government is on the same page and driving to the same outcome.
Every country on earth is grappling with these challenges right now.
Australia will be the first country in the world to bring these issues into a single, national framework.
And getting this right will enhance our appeal to international investors. 
By delivering greater clarity and speed for approvals.
And a streamlined process for verifying compliance.
It also imposes a really important discipline on Government.
AI touches on the work of every Minister and Department, so it is only natural that, up until now, our response has been issue-by-issue, sector by sector.
But just as Government developed co-ordinated approaches for other significant technologies: from civil aviation in the 1920s to genetics in the 1990s we must do this with AI as well.
Effective today, I am establishing The Office of AI in my own Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
It will work closely with the Minister for Industry and Innovation, Tim Ayres.
And the Assistant Minister for Science, Technology and the Digital Economy, Andrew Charlton.
To co-ordinate the design of our new Australian Standards.
And to bring together the work that Ministers across Government are undertaking.
The Minister for Climate Change and Energy is working with his state and territory counterparts and energy market bodies.
The Attorney-General, who is with us today, has been facilitating consultation on copyright and artist protections where AI training is involved.  
The Treasurer will have responsibility for the pivotal role of AI in our productivity agenda.  
The Minister for Employment is engaging with employers, workers and unions on AI’s role in the workplace.
And the Education Minister is meeting with his counterparts literally today, to discuss the impact of AI in schools.
This is in addition to ongoing work in everything from the design of our digital duty of care, by the Communications Minister, to the risks that chatbots pose to children to the intersection of AI and skills and manufacturing.
And – importantly – AI in defence and national security.
This year’s National Defence Strategy identified AI and machine learning as holding, to quote the strategy; ‘the most significant potential for technological disruption’ in the years ahead.
We know that both extremists and state actors already use AI to create propaganda aimed at young people - and to spread disinformation that targets democracies. 
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs are working closely with their agencies – and with our Five Eyes Partners – on these matters of national security.
And the fact that we're one of these five eyes nations gives advantages for what's ahead.
I was the first member of my family to go to university.
And like most of the people I went to school with, I sat my last HSC exam on the Thursday and went into full-time work the following Monday.
When I started at the Commonwealth Bank Branch in Holme Building, about 100 metres from here, my first task was to try and convince customers who were coming in with their passbooks and to convince them of the need to use this new contraption called an ATM, a hole in the wall.
Our target, our KPI, was if I could convince 20 per cent of people to abandon the old paper passbooks and to trust this key card, as it was then, put it into the wall and get money to pop out, that was the target.
I'm old but not that old. 
None of us could have imagined a world where most people did their banking from a phone you've got in your pocket.
Now, when I was working at the bank, I remember people telling me, “Oh, that’s a good job you’ve got”, and one of the reasons why my mum encouraged me, because it was publicly owned, of course, so you were getting a job that was secure for the next 30 years.
This was still the expectation back then, that you’d have one job, one career, work your way up.
One day I might get to be manager of a local branch or something like that. You'd have one employer. 
Now, that world is long gone.
Wave after wave of technology and economic change have re-defined it.
Australians studying here or starting in the workforce today don't expect – or want – one job for life.
But what has not changed – what will never change - is the value and importance of secure and fulfilling work.
A job that gives you a stake in the economy, the stability to plan for your future and the opportunity to better yourself.
Now, we should not treat AI as a threat to good jobs - we must use it as an instrument to help create them.
That is the responsibility, the challenge and the opportunity facing our country.  
And if we move with purpose now, if we back ourselves.
If we trust in our values and invest in our people, if we set our national standards high then I have every confidence that Australia can seize this moment and make it our own.
We can make AI stand for Australia’s interests and I hope to do so.


Thank you, Mali, for your warm South Australian welcome, your leadership of this great state and – at a personal level - your friendship.
I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
State and Territory Labor Leaders.
My Federal team, led by the best Deputy Prime Minister anyone could ask for, Richard Marles.
And led in the Senate by two great South Australians: Penny Wong and Don Farrell.
To our new President – another proud South Australian - Kate Ellis.
And our National Secretary Paul Erickson and your fantastic crew.
Thank you for all the work that you have put into this year’s conference, our 50th in our 135th year - Australia’s oldest and greatest political party.
And Paul, thank you for the magnificent effort you put into last year’s campaign.
Backed – every step of the way – by the mighty trade union movement of Australia.
And by the passion and dedication of the true believers in our rank and file.
All of us who have the honour to serve in the Parliamentary Labor Party stand on your shoulders.
We are a better government – and Australia is a better country – because of your lifetimes of service to advancing the rights and opportunities and aspirations of working people.
And so much of the progress and reform we have delivered over the past four years, began with you and the Australians that you represent, grounded in their workplaces, their lives and their determination to pass on a better future to their children.
Thank you for what you do.
Delegates
Through 50 National Conferences over 125 years of Federation, this is only the 15th time we have gathered with Federal Labor in majority government.
Now that tells you something about the history we made together last year.
And it speaks to the responsibility and the opportunity we have now.
The responsibility to continue helping people under pressure.
The responsibility to guide our nation through this time of significant global uncertainty.
And the opportunity to build something better beyond it.
The opportunity for Australia to do more than weather this global storm of conflict and crisis, but to emerge from it a fairer and stronger and more resilient country.
A country with a growing and productive economy that works for people, not the other way around.
We have the opportunity to reject - once and for all - the failed ideology which said it was smart and rational to cut TAFE, close our refineries and send manufacturing jobs offshore, because someone else, somewhere else, would sell us what we needed.
And instead, make the most of our resources - and make more things here.
To build up the skills and energy and self-reliance of our nation.
And to lift up the talent and hard work and aspiration of our people.
So that we are not just better prepared for the next challenge the world throws at us, we are better placed to seize and shape and share the opportunities that the world holds for us.
To make the transformative changes underway around the globe – from clean energy to Artificial Intelligence – work for all Australians.
That is the test of our time.
And, delegates, it is a mission made for our labour movement - for our ambition and our determination.
And for our eternal values of fairness, aspiration and opportunity for all.
Because Australia can only seize this moment, if every Australian can reach for it.
We can only realise our true potential as a nation, when every Australian has the chance to realise theirs.
I understand that for many Australians right now, looking to the future runs second to the immediate pressures they are under.
The last decade has inflicted one global shock after another.
And people have been given every reason to feel like the economy is simply not working for them.
That goes deeper than sentiment, it’s a reality people are up against.
It is a challenge confronting governments and democracies right around the world.
That is why our focus remains squarely on helping with the cost of living, on the practical measures that matter to people and make a positive difference to their lives.
Because that is how we demonstrate to Australians that their hard work will pay off, that their effort is worth it, that they can plan and build for their future.
And it is how we prove that the status quo is not set in stone.
That problems can be solved.
That faults in the system can be fixed.
That Labor is delivering the real change Australians deserve.
Delegates
We can make that case to each other.
But we all know the true meaning of real change is beyond these walls and outside the political debate.
It’s every worker who sees their wages rise.
Every Australian getting another tax cut.
Every family that can see a doctor for free.
Every first home buyer getting a fair crack.
Every opportunity being embraced at Free TAFE.
Every family and small business cutting their power bills with rooftop solar and a battery.
Every steel worker at Whyalla.
And it is every student, in every school in every state and every territory receiving the full and fair funding they need to thrive.
Delivering real change means strengthening Medicare.
A year after I took this little card all around our country, there are another 50 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics open.
And in every one of our 137 clinics, in the regions and the suburbs, this bit of green and gold plastic is all that you need.
56 Medicare Mental Health Centres have been added to the frontline.
And 33 Endo and Pelvic Pain Clinics, part of the biggest-ever investment in women’s health.  
And thousands of GPs, trusted by millions of Australians, have switched to bulk-billing every patient, every time.
All of which means the last year has seen the biggest jump in the bulk-billing rate this century and the lowest prices for medicines on the PBS since 2004, just $25.
And since the 1st of July, the landmark agreement we secured with every state and territory government is putting record funding into public hospitals.
We are investing right across our world-class health system - and we are backing the extraordinary people who work in it.
Just over a year ago, we created Paid Prac.
Financial support for Australians studying to be nurses and midwives, as well as teachers and social workers, paid while they undertake their training placements.
This is one of those reforms where it is hard to believe that it didn’t already exist.
I’ve heard from students who had to go straight from their hospital placement to their part-time job, just to pay the rent.
Others who had to move back home to get through.
Paid Prac has changed their life.
And today we build on its success.
Today I announce we will expand Paid Prac to physio and occupational therapy, clinical psychology, pharmacy and podiatry, speech pathology, audiology radiography, rehab therapies and our future paramedics.
Real help with the cost of living for tens of thousands of Australians.
And a real investment in the health care workers of tomorrow.
This is how Labor governs.
We deal with the here and now in a way that builds for the future too.
We navigate the rough seas, while always keeping our eyes on the horizon.
You’ve seen this same characteristic of our government, through the global fuel crisis,
When the conflict in the Middle East caused the biggest spike in petrol and diesel prices in history we acted to help Australians under pressure, working with the states and territories to cut fuel taxes.
And - importantly - working with industry and our partners in our region to secure shiploads of additional petrol, diesel, jet fuel and fertiliser.
So our farmers had the security to plant their crops.
So our miners and tradies could keep our economy going.
And not only did we make sure our truckies could stay on the road we changed the law to make sure they got fair pay for their work.
And right through March and April, while our opponents were saying that travelling to Asia was a waste of time and petrol rationing was days away.
We were building up our reserves.
Meaning there is more fuel in Australia today than when the conflict in the Middle East began.
And we will have more security into the future as well.
Because we are making more clean fuels here.
We are building a government-owned strategic fuel reserve.
And the first ship in our strategic fleet is now on the water.
Delegates
For all the progress we take pride in together, we know there is more to do and further to go.
There always is.
That’s what drives us - and always has.
Right back to when the founders of our movement were confronted by unfairness in the workplace.
Inequality in society.
And structural problems in the economy.
They didn’t pretend that the answer was to tear everything down and walk away.
They understood then – as we do now – that people’s genuine frustrations deserve a practical response, not just an emotional one.
Because a list of problems only counts for something if it comes with solutions.
And while you can go a long way in politics, for a long time by raging against a system that you are a part of, without a plan to fix it.
Or blaming people who cannot defend themselves for a problem they did not cause.
That doesn’t build anything.
It doesn’t change anything.
It doesn’t take our country forward.
It doesn’t help anyone find a job, pay their bills, or put a roof over their head.
This has always been the fundamental contrast between Labor and all our political opponents.
And never more so than now.
Because beyond One Nation’s personality clashes, policy confusion, conspiracy theories and candidate chaos and regardless of who leads the Liberals to the next election.
In every way that matters, the Liberals, Nationals and One Nation are already a Coalition.
It’s not just that they need each other to form Government.
They agree with each other about what they want to do in Government. 
They all want to cut wages.
They all want to scrap Paid Parental Leave.
They all want to make it easier to sack workers.
They all want to make it harder for young Australians to buy a home.
They all want to slash the jobs and industries powered by renewables - and spend billions on nuclear reactors instead.
And they all want to cut Medicare.
And everything else, all those attention-seeking culture wars imported from overseas, all those trips around the world to talk Australia down cannot disguise the fact that none of them have anything new or positive to offer our country.
In the Labor Party, we travel by a different road.
We choose progress over protest.
We choose purpose over chaos.
We choose unity over division.
We choose outcomes over outrage.
We choose real change that makes a real difference.
Delegates 
For all the passion that we bring to our debates at Conference.
We know that the measure of our movement is not the words we put in to our platform it is the progress and reform and rights that flow out of it.
The real change we deliver, as a result of it.
And for all of us, that always begins with a fair go at work.
For a decade, 6 months of Paid Parental Leave was a goal in our platform.
Today, it is the law of the land.
And, for the first time, superannuation is paid on top.
In remote communities, the CDP has been abolished – and replaced with thousands of real jobs for real wages.
Penalty rates and overtime pay are protected by law.
Superannuation is paid, on pay day.
Wage theft is now a crime.
And after decades of union campaigning workers aged 18, 19 and 20 are finally being paid like the adults that they are.
We are delivering the historic wage increases our aged care workers and early educators deserve part of the reason that the gender pay gap is at an all-time low.
And today, right around our country.
People in factories and warehouses, meatworks and mine sites, flight attendants and ground crew are being paid tens of thousands of dollars more, every year.
Because we changed the law.
So that if you work the same rosters, wear the same uniform, perform the same tasks, with the same skills, if you do the Same Job, you get the Same Pay.  
Our commitment to a fair day’s work for a fair day’s wage is older than Federation.
And we have always understood that while you can write fairness into law, justice depends on the law being upheld.
Yet there are still too many of the most vulnerable workers in this country being illegally underpaid because they cannot access or afford the justice they are owed.
Australians who have been underpaid by hundreds, even thousands, of dollars but simply do not have the time or the resources to navigate the legal system.
Or are told their case will take months even years to resolve, and cost them more than their claim is worth.
That is just wrong.
And we are going to fix it.
Today I announce that our Government will create the Fair Work Court.
Headed by expert judges, working seamlessly with the Fair Work Commission.
This will resolve disputes faster and at lower cost – for both employees and employers.
Good for workers. Good for business. Good for the country.
Delegates
Our enduring commitment to the fair go is also how we meet the new challenges and opportunities of Artificial Intelligence.
Right now, global investors are knocking on Australia’s door.
And that gives us the chance to determine what AI looks like here.
This technology is already part of our daily lives.
We can’t stop it – and we wouldn’t want to.
But we can shape it – and we have to.
Our prosperity, our sovereignty and our national security depend on it.
That is why our Government will legislate clear, mandatory, Australian standards for AI.
Making sure data centres minimise their water use.
Put more renewable energy into our grid.
And do not compete with new housing.
We will provide the strongest possible protections for Australian artists, writers, musicians and journalists.
Because their creative endeavour is their property.
And if a tech company takes someone’s art or music or writing or journalism without their permission that is not ‘training’ – it is theft.
I know there are real concerns about how fast AI is moving and the disruption it might bring.
And we can only manage that and protect ourselves if Australia is active and confident in shaping this change.
That means investing in our people and their skills and capacity.
Bringing the same ambition that drives our agenda for A Future Made in Australia.
So we are more than a warehouse for ideas made overseas, or the last link in the digital supply chain.
Securing long-term growth, not a short-term boom.
Empowering workers, not replacing them.
Creating good jobs with fair wages, not undercutting them.
We cannot leave this up to companies or individuals to figure out on their own.
We all have a stake.
We are all involved.
It will take all of us working together, to get this right.
And that is exactly what our Labor Government will do.
Delegates
In April 1904, when the new Prime Minister Chris Watson and his Labor colleagues took their spots on the government benches of the Federal Parliament for the first time, Sir John Forrest stared across at them from the other side of the chamber and said to his Tory colleagues: 
“What are those fellows doing in our places? Those are our seats!”
They’ve never really got over it, have they?
Our opponents have never been able to accept the legitimacy of a Labor Government.
They think we should know our place.
They have never been able to accept that the trade union movement is central to the health and strength of our democracy.
Because they have never believed that the working people of Australia deserve a say in the shape of our economy and the future of our society.
That’s why - for them - every increase in wages is always the end of the world.
Any improvement in workers’ rights is a sign of the apocalypse.
They say that every cost of living measure is a waste.
And they see every change to the status quo as an outrage.
That is why they are so offended by our reforms to rebalance the tax system.
To better align the way the system deals with income earned from work and wages, compared to income from selling assets.
Because we know that the vast majority of Australians have nothing to sell but their time, nothing to give but their hard work.
That’s how they make a living - one hour of effort after another.
That’s how they provide for their family and put food on the table.
They work their guts out, every single day.
Cleaning offices before the sun comes up.
Stacking shelves at night.
Teaching our children in schools.
Looking after our parents in aged care.
They’re nurses and police officers and fireys and paramedics, keeping our communities safe.
And all the hard yakka they put in, every sacrifice they make, everything they give up and go without, is so their children can have a better life with greater opportunity.
These are the people our party was created to serve.
They are Australians you stand up for, every day.
They deserve lower taxes.
That’s why we are cutting them.
They deserve higher wages.
That’s why we are backing them.
And these hard-working Australians deserve the opportunity to buy their own home.
Which is why, after 25 years of Howard and Costello tax breaks for property investors pushing home ownership out of reach, we have reformed negative gearing and capital gains tax.
Under Labor, for the first time in a generation, first home buyers are getting a fair crack. 
This was not the easy option – but it was absolutely the right thing to do.
Because when everyone knows the system is not working.
When everyone can see that it is not fair or reasonable or sustainable for a generation of Australians to be locked out of the housing market.
The choice for a party of Government is crystal clear.
You can make excuses for a broken status quo.
You can kick the can down the road and leave the problem for someone else to solve.
Or you can take responsibility, you can take action.
You can back home ownership and aspiration for all Australians - not just some.
And that is exactly what we are doing.
Of course, we’re doing that beyond housing.
We’re taking action in so many areas where reform has been put off for too long, or progress has been too slow.
Acting on climate change and protecting our environment.
Closing the gap.
Repairing the budget.
Restoring our relationships in the region.
Fixing employment services.
Leading new action to eliminate the scourge of family and domestic violence.
And securing the future of the NDIS, so it can continue to change lives.
Hard choices. Hard work.
But the right thing to do – now and for the future.
That is the Labor way.
Delegates
Our Australian values drive us to deliver real change – and they guide us as we deal with an uncertain world.
From our first day in Government, we have been investing in our capabilities and our relationships.
We are building our sovereignty in defence - with record investment in tens of thousands of defence manufacturing jobs, including right here in South Australia.
We are building the social cohesion and national unity that is essential to our national security.
And we are building new and deeper partnerships beyond our borders.
A landmark security treaty with Indonesia.
New security agreements with the EU, Canada and India.
And a proud update we can make to this year’s platform.
Through 125 years of Federation, Australia has had two allies: the United States of America and New Zealand.
In the last year, we have doubled that number.
Under Labor, Australia has re-engaged as a partner and leader in the Pacific.
And because we are working with our Pacific family to meet the challenge of climate change and seize the opportunities of clean energy.
Because in a time of strategic competition in our region, Australia is both an advocate for peace and a security partner of choice.
Two of our nearest neighbours - Papua New Guinea and Fiji - are now our newest allies. 
Delegates, I conclude with this.
Lifetimes of change separate this 50th National Conference from our first.
Yet like the new nation it served, even the very first Labor Government was not a “monoculture”.
There were Protestants and Catholics, English, Irish and Scots.
One was an American pretending to be Canadian and no-one was sure if the Leader was born in New Zealand or Chile.
For all of that, those men could never have contemplated a Labor Government Caucus room with a majority of women.
Or a roll call of: Abdo, Albanese, Aly, Ambihaipahar, Ananda-Rajah and Ayres.
And that’s just the letter A.
They might have been more comfortable with a union leadership team of O’Neil and McManus, but Michele and Sally would have come as a shock.
125 years on, our party and our movement are more open, more democratic, more diverse and more equal.
Just like Australia.
We are more at home in our region – and more confident in the world.
Just like Australia.
We embrace the fullness and richness of our own history, the privilege we have to share this ancient continent with the oldest continuous culture on earth.
Just like Australia.
We have been enriched by people of every faith and background and tradition.
Just like Australia.
We have gained and grown from their ideas and their energy, and every bit as importantly from their loyalty to our shared values and their pride in our common cause.
Just like Australia.
And we are stronger and smarter, we are braver and better because of all of that.
Just like Australia.
Labor has changed because Australia has changed.
And because our movement has had the kindness and courage to drive that change and shape it, in the interests of all.
To make progress real for people.
To make reform work for people.
That is the mission that every Labor generation has made our own.
It is the task we carry forward now.
The work all of us must take from this Conference to the country we love.
Bringing aspiration in reach of all Australians.
Creating opportunity for all Australians.
Delivering real change for all Australians.
Thank you delegates.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
To your association’s president, Ms Bihong Wang, to the many state and federal parliamentarians and other elected and consular representatives here tonight, including Gabriel Ng and Carina Garland, and to the award judges, sponsors, finalists and winners, thank you so much for that warm welcome.
Last year I was able to attend your Box Hill Chinese Lunar New Year Festival and was struck by your amazing community spirit.
I understand that as part of tonight, we’re raising funds for the Paediatric Department of the Eastern Health Foundation. 
There’s no better cause than the health and wellbeing of our children, so give generously, as I know you will.
It demonstrates once again the immense contribution the broad Asian diaspora – and indeed all the communities represented here tonight – are making to our nation. 
As this room proves, we are a strongly multicultural country – and proud of it.
Multiculturalism is part of the bedrock of our future social and economic success.
The proposition that we could somehow return to some older, less diverse past is absurd – because that past never existed.
Australia has always been multicultural. 
I am proud of our success as a nation.
With the exception of Indigenous Australians, we are a country of migrants or descendants of migrants. People who came to Australia seeking a better life. Maintaining pride in their heritage while being proud and loyal to Australia.
So many have established businesses, worked hard and helped to build our nation. And their connections with the world give Australia a competitive advantage.
The facts speak for themselves.
Our largest trading partner is China – with $326 billion of annual two-way trade.
Our second-largest trading partner is collectively the ASEAN Member States – with almost $200 billion in trade.
Our fifth-largest trading partner is Japan – with almost $100 billion of trade.
Our sixth-largest trading partner is Korea – with $68 billion of trade.
And the eighth – India – provides $50 billion in trade and growing fast.
Those numbers say it all – our cultural strength and economic prosperity are inseparable. You can’t abandon the first and hope to succeed in the second.
I say to everyone here tonight – 
You’re not just running businesses –  
You’re not just generating prosperity –  
You’re bringing people together and making the modern world turn.
And you’re doing it in our region, which is the fastest growing in human history.
The many advantages of our diverse society are obvious. Blindingly so.
Again, they are here in this room.
Everyone here tonight is powering a path to increased productivity and to a better future for our country.
Not just through your famed achievements in education, which is one of Australia’s great success stories.
But through your outstanding success in small business. 
We know that rates of entrepreneurship are high for Australians from culturally diverse backgrounds – with young entrepreneurs of Asian heritage especially well represented.
Small and emerging businesses like these are making the most of new technologies like artificial intelligence that are helping our economy thrive.
It all means our small business success is yet another great symbol of your determination to succeed.
And my government is determined to help you continue to succeed, because it means Australia will succeed.
In the recent Budget, we introduced $3.8 billion in new measures to lower taxes for businesses and start-ups and support small business risk taking and investment.
We increased the turnover threshold for the 50 per cent active asset Capital Gains Tax reduction – from $2 million to $10 million. 
We introduced a two-year loss carryback for small businesses – to help new businesses invest and grow in their first 24 months.
We made the $20,000 instant asset write off permanent.
While capital gains taxes relating to housing have been changed – to give your children a decent crack in the housing market – all four small business capital gains tax concessions are staying in place.
And we’ve introduced important measures to support the mental health and financial wellbeing of Australian small businesses.
And all this is on top of the economic stability we have delivered for the nation – creating 1.2 million jobs, low unemployment, and rising wages, so your customers can afford to buy more of the great products and services you create.
Friends, cultural diversity along with expanding trade with our region has made our continuing national success possible.
We must keep it going.
Your success is vital to Australia. 
We celebrate you and your amazing contribution to our country and salute the exciting, innovative and caring work you are doing. 
I congratulate all the finalists and winners of these awards.
Have a wonderful evening.


ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER: I hope everyone got a few days off. I got a few days off in beautiful Tasmania last week. So, thank you to Caucus members and Ministers for leaving me alone for a few days. It was good to have a break and to celebrate Jodie's first birthday with us as a married couple as well. 
Look, during the break has been pretty busy though. Conference was a fantastic moment for our movement where we brought together the 400 delegates, 400 proxies from right around the country, from branches, from cities, from regions, from unions, from the whole spectrum that make up our great movement. And what it was defined by I think was the unity of purpose that was there, the determination to ensure that we are a long-term Labor government. The determination to work through policy issues in a constructive way. And of course, it was the culmination of a whole process. It used to be, when I first started going to those conferences, people would come along with a pen and paper and write out things on the spur with 99 delegates. Now we have the 60 members of the committee that do the work, meetings in Sydney and Melbourne, a lot of the policy work done up, making sure that we get the detail right. But right across the board, I think, as a result of that conference, we have ways to move forward. 
Paid prac, which we're extending across the health sector. That's made such an enormous difference already. We know it’s a big success. The Fair Work Court that will make sure that instead of people who haven't got wage justice, who've been ripped off, waiting or going through lengthy legal processes that they can't have the capacity to do, we'll get things fixed in the interests of workers, but also in the interests of good employers as well. And we also looked at a range of issues that this Parliament will deal with, including in the coming fortnight as well. 
I met earlier today with the Leader of the Opposition as well, to work through NDIS. I expect those changes will pass in this sitting fortnight, which will be important to make sure that it's sustainable going forward. As a result of the work that we did at the National Conference, when it comes to the gambling legislation, further work and amendments that will be carried, I think, with bipartisan support about inducements. And making sure that those issues are dealt with in a constructive way, making sure that we get the balance right between people who want to go along and have a punt on a Saturday at the races. But also, that problem gambling is actually dealt with. This will be the strongest anti-gambling legislation that Australia has ever seen, building on the previous ones, which were also by our Government, making those changes through. And I'm confident that later in the week we'll have the legislation, the House of Representatives, with some really practical amendments dealing with the targeting of advertising, dealing with reducing children's exposure and dealing with as well, the full suite of measures in a really practical way. We also have the News Bargaining Incentive that we need to deal with as well. This is about media being paid for the work that journalists do. This is absolutely essential reform going forward, making sure that deals can be done between companies and media organisations for the work that they produce, but if not, there's an incentive there for that to occur and for it to be delivered. That builds on the work that we've done since Parliament last met, based upon the legislation that we had already carried. 
Bulk billing rates right across the country are increasing in every single state and territory, up to over 84 per cent nationally. That's a figure we were expecting to reach a couple of years from now that we've reached already, saying we are well on track to that target of 90 per cent bulk billing by 2030. It's pretty clear that we will exceed that measure. More first homebuyers getting a crack every Saturday and making sure that they get the opportunity that Australians want to see for their families. We're now up to 800,000 enrolments in Free TAFE, of which 32,000 are construction apprentices, making a difference. The speech that I gave about setting up Australian standards for AI and when I go to the United Nations in September next month, we'll build on that to lead the world, just like we have led the world in our social media policies as well going forward. We are investigating new oil refinery in WA, consistent with what been doing to ensure that fuel remains available here in Australia. And the fact that we have more supply here than we had on February 28 when this conflict in the Middle East began, is quite remarkable and a tribute to the hard work that Chris has done and the work that Julie Collins has done dealing with that issue and of course dealing as well in a really practical, orderly way with the challenge of bird flu as well. 
During the break as well, we signed our new alliance with Fiji and our alliance with PNG came into force. Meaning that for the first 125 years, we had two alliances. We've had two in the last 12 months and Senator Wong, the Foreign Minister, will be making statements on that in the Parliament this week as well. In addition to that, we met with leaders from Solomon Islands, Samoa, Tonga as well, and hosted Prime Minister Modi in Melbourne. An event that was quite extraordinary, let me say. I don't think anyone who saw that footage could doubt that. It was a very excited Australian Indian community who were there on that evening. 
So, we continue to advance our positive agenda as we go forward. And it contrasts with the Opposition across the board, the three parties, the Liberals, the Nationals and One Nation, who continue to look for grievance and look for opposition. We choose a different road. We choose progress over protest. We choose purpose over chaos. We choose unity over division. How we bring the country together. And importantly, we choose outcomes over outrage. We're here to make a difference. The legislation that we will be having in this second half of the year will set us up to go into 2027, even stronger as we go forward. Not talking Australia down, but building Australia up, which is what we do, whether it's here domestically or indeed internationally as well. 
So, I hope you all took the advice and did have a few days off during the break, but now it's back to work.



TÔ LÂM, GENERAL SECRETARY AND PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM: The Honourable Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, I am much delighted to return to the beautiful country of Australia on this state visit. I'd like to extend my sincere thanks to the leaders and people of Australia and you personally for the warm welcome extended to me and the high-level delegation of Vietnam. May I congratulate you and the Government of the Labor Party on the remarkable achievements in socioeconomic development, defence, security, and external affairs, and as you continue to lead Australia towards sustainable growth and affirm its proactive role in the Asia Pacific and the broader Indo-Pacific and around the world, may I convey to you the warmest greetings by Prime Minister Lê Minh Hưng and other high-level leaders in Vietnam.
On Vietnam's part, we have recorded initial successes in economic development, GDP growth for the first six months of this year surpassed eight per cent, and this has contributed to advancing social progress and equality, to realise our development strategies towards 2030, in which Vietnam will become a developing country with a modern industrial base and an upper-middle income, and to become a developed, high-income nation by 2045. We have made every effort to implement key policies and development, including the transformation of Vietnam's development models in line with other developing countries, with a modern industrial base and an upper-middle income. Building disciplined, safe, civilised, harmonious, and developed society to make Vietnam a strong maritime nation, fostered an independent and self-reliant economy in conjunction with effective integration, and fulfil our capacities and roles in all economic sectors, especially the private sector.
In terms of foreign affairs, Vietnam remains steadfast in its policy of independence, self-reliance, resilience, peace, friendship, cooperation, development, diversification, and multilateralisation of external relations. Vietnam continues to be a responsible member of the international community, making proactive contributions to the shaping of multilateral institutions and addressing common challenges while engaging in extensive international integration.
Vietnam highly appreciates Australia's role as a friend and reliable partner, sharing multiple strategic interests. We take pride in the robust and effective growth of our bilateral ties over the past 50 years. All six pillars of cooperation under the action plan for the CSP for 2024 to 2027 have been conducted as planned, with 96 per cent of our goals to build political trust has been bolstered, and defence security cooperation continues to receive greater depth and effectiveness. The achievements we have reported after five years of implementing the EEES since 2021, it's also commendable with our two-way trade turnover doubling, reaching US$14 billion in 2025. We also witness excellent science in investment, development cooperation, education, training, science, technology and culture, and people-to-people exchange, thus elevating our bilateral relations to a new height.
The world continues to witness tremendous changes with intertwined opportunities and challenges. We believe that the reliable relationship between our two countries will bring forth tangible benefits for both nations. Thus, through this visit, we hope that we can further deepen the CSP between our two countries with added strategic significance on the basis of our long-term effective relationship and the sharing of common visions and interests. Thank you, and I wish to pass the floor back to you, your Honourable.
ANTHONY ALBANESE, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA: Thank you very much. Welcome, Your Excellency, to Australia. You are indeed an honoured and a welcome guest. Australia and Vietnam are partners. We have our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, which has driven our increasingly important trade and economic relations. Our defence industries, as well as our defence forces, are cooperating more and more. And today's uncertain world means that it is more important than ever that friends engage with each other on all levels – economic, social, environmental – to meet the challenges that are before us. My Government, since 2022, has prioritised engagement with Southeast Asia. And I know that you are meeting Mr Nicholas Moore, who developed our Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040. We are friends, and will have increased dialogue at APEC, at ASEAN and throughout the region. We, both of our nations understand the importance of trade, the importance of freedom of navigation, the importance of so many of the issues that were taken for granted for a long period of time, but are under challenge, which is why it's important that we assert our common values on those issues.
I first travelled to Vietnam way back in 1986, and have travelled there every decade since, both professionally, my prime ministerial visit where we met each other, but as well as a tourist to Vietnam going back to the 1990s. And what I have seen is the extraordinary economic development that has occurred in Vietnam. Australia is a partner in that economic development. And we look forward to our discussions today with my senior ministers, our events that are occurring throughout today. I know that you had a visit to the Opera House last night. That was very welcome. I know you are an aficionado of opera. And one of the issues that my minister has already raised with me is Australian opera singers visiting Vietnam as well as being able to attend. So, you are very welcome in our country. We admire the speech that you gave, the keynote dialogue to the Shangri La Dialogue this year. A very important speech, emphasising peace and security in our region. I think that lays the foundations of what we want to see as we go forward.


Well, it is fantastic to be back here at Tomago. 
I stood here on not quite this sunny a day, it must be said, for those of you who remember that amazing thunderclap that occurred, and it rained torrentially that day. 
But it was also a bright day. 
It was a bright day because we promised that our government had your back. 
And what we are doing today is announcing what governments do the best – a Federal Labor Government working with the New South Wales Labor Government to deliver in the national interest, in the interests of the Hunter, and in the interests of your jobs and your future. 
This announcement today secures the future of this facility. 
An example, as well, of governments working with the private sector to make sure that we're not at the end of supply chains, making sure that there is a future made right here in Australia, and a future made right here in the Hunter. 
And I want to pay tribute to each and every one of the workers here, because what you do is strengthen our country, strengthen our resilience. 
Aluminium is an essential product and will be even more important into the future, which is why it's absolutely critical that today's agreement makes sure that this facility that has been so important for the Hunter, 1,000 direct jobs, but 5,000 indirect jobs in this region on top of that, but tens of thousands of jobs, if not hundreds of thousands of jobs, right throughout the country because of what you produce. 
But most importantly, you make our nation stronger. 
So, thank you for what you do. 
Thank you to the company as well for the constructive engagement that we've had to make sure that this facility not only survives but thrives into the future. 
Well done.


Buongiorno and happy Ferragosto.
This is a fantastic celebration.
Of course, today I want to pay tribute and begin by thanking as well the faith leaders, including His Grace, Bishop Umbers, for the procession.
Because today is, of course, in acknowledgement of the feast, celebrating the Assumption into Ascension into Heaven of the Virgin Mary.
It is also a celebration that goes back many hundreds of years, from a time where the harvest in summer, mid-August, was celebrating the harvest in Italy, and where there was a period of rest for people in those agricultural communities.
Here in modern Australia, of course, it is a celebration of something else as well.
It is a celebration of the proud contribution of Italian-Australians to making Australia the most successful multicultural country on earth.
I'm very proud to be the first Prime Minister of Australia, out of the 31 that we've had, to have a non-Anglo Celtic name, and I'm very proud of the background that I have.
I look forward to celebrating all of that today with you that you will do.
Celebrating the food, language, culture that the Italian community have brought here, including I was speaking before to the Nonna’s who will sing in the Abruzzese language here as well, and that will be no doubt a highlight going forward.
We have a proud country.
This is the best country on earth because people have brought different cultures here, remembered where they're from, are proud of their culture, but also are proud Australians.
And that’s what makes us such a country where we can enjoy the broad breadth of our diversity.
I want to thank the council and everyone else, all the special guests who are here, and everyone who's made this a successful day and put in the hard work.
Have a fantastic day.
Forza Italia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I also want to acknowledge today the fact that it is Vietnam Veterans’ Day, a really important day in our calendar.
And I acknowledge the presence and pay my respects to all of the veterans who might be with us here this evening.
I want to acknowledge as well the Leader of the Opposition, the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Julie Collins, the Minister for Environment and Water, Murray Watt, and other parliamentary members who are with us this evening.
I also acknowledge National Farmers' Federation President, Hamish McIntyre, and CEO, Mike Guerin.
It is fantastic to be here, and what a great thing to actually celebrate and commemorate the achievement of an objective in advance.
And too often we sort of slide past it to "what's next?"
But it is important to pause and take time, and to give thanks to this rather extraordinary achievement, or overachievement, which is what we want to see.
So, to Mike and Hamish, you've done a remarkable job leading the sector through what has been a difficult period.
And to the people who were here as well, leading the NFF over a long period of time.
I've been here throughout that time and have always had a very good relationship.
I value collaboration and working together in the national interest across the range of issues to make sure that Australian agriculture and farm production can continue to grow in size and strength.
And it is an extraordinary achievement for the Australian agriculture sector to now officially grown into a $100 billion industry.
Set the goal in 2018 – with a consensus to get it done by 2030.
So, it’s extraordinary that that has been achieved by 2026.
But the sector has surged ahead.
Not just growing – but thriving.
Meeting that $100 billion milestone a whole four years in advance.
That number represents the substantial growth of Australian agriculture, right across the board:
The grain sector – up 128 per cent.
Cattle – up 83 per cent.
Sheep – up 70 per cent.
Horticulture – up 59 per cent.
An overall sector wide increase of over $42 billion over that period.
And importantly, that number is not a ceiling.
It is a mark of the potential that is there for the Australian agriculture sector and its capacity to continue to grow.
To contribute more to our nation.
To back in the future of our shared prosperity.
And that economic success, of course, doesn’t just happen by accident.
It is a product of hard work, driven by the people in this room, driven by the innovation, energy and constant hard work that makes this industry turn, year after year.
The planting, pruning, picking and cropping.
The shearing, droving and milking.
The seasonal rhythm of a sector that provides such abundance for our nation – and indeed, for the entire world.
Because the fact is that the world wants what Australia produces.
Our food and our fibre.
Our red meat and wheat.
Every type of fruit and vegetable grown under that bright Australian sun.
Because it is our way of doing things – our reputation for quality – that marks out the words ‘Australian grown and made’ as an unrivalled measure of excellence.
Paired with the unique position of our continent sitting as we are, at the centre of the fastest growing region of the world in human history.
We are well placed to build on our success and seize new opportunities as they emerge right across trade and agriculture.
That’s why we have worked so hard to expand Australia’s trade partnerships and market access right across the board.
Securing the best possible deal for Australian agriculture and Australian consumers.
Together, we have worked to open up new and expanding markets through trade, including the deals with the European Union and the UAE.
We’ve opened up Australian trade to 40 new markets and we’ve restored access to 19 that were previously lost.
In addition, we have continued to invest in the strength of our relationships with our long standing partners like Indonesia, India, China and the United States.
And investing those relationships, coming together to put forward our position, has certainly paid dividends.
That opening up of trade will only continue to drive the jobs, technology and collaborative spirit that has cemented Australia’s standing as a great primary producing nation.
But for all of that success, for all of those opportunities, what really sets Australia apart is how we manage disruption.
How we shape change in our national interest, while building our resilience for the future.
The world today is more complex and connected than it has ever been.
As change comes at us, we cannot press the stop button.
We have to work to shape that change as it occurs.
Because no country and no economy has been immune to the impact of the overlapping global shocks that have occurred since this target was set, which makes its achievement even more remarkable.
We had, of course, the Global Financial Crisis before that, but then COVID, which disrupted markets.
We had in more recent times as well, significant disruption, including this year since February 28, the disruption to our global fuel supplies.
As a Government, what we have done is work with the NFF and other organisations to make sure that that fuel security was maintained, that diesel, in particular, was available to the agricultural sector, so that people could plant with confidence that they’d be able to harvest that yield.
So that, as well, it must be said, one of the reasons why we were able to be successful is the fact when I went to Singapore and Brunei and Malaysia, when I spoke to our neighbours about our need to secure supplies, part of what that debate and discussion was about between our friends, was we are a reliable supplier.
Brunei and Singapore depend upon our food bowl.
Their food bowl is right here in Australia.
And what that meant was that the security of fuel was able to be achieved.
Today, we have more fuel in Australia than we had at the outbreak of the war on February 28.
It’s a remarkable achievement being done, working with organisations like the NFF, working with the private sector, to deliver that outcome.
In addition to that, we were able to secure supplies of fertiliser, including from Brunei, but particularly, additional fertiliser from Indonesia.
That’s a direct product of the relationships that we’ve built.
The fact that President Prabowo directed effectively Indonesia, for all of its excess to come to one country, this country, to look after our interests, because Indonesia knows that they have a friend in Australia.
And that is a reciprocal relationship that was absolutely critical in achieving what we’ve been able to do.
In addition to that, we had the issue of the trucking sector, which is so important for your industries to get product to market.
And we were able to pass legislation making sure that around the supply chains that there were fair payments, so you didn't have a disruption in the transport sector, which would have been devastating.
So, as it is, the Middle East conflict, of course, unfortunately continued.
But we're going better than anyone thought we would, it must be said there were calls before Easter for there to be rations of fuel at that time.
In addition to that, of course, we've now been hit with bird flu.
And again, we're working with the sector, working across the Parliament in a bipartisan way, working with the farmers to make sure that at this stage it is not having an impact on our agricultural sector.
But we know that it is a risk, and we're doing everything that we can to make a difference there, including the $113 million investment that we've made in the preparedness for the H5 bird flu.
We're also looking to the future in other areas, investing in a government owned 1 billion litre strategic fuel reserve and growing Australia's biofuel and low carbon liquid fuel industry.
We want to expand opportunities for farmers to turn Australian grown sugar and canola and other byproducts into Australian made fuels, this would benefit our nation's fuel security.
It would lower emissions, and it makes a difference for the agricultural sector as well.
We think that can make an enormous difference going forward.
These changes that we will make build on the consistent investments we've made as a government to strengthen our biosecurity framework.
That is obviously critical.
We've put in $2 billion since 2022, part of making sure we can continue to say we have the best products and the safest products in the world coming right here from Australia.
With those investments, we're backing vital industries like our ag sector to build our nation up.
And together we're making our resilience as a feature of our national character and our national industries.
Because that is the way that we manage challenges in Australia.
Acting together, supporting those who need assistance here and now, but always keeping an eye on that horizon, making sure that we build our capacity and grow our success in the future.
That's how we can set Australia for future generations, and how we can deliver long-term opportunities for the farmers, fishers, foresters, and agricultural workers of today and tomorrow.
So, the role that you play in that future will be crucial.
I have every confidence that together we will make it a success.
Congratulations once again on the historic milestone.
And very much on a personal note, I don't come from an agricultural background. It was just cement where I grew up.
I want to thank personally the many farmers who welcome me onto their property, educated me, who've been reached out and engaged so constructively over my time, not just as Prime Minister, but well before this, over a long period of time.
It is a great privilege that I have to get to see every bit of Australia and every part of Australia that contributes to the whole.
There's no sector that is more important than the one I'm looking at right now.
You provide sustenance no matter where people live, and you make such an enormous difference to our national economy.
You make me proud, which I am every single day, to be Australian.
Thank you for what you do.


Thank you so much, Geoff, and thank you, Bran as well for what I thought was a really constructive, thoughtful opening to this evening’s events. I begin by also acknowledging the traditional owners and I thank Yvonne Weldon for the welcome to country. I want to thank everyone here for hosting us for what is my fifth address to the BCA and to acknowledge all of my state and federal parliamentary colleagues who are here this evening, in particular all my ministerial colleagues, but also the members of the diplomatic corps, senior public servants, but members of the BCA as well.
My theme tonight is the need for a positive partnership between government, business and the community to keep our economy strong so we can keep our democracy strong. With the world now as it is, these two aspects are inseparably linked. All of us here tonight have been fortunate to live in an era of relative global harmony.
Ours has been an era of peace, technological innovation and rising prosperity for the people of the world. Australia has been among the biggest beneficiaries driven in large part by growing trade with Asia. The resulting sustained growth has made us the envy of so much of the world. Australia's comparative good fortune, our peace, our prosperity, our democratic foundations appear obvious. This sustained success has given our nation a sense of optimism and common purpose that seldom is found as strong elsewhere. Of course, we sometimes differ on important policy issues, but those disagreements are typically matters of emphasis and degree. Division, declinism, and negativity haven't overtaken us, as unfortunately they have in so many parts of the world. And this has allowed us to mostly build broad consensus and advance together steadily with governments of the centre left or the centre right. As a result, our nation has thrived.
The facts tell the story. Australia had a stronger economic growth, lower unemployment, stronger employment growth, and a stronger budget than most advanced economies. And our stable economic outlook and AAA credit rating were reconfirmed just in the last fortnight. Both Moody's and S&amp;P were upbeat. With Moody's adding that our AAA rating was, and I quote, underpinned by robust government finances supported by expenditure reforms and a record of conservative budget saying they expect real GDP growth in 2026 and 2027 to be among the strongest in the G20. Now, we must do all we can together – a theme of the three speeches you've heard tonight – to keep this success going. It won't be easy. After decades of relative calm, our world is indeed turbulent. It is beset by major military conflicts, most notably in Ukraine and the Middle East, that are causing trade restrictions and global inflation. It is experiencing the unmistakable impact of climate change.
The current temperature record breaking European summer has been a wake up call for the world. Its economic, social and human costs will be enormous. And our world is undergoing another profound wave of technological change in the shape of artificial intelligence. There is uncertainty about how all of these factors will play out, but they are causing unease and they're involved in populist forces, intent on spreading disinformation, negativity and division. How we handle this global moment will have major consequences for our economy, our social harmony and our democracy. Government, business, unions, and the community must meet this challenge together. The answer lies in not elevating grievance and division. We must remain positive and optimistic. Promote good ideas. Stay open to necessary reform. And crucially, we have to acknowledge that many Australians currently feel under pressure and deserve to have their concerns addressed very directly. Just as we need to push on with economic reform to increase productivity, we need to understand why so many Australians seek reassurance about the degree and direction of change.
That means we must do all we can to ensure that our rising prosperity reaches everyone. Australia can do this. We know this because we've done it before. And this is the motivation behind what we're doing at the moment in the crucial area of housing. Now, in all of the debate, no one has argued that the existing housing system was working for what is after all its primary purpose. And the primary purpose of housing is to give Australians access to a roof over their head, for them and their family, for home ownership. Since we changed tax breaks for property investors, first home buyers are facing less competition. More homes are being built right across the country. In the June quarter, there was a 27 per cent increase in investor loans for new builds. That is what the system was designed to do. And a 20 per cent increase for construction loans showing that developers are responding to this environment, because investors can still purchase new property using negative gearing and the capital gains tax discount if they want to do that.
That's a good thing, investing in their own future wealth and assets. But if you're investing in a new build, you're also investing in the assets and future wealth of the country. This is why, even though this is difficult reform, we're about giving Australians more of a stake in our national success. And this fact is vitally important, because when you can put a key in your own front door, you know our economy and the democracy are working for you. And when you have a decent job with better pay, you also know our economy and democracy are working for you. That is how we head off the populist challenge by delivering economic growth, generational equity, and making the economy work for people. Achieving change like this isn't easy. As Jeff just said, it is sometimes easy to retreat and support the status quo. It takes time. It takes effort and it takes goodwill.
But its worth to our country is immeasurable and wide-reaching. And the BCA is playing your role by contributing intelligently and forcefully to our economic debates. And I endorse wholeheartedly your call, done tonight in advance, to become a top 10 global investment destination in order to secure better living standards for this and for, importantly, future generations. As your recently published Global Investment Competitiveness Index shows, Australia is extremely well placed to rise further up the global ranks. We currently are second out of 42 nations in trade, something that would have pleased Minister Farrell, who's with us here tonight. A huge advantage, but in other areas as well, we're tenth in the rule of law. We're 11th in energy. So, we have a starting point where we do of course always do to aim better, but progress is well underway.
When I was your guest last year, I outlined the success of our August 2025 Economic Reform Roundtable that was convened by the treasurer Jim Chalmers, who’s also with us here tonight. A year on, its list of achievements is lengthening. As the Treasurer said on the round table's first anniversary just last week, in the last 12 months, we've delivered the most ambitious tax reform package, the broadest productivity push, and the most net savings in a generation. We're cutting compliance costs across the economy by $10.2 billion dollars a year. This includes pruning $960 million worth of red tape in the financial sector alone. Our moves towards creating a single national market will boost GDP by $13 billion every year. Including this month's heavy vehicle reforms agree with the states and territories that will increase GDP by up to $4.4 billion per year. In the last 12 months alone, we have cut around 500 nuisance tariffs, bringing the total number of tariffs cut to nearly a thousand. And our new Free Trade Agreement with the European Union will give Australian exporters easier access to a market with some 450 million customers. One of the things that we will need to work on to take up the BCA's offer here is that we'll need the support of the business community to ensure it gets through the Senate, given the comments of the Nationals leader, the Greens and other sceptics towards markets. We cannot afford for anything other than there to be support for this major agreement.
Now, all these major reforms compliment the more than $3.8 billion in new measures. We've taken a lower taxes for businesses and startups, including two year loss carry back, loss refundability and expanded incentives for venture capital. Our strong suit in the global rankings trade is set to become even stronger. Annual two-way trade with our five top Asian trading partners, China, ASEAN, Japan, Korea and India now totals almost three quarters of a trillion dollars. And it is set to keep growing. Our efforts here are unstinted with recent visits from regional leaders.
And earlier this year I visited Indonesia, Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia to strengthen those relationships even further. These visits did ensure security of supply for our fuel and fertiliser. And I'll be working with the BCA on advancing our trading relationship with India by the end of this year. Our prosperity does continue to rise for it to continue. Support for reform must be maintained and it must be strengthened. And there's only one way to harness support for this by demonstrating that will make life better for people. Business must succeed for people and communities to succeed, which is why I welcome the constructive relationship between the Government and the business community. And I welcome the formation of an umbrella group comprising all of the people organisations from small business right through to the major businesses. Positive change for people must be driven, and that is the most important outcome.
Taking the pressure off cost of living remains our first priority. Economic justice is being spread with methods such as the gender pay gap being at an all time low. New legislation locking in wage justice for early childhood educators. And just last week, gig economy workers not being left behind. These are valued members of our workforce who deserve to share in our national growth. More opportunities are being created through our skills policies. 800,000 enrolments now in Free TAFE. More than 250,000 of those have been completed. 36,000 new construction apprentices in our key apprenticeship programme. We’re also providing practical support for people through bulk billing, lifting it up through our tripling of the bulk billing incentive. Bulk billing now at 84 per cent nationally, 3,800 clinics around the country making a difference. Cheaper medicines being added to the PBS regularly, and the price coming down to $25. And that, as I’ve said before, something that is front and centre is young Australians getting a fair crack in the housing market, that frankly was just rigged against them.
Two other factors must now also be confronted. The first is the effect of the global situation on Australia's inflation and global supply chains. Simultaneous conflicts in Ukraine, the Middle East have upset world trade. They've pushed up prices and they've made the attainment of sovereign capability in vital goods and services absolutely crucial. That’s what the Future Made in Australia agenda is about, making sure that we can't be left at the mercy of highly exposed supply chains. On energy, we recently leveraged our diplomatic and trading relationships to secure those fuel supplies and on resources and manufacturing. We recently worked with industry, unions and the community to secure the future of the Tomago aluminium smelter. Tomago’s significance for our economy is enormous. This was a joint agreement between the Commonwealth and New South Wales, which will secure a supply of vital aluminium for Australian manufacturing businesses. And importantly, we’ve worked with the company, with the private sector, Rio, Tomago, we’ll put in over $1.4 billion dollars to upgrade that facility. This is about supporting thousands of jobs in the Hunter region, but it's also about making a massive contribution to decarbonising our economy and our East Coast energy grid. Australia is one of only a handful of countries with an end-to-end aluminium supply chain spanning bauxite mining, aluminium refining, aluminium smelting and advanced manufacturing. We couldn't afford to let it fail, and that's why we didn't.
We're bringing the same level of ambition to AI. Now, AI adoption will continue to grow. As business builds and tests newer capabilities of frontier AI capabilities accelerate, Australia can do more to unlock frontier AI development. And we must shape this change to harness the positive opportunities while minimising the downsides. Australia is in a strong position to attract investment in data centres, but maintaining social licence will be essential. That means ensuring energy bills do not rise, water security is maintained, and locations are appropriate. Getting this right can ensure Australia is the infrastructure partner for our region, aided of course by our status as a Five Eyes partner. It will advance our national sovereignty. It is essential for our national security for business productivity, science, innovation and resilience. Tomorrow I will advance discussion on national standards for AI at National Cabinet. The objective of all governments must be to turn our attractive investment settings into a comparative advantage that supports our national interests. We can't afford to have eight different systems in Australia, which is why we need national standards with broad support. Hosting large-scale AI training data centres and unlocking frontier AI model training will help Australia capture a larger share of the economic value, technical capability, and strategic influence of artificial intelligence, as well as boost the competitiveness of our startups and innovative businesses.
We must establish conditions to attract investment in frontier AI training, ensuring that artificial intelligence is developed safely, securely, and in ways that respect copyright and provide control and payment to the creative sector. Now, every country is dealing with these enormous issues. Just as I'm absolutely sure that every business in this room is considering the implications of what is a revolution. Australia will be the first to bring the policy response into a single national framework overseen by a central office located in my own department. We're leading the world in developing AI best practice, and I will be doing further work on this at the UN next month. We’ve led the world in the under-16s social media ban. Joined by New Zealand just on Monday. We can lead the world on AI. We have all the advantages, the space, the access to clean energy, the location, the security, trust of partners as well as a Five Eyes partner, for this to be something that drives productivity right through our economy.
Now tonight, I've spoken of the importance of remaining positive and upbeat in the face of the challenges which are there caused by global volatility. We know that they include global inflation and productivity. I am so incredibly proud of our country and I'm so optimistic about our future. A huge strength is that we can get reform done. In just last week, our parliament passed three highly significant pieces of legislation: reforms to make the NDIS sustainable so it can help Australians who need into the future; the News Bargaining Incentive to keep our media sector strong and make sure that journalists’ work is valued and importantly; new laws as well to get the balance right on gambling to protect those at risk. I believe we're on the right course to emerge even stronger from the big economic and political difficulties that are currently facing the world, and that our national economic success and strongly performing national institutions will help us see off the populist challenge now on the march right across the globe.
By strengthening our economy, we strengthen our democracy. And in the process, the role of the Business Council of Australia will continue to be central. I'm optimistic that together we can ensure that Australia's best days are ahead of us. And I am sure the BCA through Bran and Geoff, but all of the members here as well, that we remain willing partners. Our doors are always open. We need to have constructive, mature dialogue about policy solutions, because no individual has all of the answers. And I’m really encouraged by what I’ve heard tonight and from the work that has been done. And I thank you so much for giving me the honour of addressing you once again here. I look forward to working with you on our common objective, which is the prosperity of our nation. And we all understand that that means successful businesses and also means you therefore as successful businesses with productivity growing and profitability and prosperity growing mean that more Australians can enjoy that as well. Thanks very much. Have a great evening.


I begin by acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and I pay my respects to Elders past, present and emerging.
And thank you to Country Mayors Association of NSW Chairman, Mayor Rick Firman OAM, for that warm welcome.
All of you here tonight represent two important truths.
Firstly, that local government plays a vital role in the life of our nation.
And secondly, the fact that Australia has always been so much bigger than our big cities.
The regions give this country so much of our strength, both economically and in terms of our identity as a people and as a nation.
Local government has long been one of my priorities.
As Minister for Local Government in 2008, I established the Australian Council of Local Government.
Then, after it was abolished by the former government, I reinstated it in 2023.
Its role as an advisory body is invaluable.
And it is complemented by the open line you have to my office and to my ministers.
In us, you have a Federal Government that recognises the pressures you face – and works with you towards solutions.
A Federal Government with a track record of backing local government with real funding, a record we have continued in this year’s Budget.
A Federal Government that understands that you are in so many ways the frontline of our democracy – essential to Australia’s functioning, both in the here and now, and in the building of our future.
A future in which we see the towns and communities of our great continent’s regions become ever more viable, growing in desirability as places to live.
Places where it’s easier for younger generations to stay, and more appealing for newcomers to move to – whether it’s to set up a business or to make a home.
And we do it with the knowledge that our choice is to either shape the future, or be shaped by it.
My Government’s approach is built on anticipation – not just reaction.
One very topical example is our establishment of a bird flu taskforce – in 2024.
So when bird flu reached our shores recently, we were ready.
We have also learned from past mistakes that left Australia vulnerable.
Since we were elected in 2022, our Government has been working consistently and carefully to restore Australia’s relationships with our neighbours in the region.
One dividend of that work is we now have more fuel in Australia than before the current Middle East crisis began, including the diesel that is one of the lifebloods of the regions.
And we’ve unlocked an additional 250,000 tonnes of fertiliser from Indonesia.
There is so much that can be achieved, but everything is governed by reality.
You and your councils cannot be expected to pull off the miracle of doing more with less.
That’s why, at the Labor Party’s National Conference in July, we endorsed a five-year Federation Compact that commits to ongoing increases in the Financial Assistance Grants, restoring funding certainty for local councils after the freeze that the former government imposed.
That is a success that resulted in no small part from the patience, hard work and persuasive powers of your membership. 
Conference delegates also agreed that we would:

Ensure Roads to Recovery funding can be used to purchase plant and equipment to enable councils to carry out their own road maintenance with their own trained workers, to the extent possible;
Support and increase the availability of apprenticeships in local government, as well as other employment programs in a local government context;
Deliver new capabilities to improve outcomes in housing, planning, emergency management and aged care; and
Ensure the Government publishes an annual summary of funding for Local Government.

Through the 2026-27 Budget, our Government is providing $3.6 billion in untied Financial Assistance Grants. More than $880 million of that is to NSW local governments.
Real money that local governments can spend on their own priorities. 
This includes bringing forward payments of $2.9 billion – or 80 per cent of the 2026–27 FA Grant estimate – to assist with immediate cost pressures during this period of unpredictability in the global economy. 
Compared with the Coalition’s last five years in power, Labor is delivering more than two-and-a-half times the growth in Financial Assistance Grants.
As for disaster funding arrangements, councils have told us that the current disaster funding arrangements are too slow and complex. 
We have listened. Our Minister for Local Government Kristy McBain has commenced consultations to make the process simpler and faster for councils to navigate. 
When disaster strikes, the role of the local council is vital.
As many of you know, I will always try talking with the mayor in the disaster zone first to find out what’s actually going on – and, crucially, what is needed.
In the Budget handed down in May, the Government committed an additional $395 million to major projects in NSW, bringing our 10-year commitment under the Infrastructure Investment Program to $17.3 billion.
Major IIP projects in Regional NSW include the M1 Pacific Motorway Extension to Raymond Terrace, which is about to open, and $1.4 billion for Princes Highway Corridor from south of Nowra to the Victorian border, including the Milton to Ulladulla Bypass Motorway
Under the Roads to Recovery program, the Government has committed $922 million to your member councils for the years 2024 to 2029. 
This funding represents a total increase of over $331 million from the previous funding period 2019-24.
This Government has doubled funding for Roads to Recovery, reaching $1 billion per year from 2027–28.
We have committed funding to your member councils under the Safer Local Roads and Infrastructure Program since 2022 to support the delivery of safer and more productive roads across Australia.
Among other projects, we have also committed $96 million to your member councils under the Black Spot Program to improve road safety and help prevent serious injuries and deaths on our roads. 
On the rail front, I know many of you were disappointed by the decision on the Inland Rail Project – but in a world where money is most definitely finite, the case for it just didn’t stack up.
 Yet we will still benefit from it.
 As part of our record investment in freight rail, we are investing $2.8 billion in the productivity and resilience of our national rail network.
And getting on with completing construction between Beveridge in Victoria and Parkes in NSW. 
 This will enable double-stacked freight trains to travel between Melbourne and Perth, via Parkes.
We are an orderly, methodical Government. By getting the detail right, we deliver real benefits to communities.
On which note, we not only want you to build more housing, we want to help you do it.
That is why we are making $2 billion available for the Local Infrastructure Fund under the Housing Support Program to help local governments and state-owned utilities build the critical ‘last mile’ infrastructure needed to support new housing developments, and to help unlock development-ready land by fast-tracking enabling infrastructure such as water, sewerage and electricity connections.
A key part of the economic lifeblood of many regional NSW communities is working holidaymakers from overseas.
Working holiday visas are still being processed, albeit more slowly in order to manage net overseas migration. 
The number of working holiday visas is at a historically high level.   
As announced in the Budget we are managing demand for the program and providing a fairer allocation of visas, while continuing to support the tourism economy and workforce needs particularly in regional Australia 
The Government will continue to work closely with stakeholders to monitor critical workforce needs.
Continuing a key part of the Government’s mission, we’ve been strengthening Medicare by boosting bulk-billing, making mental healthcare more accessible, and establishing Urgent Care Clinics. 
There are now 36 Medicare Urgent Care Clinics in NSW, including in Albury, Batemans Bay, Bathurst, Bega, Cessnock, Charlestown, Coffs Harbour, Dapto, Erina and Lismore. 
We’re training more doctors for the regions, and expanding Commonwealth Paid Prac for people training in frontline health professions, making it easier for students to undertake placements in regional areas.
We’ve been enhancing education opportunities and building vital skills through free TAFE – indeed, a third of enrolments are in regional and remote areas. 
And we’re tapping into a huge pool of talent by making it easier to get more regional Australians into university, helping them study closer to home and building the regional workforces we need.
We’re making it easier for households, small businesses and indeed local councils to cut their power bills through cheaper rooftop solar and our Cheaper Home Batteries program, which has seen the regions and outer suburbs leading the charge, installing over half a million batteries.
We’ve been eroding the tyranny of distance by improving the NBN and keeping REX in the air. 
We’re tackling more mobile black sports with funding for 10 new mobile base stations across regional NSW.
We’ve focused on jobs as the building blocks of regional Australia’s future, through our support for industry – a prime example being our investment earlier this month in the workers of Tomago.
And we’re seizing the opportunities of renewable energy in places like the mighty Hunter.
On the 1st of July 2026, Orica reached Final Investment Decision on its Hunter Valley Hydrogen Hub, and will proceed with a grant from the Government’s Hydrogen Headstart program to produce and use renewable hydrogen in the Hunter Valley. 
The plant will become operational in 2029. 
That is just one example of how we are building Australia’s future in the regions. 
Of course, water is central to that future.
The National Water Grid Fund is investing in active projects in regional NSW, including the Molong Water Security Pipeline, which will improve water reliability for communities in the Central West, the Walhallow Aboriginal Community Water Supply and Wastewater Reuse project, which will improve drinking water quality for an Aboriginal community in northern NSW, and planning projects, such as the Macquarie-Wambuul Water Security Project Detailed Business Case, which will consider a range of options for improving water supply across the region.
Achieving a genuine balance between water for communities and industry and water for the environment is a real challenge. 
We have the Murray Darling Basin Plan because it was recognised by the governments of the day that the balance was wrong.
Almost 15 years later, independent evaluations make clear that the Basin plan is working. The hard work of communities, farmers and governments to restore water use in the Basin to a sustainable level is paying off.
However, there is more work to do to get the Basin Plan balance right.
Our Government has started the work to develop a new Basin Plan that will inform future approaches to how water is managed in the Basin.
Basin communities have made their voices heard during consultation. Our Government will listen carefully to those voices because we are committed to delivering a new plan that delivers the genuine balance.
And that captures so much of the essence of our Government’s approach.
Listening, consulting, getting it right.
Working with ambition, but not rushing the job.
Recognising that what matters in even the biggest picture is the detail.
And that when it comes to the details that make up the communities of regional NSW, and right across our continent, no one is across them like their local councils.
When we work together, we lift your communities.
And when we lift them, we lift Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and I pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.Before we begin, I want us to take a moment to reflect on the tragedy in Nepal that has resulted in such devastation and loss of life – potentially including many Australians still among the missing. Our thoughts and prayers are with their families and friends, with the people of Nepal, and with the citizens of every country caught up in this calamity. Our hope is that many of those missing are found alive. That something so devastating could occur in such an awesome and inspiring corner of the world during times of pilgrimage and holiday makes the blow seem even more heartbreaking. I want to reassure you that, as always, Australia is responding with significant consular, rescue and humanitarian aid. Delegates, it’s always a good day to be in Queensland. The state whose struggles for the rights of trade unionists inspired the formation of Labor 135 years ago – an anniversary we acknowledged at our National Conference last month. I had the privilege then of launching a new edition of Ross McMullan’s tremendous history of the ALP, The Light on the Hill, which opens with the drama of the big Shearer’s Strike of 1891. Although that strike was lost, it taught the workers a lesson. About the need for parliamentary representation. From defeat came a victory – the formation of the ALP. Delegates, 135 years on, we’re still here. Still standing up for a better life for everyday Australians. For the low paid. For equality for women. For justice for Australia’s First Nations people. For the environment. For social cohesion and for democracy – in a world of increasing anger and intolerance. Our Party has never been more respected in the world. And never been more listened to. Because on so many big topics, we don’t wait for the world. We take the lead. We’re unafraid to take on the big challenges. That’s why we should all be proud to be members of the greatest social-democratic party in the world. My thanks to the Branch for your invitation. Especially after I let you down last year. But it was for the best of reasons. It was, after all, my wedding day. So, thank you for your understanding. My thanks to our office bearers – Fiona, Ben, Isabella and Megan. To Steven Miles and Cameron Dick. To all the Queensland State MPs, Mayors, Counsellors and Union officials. To the students and Young Labor members. To all the delegates. To our wonderful rank and file members. And of course, to our federal caucus members, including the fantastic new additions from last year’s historic victory. Corinne Mulholland, Renee Coffey, Matt Smith, Emma Comer, Madonna Jarret, Kara Cook, Rowan Holzberger, Julie-Ann Campbell, and, of course, Ali France. A fact that makes our great Labor Party stand apart is that our name still means something. Unlike the right-wing parties. We have a Liberal Party that isn’t liberal, a National Party that isn’t national, and One Nation – whose leader seeks to divide Australians talks Australia down both here and overseas. We all know that right now many Australians are under pressure. The disruptions to global trade caused by the wars in Ukraine and the Middle East have caused inflation to spike around the world. It’s spread economic unease and political disruption. It’s something every country is facing. My response to this situation is clear. To show people that government can ease the financial pressure and lower the temperature of our debates, while building a better future. We’re showing this across the country, including right across Queensland. In Brisbane. In Toowoomba. Rockhampton. Mt Isa. Ipswich. Matt Smith’s fortress up there in the far north. Delivering real change for Australians. With more tax cuts. Cheaper medicines and a stronger Medicare. Real help for first home buyers. Wage justice for the low paid. Delegates, I’m so proud of what we are doing in health. There are now 691 fully bulk billing practices across Queensland – 301 of which have made the switch from mixed billing as a result of our record investment. We’ve lifted the bulk billing rate for GP appointments in Queensland to 82 per cent. And there have been over 740,000 Queensland visits to our 26 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics. In the last 16 months alone we’ve added ten new clinics in Deception Bay, Cairns North, Gladstone, Mackay, Carina-Carindale, Coorparoo, Capalaba, Inner Brisbane, Buderim and Caloundra. When the children are unexpectedly sick or injured and you need help, you now have somewhere to go, free of charge, right across this big state. All you need is your Medicare Card, not your credit card. Our cheaper medicines have filled 94 million scripts, saving Queenslanders $600 million in pharmaceuticals since 2022. And our latest Hospital Funding Agreement is investing an extra $5.7 billion over five years in Queensland hospitals.   This is real change that is making a real difference to Queenslanders’ lives. Free TAFE is changing lives – that’s why Labor established it, and why we’ve made it permanent. Since 2023 143,000 Queenslanders have enrolled in a Free TAFE course. Giving a future to Queensland’s crucial manufacturing industries. Nearly 7,500 Queensland housing apprentices have picked up the tools and taken up a trade through our Key Apprenticeship Program. Tens of thousands of Queensland uni students and graduates have had their student debt cut by 20 percent. And for the first time, Paid Prac for students in critical health, education and other services is being paid. We expect over 17,000 Queenslanders will receive it this year. Delegates, this is Labor delivering real change for people. I’m incredibly proud too of the work that our movement is doing to lift wages. Annual wages have now grown above three per cent for 15 consecutive quarters. We’ve delivered 5 consecutive increases to minimum and award wages. We’ve abolished junior pay rates – so 18, 19 and 20-year-olds get paid like the adults that they are. Gig economy workers are now getting wage justice and decent conditions thanks to our new legislation. And early childhood educators – no longer undervalued by our society, are now getting a locked in 15 per cent pay rise. Aged care workers too are now being paid properly.And we are delivering record funding to fix the Bruce Highway, Queensland's most important artery. This is the difference Labor governments can make. Delegates, Queensland is Australia’s gateway to the Pacific and the world. No other part of the world is more important to us, which is why tomorrow I’m heading to Palau and the Pacific Island Forum, to discuss issues crucial to the security and prosperity of all our nations. Australia is a proud member of the Pacific family, and investing in the security and prosperity of our Pacific neighbours makes our region safer and our economy stronger.Our engagement in the Pacific Islands Forum and our contributions to the infrastructure, regional security and climate action of the region matter more than ever before.The big challenges facing the Pacific require solutions designed and delivered for the Pacific, by the Pacific. And Australia has a key role to play – as a partner and leader.And this economic cooperation works two ways.People from the Pacific make an enormous contribution to Australia’s prosperity through their vital work in regional industries like agriculture and meat processing.So many of our farmers and food producers rely on them.We know also the wages they remit home help boost the economies of their families and communities, contributing to the prosperity and stability of the whole region.And we intend to keep this crucial two-way economic benefit continuing.We won’t ever let those who peddle division affect the viability of our food producing industries.Our predecessors joked about water lapping at the shores of our Pacific Island neighbours. It was disgraceful and undermined our national security.Taking climate change seriously is the entry price for engaging with our Pacific family. For the small Pacific island nations, climate change is an existential threat. Our position is therefore clear: climate change is happening, the threat it poses to small island nations is real, and we are ready to help by showing global leadership on cutting emissions. As good neighbours we want to help Pacific Island communities thrive and address issues of mutual concern – like controlling the illicit drug trade, advancing women’s rights, safety and economic empowerment, and showing that the nations of the Pacific working together can help shape the way the world adopts AI Their success is our success. Delegates, this a crucial time for our movement. Across the world hard right populists are on the march. Peddling politics that is dangerous, divisive, and downright dishonest. We simply must defeat them. We owe it to history. And we will defeat them. They’ll say anything and do anything to win votes. Bend any facts. Peddle misinformation and disinformation. Turn Australian against Australian. Parties like One Nation have no serious answers to our problems. Their own divisions and disagreements are now showing through. They think Australians are lazy and overpaid. That people working from home are bludging. That domestic violence is sometimes a woman’s fault. That we should – somehow – become a monoculture. Delegates, we unequivocally support multiculturalism because we know it’s part of Australia’s strength. And because we believe every Australian is equal, whether they are Australian by birth or Australian by choice. It’s obvious – One Nation are not on the side of working people. How is their plan to cut penalty rates going to help the people of Logan, or Gladstone, or Strathpine, or Ipswich, or Mt Isa? Every time they achieve any success, it leads to chaos and division. Remember when they won 11 seats in Queensland in 1998? They lost all of them in record time. How on earth will they govern in coalition with the LNP? Because they can’t govern without the LNP – and the LNP can’t govern without them. The only mainstream political force in Australia that seeks to govern in the interests of the Australian people in their own right is the Australian Labor Party.The best way to defeat this coalition of chaos is to give Australians real hope of a better future. For their country. And for their families and themselves. To stay positive. To be the party with the ideas that will make our people’s lives better, our economy stronger, our country safer, our environment cleaner. To be the party of progress and optimism and aspiration for everyone. I believe no matter how enormous the changes in the world are right now, we can retain control of our own destiny. And that we can do it by governing with courage and intelligence and decisiveness. Delegates, that’s what we are doing. After four years and four months of Labor government, our country is in good shape. We have stronger economic growth, better employment growth, lower unemployment, and a sounder budget than most major advanced economies. And our stable economic outlook and Triple-A credit rating were reconfirmed recently in glowing terms. We are on the right track. And, with every sitting of parliament, passing important new reforms, like our reforms to keep the NDIS sustainable, our News Bargaining Initiative to keep our media companies strong, and our changes to strengthen gambling advertising restrictions. All passed just over a week ago. Our goal is to make our economy work for people, not the other way around. So it can deliver economic justice for everyone. And that justice has a crucial dimension we must never forget. A generational dimension. Across the world, many young people are in despair, robbed of hope, feeling they may never attain the standard of living their parents enjoyed. It’s made many cynical – even about the great miracle of democracy. And turned generation against generation.  We can’t let this trend take hold here. This, delegates, is a cause for our time. We must give young Australians a stake in the nation’s future. And the best stake in Australia’s future is to own a home. Because when you can put that key in the door of your own home, you know our economy is working for you. For too long Australia’s housing policies didn’t serve young Australians. We are now giving them a real crack at getting that home. Since their release three months ago in the Budget, our housing policies have already started making a difference. No one can argue that the existing housing system was working for its primary purpose – to give Australians access to home ownership. But since we changed tax breaks for property investors, first home buyers are facing less competition, and more homes are being built right across the country. In the June quarter annual figures, there was a 27 per cent increase in investor loans for new builds, and a 20 per cent increase for construction loans. A big part of this was the pickup in the days and weeks after our budget. Because investors can still purchase new property using negative gearing and the capital gains discount, they are not just investing in their own assets and future wealth, they are investing in the assets and future wealth of the nation. This means we’re giving every Australian a stake in our national success. That’s how we head off the populist challenge – by delivering economic growth, generational equity and making the economy work for people. Building that future for our young people is also about building an economy that will work for them. Creating future jobs. Rewarding their effort. Honouring their creativity and brilliance. We’re now so well positioned to do this. Especially here in Queensland, which is so perfectly placed to benefit from future economic development, with its proximity to Asia, abundant minerals, outstanding natural tourism attractions, vast distances and limitless sunshine and renewable power potential. There’s nothing Queensland and Australia can’t do. It means we have to engage positively and bravely with the profound technological changes affecting the global economy. It means we can’t afford to be passive adopters of AI And we won’t be. As you know, last year we led the world in standing up to the big tech companies by addressing the harm being done to children – by adopting our under-16 social media ban. The rest of the world has taken notice. Just this week, the New Zealand Government followed our lead. And I’ll be encouraging more countries do the same very soon when I visit the United Nations. Our digital policies are designed to shape the globe        . Their policy significance is profound. Because they show that middle-sized countries can stand up to the power of the tech world. That people can control their own destiny. And that it’s possible to make this awesome new technology work for us. But only if we have the guts to develop a strategy for making it address the needs of our economy, our community, and our people. This is what Labor does. We stand up for people and for communities as we shape the future of the economy. With our active involvement, AI can be a tool for national success. Delegates, this is how we will keep delivering real change. How we will remain a great party with many more landmark anniversaries to celebrate. Through positivity, optimism and good government that provides real change that works for people. As opposed to the chaos, division and cynicism of our opponents. That’s the choice that Queenslanders and all Australians will have to make at the next election. And, delegates, knowing their common sense and decency, I’m confident they will choose us. 


