
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON PAUL KEATING MP, PRIME MINISTER,
ADDRESS TO ) PARLIAMENTARY DINNER
JANUARY 2 19391
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Twenty years ago when I was first introduced to you by
Alexis Johnson I could not have forseen that I would have
the honour of receiving you as President of the United
States, and that the honour would be compounded by welcoming
your wife.
Your visit to Australia is a manifestation of a friendship
between our two'countries and underlines the importance you
attach to Australia as an Asian Pacific country.
There is, of course, much that binds our friendship a
common culture; a common language is another reason.
Churchill, of course, said that the United States and the
United Kingdom were two nations divided by a common
language.
Marshall Green, a former distinguished US Ambassador
maintained t: hat much the same could be said of Australia and
the United States, and I think there is a lot in that.
Indeed we have different spelling for different words, and
of course di~ fferent accents. One of our great long-standing
Parliamentarians, a person by the name of Fred Daly, used to
tell the story of a visit he made to Alabama just after
World War Ill.
In those days, of course, calls were put through by operator
and an international call was a very big deal indeed. He
wanted to call his wife in Sydney personally. He told the
operator he wanted Mrs Daly and a certain number. And she
said " certainly Sir, Mrs Dily". He said, " no, Daly". She
said, " yes Sir, Dily". He said, " no Daley, She
said, " yes Sir, " No, no", said Fred, A as
in Alabama". I After a brief pause she came back politely,
but quite firmly, and said, " ain't no i in Alabama, Sir". 
An Australian friend of mine living in Washington escaped
from the Beltway for a weekend in West Virginia where he had
a conversation with the Park Ranger about bears and about
deers. The Ranger, curious about the funny way my friend
talked, said, " where's you from?". And my friend said,
" Washington". And the Ranger nodded and said, " Knowed you
had an accent".
There are a lot of similarities, Mr President, a lot of
similarities. The phone book is one. Our directory is like
yours. The Canberra phone book is only about this thick.
But there's a column of Bushes, there's a solid set of
numbers there for the Bush Fire Brigade, but there's no
mention of Pennsylvania Avenue. There are some Scowcrofts
and Keatings. But, of course, there's a couple of columns
of Lees, and a few of Kims, and a few Italian, German and
Dutch names, also Jewish and Muslim names. Our societies
have both come to include many different cultures, but they
started in the same place.
We were both called upon to choose, in the words of one of
our poets Henry Lawson " between the old dead tree of the
countries we came from and the young tree green of our new
countries". We both received what your poet, Robert Frost,
called " the gift outright", the continent, or in your case a
pretty good share of it.
We were given it. And as Robert Frost wrote, " at first we
were still England's colonials. In time we gave ourselves
to our new countries and the people and the land have now
become one.
These diffe: cences of languages to one side, you have flown
14 000 miles to see us. American leaders have had a tough
time in our part of the world, but they are rarely
discouraged. Lyndon Johnston was attacked by flying in the United States
Airforce in the Pacific, John Kennedy's torpedo boat was
sunk in the Solomon Islands, Richard Nixon was a naval
officer in fighting around Bouganville, and you, Mr
President, flew fifty eight missions in the Pacific War and
was shot down once. But you came back. And I can assure
you I breath a sigh of relief when Airforce One touched down
safely on New Years Eve.
You arrived in 1991 just over fifty years to the day when
our wartime Prime Minister, John Curtin, published his
appeal to the United States after Pearl Harbour. He said,
" I make it quite clear", he declared, " that Australia looks
to America free of any pangs as to our traditional links or
kinship with the United Kingdom. 
It was a bi~ g change. Though Australian and American ties
have a much longer history. And you yourself referred to
the Bicentennary of the first ship visit today from the
Philadelphia. Prime Minister John Curtin's 27 December 1941 appeal for US
support in the Pacific war built on a history of economic
and cultural ties, but it began a much closer, strategic tie
which was consolidated by ANZUS, signed as a treaty on 1
September 1951, which underlines our commitment to joint
facilities. Since John Curtin's appeal, we have since fought together in
three conflicts, most recently in Desert Storm, making five
military engagements together in all, and without including
the silent war the cold war over the end of which you so
nobly presided.
Mr President, this visit, through the Asia-Pacific was the
first in a long time for an American President through a
region of peace. We can now take stock and plan the future.
I've learnt quite a deal on this visit, both about the
President and about his policies.
We have an American President, a dominant Western Leader, I
believe who cares about the world. A leader who not only
cares about the world and America's role in it, but knows
about it. A leader who, having triumphed over the West's
opponents, now wants to make the world a bigger and better
place for everybody.
This world -was last like it was in 1914, as we now see the
old Russian States rejoining the world economy, as we see
Central Europe, India, China, and the countries of South
America, provides a new opportunity to shape up the world's
trading system. And as Bretton-Woods provided that great
historical opportunity for the economic system post-1945, a
new opportunity exists for the world trading system post-
1992, not just for now but for the next century.
In the end it was the economic superiority of the West that
defeated Soviet Communism, not military superiority. And it
is that economic superiority that has to be expanded and
buttressed. Only in this way can it be a bigger and better
place for everybody.
The vehicle for' this is trade, and the vehicle for that is
GATT, and the key to GATT is Uruguay, and the key to Uruguay
is agriculture.
An open trading system is the way to go, which I think is
what we all wish.
I 
We also, Mr President, took comfort from your words today.
You said we know that our security is inextricably linked to
stability across the Pacific and we will not put that
security and stability at risk.
We want the US straddling an open system in both oceans for
the benefit of all. That means we need GATT and we need an
US economic involvement in the Pacific.
Much of the policy between our two countries has been
likened to a fan with spokes, with the hub of the fan in
California and the spokes going to the treaties of Korea,
Japan and Australia. We'd like to put some fabric on that
treaty to make the weave tighter for a lot of bilateral
conversations between the countries, conversations which are
conversations between non-Americans which, in such an
arrangement, a country like Australia has independence while
keeping and strengthening bilateral links with the United
States. Mr President, on behalf of all Australians, thank you for
coming to Australia. Thank you for accepting the
responsibilities of global leadership. And we wish you well
for the balance of your journey and the greater task ahead.
With those words it now gives me great pleasure to call on
another good friend of the United States, the Leader of the
Opposition. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
ADDRESS TO ] LAUNCESTON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, JANUARY 23 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much for that kind welcome Michael ( Field),
Robin Holyman, Mrs Holyman, the Chamber of Commerce, my
distinguished colleagues, including the Mayor, Alderman
Graham BeanEts, and my Parliamentary colleagues, Senators
Tate, Aulich and Sherry, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much for arranging such a substantial
gathering at: such short notice. It's a compliment for me,
Robin, that the Chamber of Commerce was able to invite so
many distinguished people tonight to come for dinner and
that they've agreed to come. And I'm particularly pleased
to be here in the company of Michael and Jan, particularly
in election campaigns. We have partisanship in all of usmost
of us barrack for our own side and I have great
pleasure to be barracking for Michael.
Over the years a lot of Premiers and Treasurers came my way.
I must say I always have a soft touch for Michael, always a
soft touch for Michael, because he had that disarming
frankness about him, no nonsense about him. And there was a
great change occurring in the fiscal basis, particularly
with the States, there was a great funding gap between fixed
revenues and discretionary spending, and no Treasurer in the
Commonwealth of Australia had a greater, more difficult task
than making -the books of the Government of Tasmania adjust.
And as Premier and Treasurer Michael has done a sterling job
for us, the public here. I don't know whether they quite
understand what he has done. But he had to have a heart as
big as Western Australia, big in size, to actually take the
job on and to do it, and he's done that while at the same
time balancing all of those industrial interest which have
been important to the State's continuing progress and
development. So I not only regard him as a pal and as a friend but as
somebody who has really faced up to really rutted-in
problems of the State he inherited, and didn't gloss over it:
or take the cosmetic job, but to do it the right way. 
At the last: Premiers' Conference I attended as Treasurer, he
made a speech I would have been very proud to have made
myself. It: was about fiscal policy, and his achievements
were quite profound. So I was delighted to be in Tasmania
with him today in the course of his election campaign and to
be on his side.
Now you've asked me tonight to talk about the agenda of the
Federal Government and how we see Australia and where we're
going now, and where we're going from here. And this will
be important, not just for Tasmania, but for Australia as a
whole. And I think that the main objective that we have to keep
before our eyes is a commitment to growth and to adaptation.
To growth and to change. That may sound like an
unexceptional objective, but there are not too many
governments around the world who have committed themselves
as positively as this Government has over the years to
growth. Andl that means taking a macro economic risk, taking
the forward economic risk on inflation and the current
account by : letting the place grow more quickly rather than
taking the safe course which would put less pressure on
prices, less pressure on inflation, less pressure on the
current account to grow slowly.
And during the ' 80s we ran Australia quite quickly, quite
fast. In the first seven years of this Government the rate
of economic growth was twice as fast as the previous seven
years under the Fraser Government. And that was a
deliberate policy. And that employment that came from it,
which took the workforce from 6 million to 7.5 million, a
per cent increase in the workforce, came expressly from that
policy. But we've lost that growth with the recession, we've lost
some product, and while we've kept largely those 1 1/ 2
million jobs, we've lost some and we're adding to the
unemployment pool because the labour market is not growing
quickly enough to take up the new entrants into the
work force.
And so our commitment to return to growth, the commitment to
return to equity and to prosperity, where all Australians
have a share of the national cake through their capacity to
get a job. And this is no more true than with our young
people. So the Government will be committing itself to a recovery at
the earliest opportunity, a sustainable low inflation
recovery, andi to commit itself further to building on the
successes of change in the 1980s in what was broadly the
internationalisation of the Australian economy. 
And so we are not embarking on an economic statement, the
point of which will be to get a recovery going as quickly as
possible, to restore employment back to the labour market,
to check unemployment and then bring it down, and then to
continue the structural change which we had, the momentum
which we had up in the 1980s.
And that Statement will be looking to further
internatiortalise the economy, to pin in our success with low
inflation, to bolt it in, to continue the changes and
efficiency of each place of commerce and each workplace
around the country, to change work practices, to change
management practices, and to generally improve efficiency,
to expand further our manufacturing exports, which have
already expanded substantially in the 1980s, to improve the
infrastructure of Australia, particularly some of the public
infrastructure to make that process happen more quickly.
And we can ( do some of that by building on the great fiscal
position that the Government secured for Australia and for
itself by having structural Budget surpluses, which in the
cycle of the recession are now in deficit, but as the
economy starts to grow and revenue starts to pick up will
move back into surplus, to use some of those carefully
husbanded changes in fiscal and budgetary policy to now
stimulate the economy to lift it back to growth and
activity.
Now, much ha~ ve changed in Australia, but the ' 90s have to be
a decade of productive investment because we're now paying
part of the price of actually knocking inflation and
speculative investment out of the system.
That may not sound, again, a profound statement, but much of
the 1980s was not simply about producing a taxable income,
it was about having an inflation bet on the side. And often
that was in property. Often a lot of companies or
individuals w~ ho had reasonable productive businesses decided
that because they were doing so well they'd have a little
inflation bet on the side with an office block or a set of
shops or an office car or something else or a factory, and
it is that asset price problem, that is the fall in asset
prices coming from washing the inflation out of the system,
which has not threatened many of those businesses because
they relied upon the inflation pump. And it's that change,
the washing of two decades of inflationary expectations and
inflationary culture out of that system, which has produced
a recession of greater dimension than official policy ever
wanted or probably would have caused.
And when you had 20 per cent credit growth per year in the
late 1980s, financing a production of about half that, we've
now seen credit go back to about 4 or 5 per cent and the
banking system has taken losses and is keeping to itself and
is now abstemiously funding only productive cash flow
investments. 
In other words, the inflation psychology has gone. It is
the going of that inflation psychology which gives us a
chance of being a low inflation country where the premium
again is on lower cost of money, low interest rates,
permanently low interest rates through the ' 90s, a lower
cost of capiLtal and a more productive place. That is
putting the premium on building productive investment rather
than simply investment in the non traded goods side of the
economy. And that wil. l help us continue to grow the place in the
and to become more self sufficient, less reliant on imports,
and therefore less reliant on overseas savings and overseas
debt. It's just worth recalling some things. Because I notice in
the public debate we've had a few people say the policies of
the ' 80s have destroyed manufacturing and our manufacturing
businesses are closing down, and our agriculture is down,
beef is down, wool is down, non-ferrous metals are down
zinc, lead, etc, and therefore the economy is in
difficulties. But the fact of the matter is that we had a
very great success in manufacturing industry in the 1980s,
and between 1982-3 and 1990-91 non metal manufactures rose
by 200 per cent ' in that period, when total manufacturing,
that is all manufactures including metal manufactures, rose
by 125 per cent in the period. They more than doubled. And
most of that occurred in the last five years of the 1980s.
So the growth in manufactured exports is now 17 per cent per
annum, whereas rural export growth was 2 per cent down. So
if we were the same country today as we were in 1982/ 3
relying on wheat and wool and other grains and minerals,
then this country would be a country which wouldn't be able
to afford to import, which would have a very low basis of
exports, and the international market place would have
sought to recess it probably in perpetuity.
Now we've beaten than dismal legacy, that dismal prospect,
by making the changes to internationalise the place in the
1980s. But " the challenge now is to keep the process up.
And they are the first order issues to get people back to
work, to get a recovery going, to make sure the inflation
rate stays low in a structural sense, to lift investment in
productive plant and equipment, to get the investment up to
get the produce, to get the produce to import compete and to
export, to get the current account down and hence our
reliance on overseas debt.
And to do that to make the place set a premium and focus
back on those parts of the economy long forgotten like the
public infrastructure, the transport system, the airports,
the airline system, all the things that are going to matter
in whether Australia is a truly international place or a
place which h7. as settled for second-best and which just
doesn't have a national will to carry itself off as a first
rate economic nation. 
Now these are the challenges the Statement the Government is
putting together will address. In other words, they are
what I call the first order issues. And they are about
guaranteeing a place in the world for Australian commerce,
in the Asian Pacific area, the fastest growing part of the
world, which we have been now very closely integrating
ourselves through the 1980s and now the early 1990s.
And it's very interesting to know that 15 per cent of our
trade went to Asia in 1983-4, 15 only, and between 1983-4
and late last year, that has shifted to 28 per cent. So
it's a very dramatic shift in the orientation of Australia's
markets and trade with the Asia Pacific area, which is the
fastest growing part of the world, which has got the fastest
growing demand and which will need the things for which
Australia has a natural comparative advantage such as food,
agricultural products in general, metals, other finished
products, which we can supply to this part of the world for
either further fabrication or specialised high technology
things which Australia can do like telephones,
telecommunications, medical services and of course all the
services which we never had in the ' 70s such as tourism,
financial services, again medical services, education
services, and all the sort of sophistication of the service
sector a country like us should have.
So we are part way through the largest structural post war
transition and what we want to do is to finish the job, to
set Australia up in the ' 90s, to get back onto those things
recovery, jobs, inflation, investment, the capital stock,
exports, the current account and our debt.
Now they are the first order issues. And what I have to do
as Prime Minister and as Leader of the Labor Party is to
make sure Australians understand they are the first order
issues. And that basically we are not going to be dealing
with those issues like inducing a recovery, creating
employment, locking in low inflation, a lower cost of
capital, adding to the capital stock and producing exports,
we're not going to do all of that by simply taxing our food
and clothing. And this is where I have to deal with my
friend and colleague, Dr Hewson, and his proposal for the
GST. Now I often get the question, and I've had it in the last
few weeks, when are you going to get stuck into Hewson and
the GST? Well, I'll tell you this. The politician in me
wants to get stuck right into it but I'm not going to
indulge myself. I'm going to do it when the time is right
after I've put together Labor's plan for the 1990s. 
And I don't doubt, I don't deny Dr Hewson the fact that he
has a plan for Australia. But it is the wrong plan, it is
the wrong pl. an. Flghtback is not a package, it is an excuse
for a new ta~ x and there's more camouflage on that new tax
than any tax: in the history of this country. Never has a
new tax been so disguised by the ons and of fs and shifts in
revenue and the changes to policy, but when you pull all the
bits away, Underneath there what there is simply a tax which
will tax thE, basics of most Australians.
And the question will be whether Australians really want a
tax that will go right to the heart of the Australian
lifestyle, or whether they will want policy changes which
will deal with the true problems of Australia that is
taking us from an agrarian society which produced a bit of
wheat and wcool and minerals to a sophisticated industrial
place which provides employment to the cities where people
live, where the bulk of the population is, and where we can
have interesting jobs and be part and parcel of the rest of
the world.
Those are the issues for the ' 80S. AS usual the hard ones,
the difficult ones, the ones which are not easily sold and
won't be done in five minutes. But we are so far through
now, we are so far through the transition that we've
actually licked a lot of the big problems. We've got the
problems of the recession, but we'll come out of this
recession not with a 10 per cent inflation rate, like 1982-
3, but with a 3 per cent inflation rate. Not with a
structural budget deficit but with a structural budget
surplus, a cyclical deficit but a structural surplus. With
a high profit share because as soon as any growth occurs in
the economy it will go straight into profits as the extra
production moves straight into the profit share, which will
mean we will be set up reasonably well to carry on our
ongoing investment.
So now we're running a current account deficit of about 4
per cent of GDP. Our debt has stabled at about 2. The
difference is about 2 per cent of our national production.
That's about $ 8 billion. We've got to produce import
compete or export to the tune of about $ 8 billion to turn
our current account deficit into a surplus and to guarantee
Australians -their sovereignty over their affairs from now on
into the future. And to do it living in the most exciting
part of the world.
So in structural terms, if you look at the future, the solid
bits, coming into the ' 90s is nothing like coming into the
We came into the ' 80s with the wage share up and the
profit share down, with inflation in double digits and mass
unemployment, with investment smashed, with virtually
manufacturing closing down, with no tertiary sector to speak
of. And yet now we have such great opportunities,
notwithstanding the fact that we repair from the recession
to pick them up. 
Now the recession is part and parcel of events world-wide
there's a recession in the United States, there's one in
Canada, there's one in Britain and there's one in Australia
and in other. countries. And they're for roughly similar
reasons. But be there or not, our policy must be to get out
of it because it is not acceptable of us, simply for the
Labor Party to say we will adjust Australia into a more
productive place by letting the burden fall on the
unemployed, they can carry the adjustments. That's not been
the Australian way, it's not the Labor way. And that's why
we must go back to positive rates of growth and do things
that have quick mechanical effects inside the economy, to
get the place back into growth and recovery, and to get that
unemployment: down, so that all Australians can share in the
fruits of our economic wealth and our economic prosperity.
So they are the real challenges. To recognise that we've
come a very long way, that we have come from a place which
was slipping down the international income league table and
which is now, coming back up that table in terms of its basic
foundation of its wealth, and to realise that it is that
which will give Australia it's future into the 1990s. By
only being competitive, by only being productive, only being
efficient can you make it, and we will not solve our
problems by slashing our essentials of life with a very
heavy flat tax, believing that that will cure all of those
very specific and practical difficulties which the country
is now facing.
Now, the other problem about the GST is simply the fairness
of it. Can I just make this point. I think it is fairyland
for the Coalition to believe that they can basically market
a tax which affects the poor the same as the wealthy, which
is a flat tax, the same nominal tax on all goods regardless
of income. And ' if you're on $ 20 000 a year and you spend
all of your : money, all of your income and all of your
outgoings are taxed. But if you're on $ 100 000 a year and
you spend $ 40 000, only the $ 40 000 is taxed, and not only
that, not only is the $ 60 000 not taxed, but there's a tax
cut in stall for you as well. And that sort of disparity in
distribution and that sort of unfairness is not what is
required to keep the Australian community socially cohesive
and looking at the same issues in recovery and production.
Now, in the last few weeks we have had the pleasure of
meeting many members of the business community in this
consultation process which the Government has run. And
three of my colleagues and myself have seen a very
representative group of people from Australian business,
unions and other walks of life. And I can say the most
clear and obvious thing that came from that is a lot of the
ideology has fallen away from the public debate. But the
business commnunity was not in there saying, as they would
have said a couple of years ago, look first thing is we
want is the labour market deregulated; second thing is, we
want a change in the tax system with a certain agenda. 
Basically people are saying now let's put all that to one
side, let's get the place moving again, let's pull together
and let's get the place moving again.
There's a great spirit of cooperation out there and which I
hope the Government can use fruitfully to get Australia
moving again. But I don't think that spirit will obtain if'
we try to tear the consensus up and we rip away at the
fabric by a profound change to the tax system, which leaves
the low income people worse up and the higher income people
better of f and we have a transfer of wealth from the poorest
people to the wealthiest people in society, while at the
same time wet try to lock in a low inflation rate and start
rebuilding cur productive sector for the long run through
the 1990s.
It won't wash. And it's my job to tell people why the GST
is not a policy, and I'll be doing it fulsomely, but when it
suits my Government to do so. And it will suit it after, we
will address it comprehensively after we've addressed our
own fightback, the real fightback that is to get the
economy moving again, back into recovery, and back into
growth. So I look forward to working with the business community, to
bringing down an economic statement which is relevant to the
things that really matter, that really matter, about
engendering that recovery, about sparking that employment,
about pinning that inflation rate down, about keeping that
lower cost of capital, about getting investment going,
building the capital stock, watching that production grow
and seeing those current account projections come down.
That's where Australia's bread and butter is. That's where
its future is. And isn't an ideological obsession about tax
rates, which might have their place in Western Europe but
don't have their place in Australia.
So, I conclude on this point that the Government has
listened and is listening to what Australians say. I'll be
very interested to hear from some of you tonight your views
about how you see affairs in your own State of Tasmania and
we will be enideavouring, we will put together a policy mix
which keeps on the main gain of Australia's competitiveness
and its future, and keeps the fairness of Labor stamped upon
it, but the product of which we hope can be accepted by
broad sections of the Australian community as fair and just
and in time. And I hope from the presentation of the
Statement we can get confidence moving again so that we can
actually get that confidence log jam broken and let people
know that the Government wants the economy to grow, and the
Government isn't sitting back there trying to keep the
economy recessed or slow for inflation or current account
reasons. 
9
It actually wants the economy to grow and will do the things
to get that growth and activity. And we can go out, leave
this trough, leave this period behind us and go back to the
great changes through the ' 80s, build on them in the
and find ourselves in a very, very significant position in
the world and most particularly in the Asian-Pacific region.
That has to be our great objective and that's what we will
be committing ourselves to. Thank you very much for coming.. 



2
EMBARGOED 7Z30am SUNDAY JANUARY 26
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA DAY ADDRESS
AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS BREAKFAST
ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY, 26 JANUARY 1992
This last year has been one of unprecedented global
upheaval: of change so rapid we f ind ourselves having to
confront international realities that were inconceivable
twelve months ago. We have witnessed the disintegration o~ f
the second most powerful nation on earth, and the re-birth
of nation states and national movements dormant f or
generations.. We have seen the face of Europe change. We
have seen the emergence of a dictator in the Middle East;,
and unprecedented international cooperation to defeat him.
Few eras have been so uncertain or so promising. The
world is being re-made, not just in Europe but in our own
immediate region in Asia where economic growth is faster
than anywhere else in the world, where no one yet knows what
the future political landscape will be, and where Qlux future
substantiall. y lies.
We cannot hide from these realities. We must be ready and
able to adapt. We must be strong enough and independent
enough to bEt a constructive political and economic player in
the new ordetr. In one sense we have never been so alone: in
another we have never been so much a part of the world.
In facing these challenges we ought to take both courage and
pride in what we have already achieved. Because it is true
to say that, if the changes here have not occurred with the
same astonishing speed, they have been profound.
Only a generation ago we lived as an isolated outpost of
Europe largely protected from the wider world by high tariff
barriers and a cosy but increasingly unrealistic
relationship with Great Britain. We have moved a long way
from that: our course is now fixed towards a robust
internationally competitive economy based on not just our
great natural wealth but our human skills and energy in
manufacturing and services. 
Only a decade ago our workplace relations and our wages
system were governed by an inflexible code of hostility, a
conventional wisdom that the interests of employers and
employees were naturally opposed. That is emphatically no
longer the case.
Less than a generation ago we still lived in fear of Asia
we regarded our near neighbours with a mixture of ignorance,
hostility anad condescension. We are now much more a part of
the region, much more at home economically, and as the
Cambodian peace settlement so dramatically testifies,
politically. Without sacrificing social cohesion, we have become a much
more complex society. Where for so long we were notorious
for the White Australia Policy, we now enjoy a large measure
of respect for the tolerance manifest in our immigration and
multicultural policies.
Perhaps we should not be surprised if these and other
profound cultural and economic changes have made many
Australians wonder if the traditions of their country, the
values for which they have worked and fought, are not under
attack. I suspect there are many Australians who are
wondering if their Australia will survive the changes i
there will b~ e a place for the " old Australia" in the new.
I have no doubt that the best of Australia will survive
in fact it must. The hard-won traditions of democracy, of
fairness an~ d equity, individual opportunity and personal
security, our way of life and those institutions which
guarantee our freedom, will remain the guiding principles cof
Australia. Indeed it is becauise we want these values to survive that we
must re-make Australia. There is no question about it if
the good society we all want is to become reality we have to
become a more dynamic, more efficient and cohesive society.
We have to become a nation with a more truly natin U
purpose. With other ministers in recent weeks I have spoken to
representatives of Australian business all kinds of
Australian business. I've spoken to state premiers and
their senior ministers, and I've spoken to trade union
leaders. The spirit of cooperation and endeavour, the good
will, the unanimous commitment to economic recovery, and the
idleas which emerged from these discussions re-affirmed my
belief that we can successfully respond to the two great
imperatives: the immediate one of stimulating economic
growth and -getting people back to work, and, in the longer
term, completing the task of creating a revitalised and
vigorous Australia. 
One hundred years ago the colonies which were soon to form
the Australian nation were deep in the worst depression and
the worst drought Australia has ever experienced. Yet the
1890s was remarkable for the sense of nationhood which
emerged. It was the first great flowering of the Australian
spirit. Much of the old Australia was born in that decade.
The new Australia, I firmly believe, can be born in this
one. We can build on those great traditions and that spirit
to meet the challenges which face us now.
I believe we need have no doubt about the future of our
nation no doubt that we can come out of this recession
much stronger, with a much firmer basis for full employment
and long term prosperity, and with a clearer vision of our
common goal.
So in presenting these awards for the 1991 Australian and
Young Australian of the Year we are honouring, I think,
people who exemplify the spirit of Australia: that means,
among many things, courage and enterprise, faith in
ourselves, pride in our past but with eyes firmly fixed on
our future.
On behalf of the government and people of Australia I
congratulate you all, and thank you for the example you have
set us. 



Embargoed Against Delivery ( 12.3Opm AEST, 19 February 1992)
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
BATTLE OF AUSTRALIA COMMEMORATION SERVICE
BICENTENNIAL PARK, DARWIN, 19 FEBRUARY 1992
Today we pay tribute to those who died here in Darwin in
1942 Australians and Americans who gave their lives in the
defence of this country and freedom everywhere.
The raids on Darwin, the loss of life, the great destruction
of this and other northern communities, the tragedies of so
many Territorians forcibly expatriated from their homes
these things we Australians have not properly acknowledged.
Today we acknowledge them.
Today we pay tribute to their courage, and recognise the
debt we owe to the people of Northern Australia.
No nation should fail to honour those who have given it
devoted serviLce. No nation should forget its past.
This and subsequent raids on Australia's northern ports were
acts of unwarranted aggression, yet it has to be said that
there were worse-actions during the Asia-Pacific War.
The Japanese conquest and occupation of the region involved
unspeakable suffering for large parts of the population, and
for Allied prisoners of war, including many thousands of
Australians. These events cannot and should not be forgotten.
Indeed, among the countries of the region a common awareness
of the history we share will strengthen the basis of' trust
and cooperation in our relations.
In Japan's case, more candid recognition of responsibility
for past actions will enhance the wider acceptance and
legitimacy of its emerging leadership role in the Asia-
Pacific region. 
Yet we would certainly be wrong to think that only Japan has
lessons to learn from those events fifty years ago.
The attack on Darwin was a striking symbol of the
uncertainty of our position in the region.
It was also unmistakeable proof of the inadequacy of our
responses. Fifty years later, of course, there are still
lessons to be learned.
A lesson in strength and independence of mind, for instance.
We might remember the folly of relying so totally, for both
policy and defence, on Great Britain.
Increasingly we had been living in a fantasy land of an
exhausted Empire. We treated Asia with a mixture of
condescension and fear or worse, we ignored it altogether.
Yet there is a positive lesson to be learned as well we
adapted. Australians, accustomed to regarding themselves as
British, resolved to turn to the one country that could save
the day without prejudice to their British origins they
forged a friendship with the United States which endures to
this day.
It will do us no harm to reflect on the virtues of changing
old preconceptions and being ready and willing to respond to
new realities.
To the generation of 1942 it was quite unthinkable that we
might voluntarily become a part of Asia. That we might ever
be friends with Japan was entirely out of the question.
Yet we have made those changes. We have built friendships,
trust and understanding. We are playing a creative role in
the region, and the opportunity is there to expand that
role.
The bombing of Darwin was a tragedy. But it was also an
awakening. And there is no doubt that we have learned from
the experience.
Yet there is much more to learn, and a good deal of it, I
think, concerns our own society, our own attitudes.
I
It is significant, for instance, that it took 49 years for
an Australian government to recognise the role that
Aboriginal people played in the defence of Australia.
During the war, groups of Aboriginals, including special
Army units, patrolled areas which spanned almost the entire
Arnhem Land coast. They were involved in the rescue of
Allied airmen and the capture of enemy airmen. 
Yet they received very little recognition and until last
year little or no remuneration for their services.
I am very glad that on this 50th anniversary we can at last
pay tribute to all those Australians who served their
country. The bombing of Darwin brought home to us how isolated and
vulnerable so much of Australia was how difficult it was
to make and defend a nation on such a vast continent.
Today we might remind ourselves that we will do that so much
better if we include in all our national goals, and all our
national pride all our people.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the hour of peril in 1942
Australians responded as you would expect a free people to
respond they found in themselves and each other untapped
resources of strength and purpose.
They learned the value of cooperation.
They made an all-in, national effort.
Today there is, of course, much to learn from that as well.
We must find in ourselves that same resolve and spirit which
helped to turn the tide.
If we do this we will be able to speak to the world about
those things which Australia cherishes about freedom and
fairness, about tolerance, and independence we will be
able to have some influence, we will be able to pay our own
way and we will be able to say that the memory of those
people who died here in Darwin has been truly honoured. I
L 



SPEECH NOTES: BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
TO THE INAUGURAL MEETING: COUNCIL FOR ABORIGINAL
RECONCILIATION, CANBERRA, 21 FEBRUARY 1992
Mr Chairman, members of the Council I have taken this
opportunity to welcome you here for this inaugural meeting
and to say one or two things which I think ought to be said.
There is a big challenge ahead of you a challenge which
has pretty well defeated us for 200 years.
But I think this is a good time to take it on. I think there
is a new willingness among Australians to embrace change,
and there is certainly a willingness in this government to
make changes.
You'll see some of that in the economic statement next week.
As long as I'm in this position you're going to see changes.
And one of the big changes I want to see is change * in the
status of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders. At
present it is awful. For many Aboriginal people it's a
tragedy. It debilitates our nation it debilitates our
culture, our reputation and our self-esteem. It undermines
our ambitions to be a good society.
I'm one of those people who think it can be fixed.
I think most Australians these days recognise that having
come here and taken over the place from the Aboriginal we
can't now sneer at those of them who have ended up
demoralised and destitute.
These days most Australians recognise that and if they
forget it from time to time, it doesn't mean that they can't
easily be persuaded to the cause of improvement. That's one
reason why we can make changes.
Most AustraliLans I think also recognise the unarguable fact,
the big fact the fact that Aboriginal Australians and
Torres Strait Islanders were the first Australians and
that they are no less Australians for that.
That's the fiLrst building block. That's a strength. it
means that ifE other things were equal there would be no
question about the status of Aborigines. They have an 
absolute status, and an absolute right to be in the
mainstream, not the margins. The thing is to make the other
things equal.
The government is open to suggestion about the best way to
make this happen. The door's open. You're the best people to
judge, and we want to hear from you.
But, let me tell you, as a politician there are always
those who are happiest spending their time arguing the toss.
On these sorts of bodies you can spend your time debating
fine principles and finer points. You can talk about ideal
outcomes from now until the end of the century. You can
spend a decade in debate and deliberation.
Or you can do something.
I suggest you aim at doing something. Something real.
Make real improvements. Concrete improvements in health
and education for instance. Building blocks of change.
I believe in fact I'm quite certain that the best way to
improve relations between Aboriginal Australians and non-
Aboriginal Australians and the best way to provide a basis
for reconciliation is to close the gap in living conditions.
At present the gap is huge. It has to be closed in the end
it has to be diminished to the point where no one can point
to someone and say the reason for that person's poverty, or
illness, or alcoholism is that he or she is Aboriginal.
I think most: Australians want that to happen. And I think
they also recognise that it will only happen if the energy
and commitment is coming from the whole community non-
Aboriginal and Aboriginal. There's no question that the
Aboriginal community has got to deliver a lot of the
initiative, and be active players in this.
I said before that I think there is a shift in the mood of
Australia that people are open to change. I think that's
true in their attitude to your concerns.
I don't mean. that they simply want to see a problem solved.
They do want to'see that: but I also think non-Aboriginal
Australia is now much more sympathetic and much more
knowledgeable. We're generally much better educated about Aboriginal
culture and history, much more aware of the civilisation
which existed here before Europeans came, much more
knowledgeable about what has happened since and much more
concerned about what is happening now. 
It's not true of all non Aboriginal Australians of course
there is still a certain amount of ignorance and prejudice
in this country, but, like I said, there's no future in
dwelling on the negatives, no point in dwelling on the
people who find it harder to see. Concentrate on the ones
who see best and the rest will be persuaded by the things
they see you do.
So again, if you'll forgive a little political advice
that's what you've got to work on, your strengths, and the
strengths which are waiting to be tapped. It's about
creating and catching a wave.
For my part, I am absolutely committed to this. It's a huge
challenge, and hugely significant in the determination of
Australia's future.
But if we the government, ATSIC and this council if we
set ourselves progressive goals and work towards them
urgently, we can begin to destroy that gap in living
standards, we can begin to make life better for Aboriginal
people and Torres Strait Islanders, and if we do that it
will be a lot better for non-Aboriginal Australians as well.
And when people see what is being done, more and more will
come to believe in what can be done and they'll want it to
be done.
Mr Chairman I have the greatest faith that you and your
Council can do it. I look forward to seeing you regularly
and seeing the signs of your progress. I wish you well. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PARLIAMENTARY RECEPTION FOR HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN AND HIS
ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH
24 FEBRUARY 1992
Your Majesty, your Royal Highness, Your Excellencies,
Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen.
Your Majesty, on behalf of the government and people of
Australia it is with great pleasure that I welcome you to
Canberra. I know that on this visit it is your primary purpose to
participate in Sydney's sesquicentennial; but today it is my
primary purpose to congratulate you on the 40th anniversary
of your accession to the throne.
Your Majesty, we have all changed in that time. The men who
sat in the Australian parliament on your first visit they
were all practically men in those days had memories of
Empire. Not a few of them saw the world through imperial
eyes. Many of them had been born in Queen Victoria's day
and remembered the several monarchs in between.
But I daresay a good many members of this parliament are
like the majority of Australians and have known only one
monarch, Queen Elizabeth II.
This is an altogether different generation, reflecting the
profouncL. change. in our two-countries and the relationship
between them.
As our constitutional relationship has evolved so have the
circumstance! s of our economic and political lives.
These days we must both face the necessities of a global
economy and global change of often staggering speed. and
magnitude. We must also face regional realities. 
Just as Great Britain some time ago sought to make her
future secure in the European Community, so Australia now
vigorously seeks partnerships with countries in our own
region. Our outlook is necessarily independent.
That independence in part was reflected in your becoming, in
1973, Queen of Australia.
In 1992 it is reflected in our growing sense of national
purpose: in our conviction that we must move quickly and
vigorously to make the most of our human and material
resources and seize our opportunities in the world.
We must do this so that Australians will be assured of the
same freedom and security in the next century as they have
enjoyed in this.
I thank you for your visit, and ask you to accept a gift
from the people of Australia as a token of our affection and
esteem. CANBERRA 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA
27 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Ken ( Randall), members of the Press Club, Ladies
and Gentlemen. Well, Ken it is always a pleasure to be back
and when you are back here, you have generally been invited
because yout have got something to say. And on this
occasion, I hope I will not disappoint you.
Last night on behalf of the Government I offered a plan for
Australia, a 4 year plan. A plan for recovery, a plan for
growth, a plan that will create 800,000 jobs over the next 4
years. A plan that will make us stronger, more productive,
a better economy, a plan that will provide a partnership for
government and business, a plan where the unions have a
place in the scheme of national affairs. And this morning,
that plan was met with reactions from various sectors of the
community, some of which I would like to just read to you if
you haven't seen the reactions, and one which I think are
generally approving.
From the Managing Director of BHP, the largest industrial
company, has ' welcomed the initiatives to facilitate a
restoration of growth and employment in the Australian
economy and to regenerate our industrial base. He said, the
improvement that depreciation regime and the introduction of
a development allowance would encourage investment in
productive -capacity and efficiency. We need both the
recovery and sustainable future growth. He said, these are
much needed changes. The efforts to lift capital investment
in Australia will benefit the whole economy, including major
industrial companies, such as BHP. He said, BHP believed an
issues upgrade and modernise Australia's infrastructure, in
particular, rail, road and port networks, will contribute to
the nation's efforts to become more internationally
competitive. We also applaud the encouragement of
participation by the private sector in new infrastructure
investment projects'. And he went on to say some r1ather
general supportive things. 
The Commonwealth Bank said, ' in an overall sense, this is a
clever document, this is something, there is something in it
for everyone. Yet with the cost of the Budget, that is
within expectations and therefore unlikely to create shockwaves
in financial markets. In the real world, it should
also have a mildly favourable impact on business and
household confidence. From the perspective of a restrained
fiscal shat in the arm, with favourable medium term and
effects irL building the economy's capital base, the
Statement therefore rates well.'
The National Rail Corporation Chairman, welcomed the
Statement and said ' it is an opportunity to upgrade the
national network and to finally complete the standardisation
of the inter-capital city rail links and port connections
will be a great boost, to firstly, the community, rail
clients and rail employees. He said, for the first time in
Australia's history, we are seeing the opportunity for
balanced development in national rail and road networks.'
ACOSS said, ' the one-off boost to family allowance is a well
targeted way of stimulating economic activity whi'le also
relieving significant financial stress. The ongoing
increases in assistance to low income families, will be
welcomed by many struggling families. The removal of most
of the remaining waiting period for rent assistance is also
an important reform.
The Housing Industry Association said, ' the Economic
Statement -targets confidence. A commitment to sustain low
inflation : Ls welcome. Additional spending, thankfully, is
more modest: than earlier speculation suggested, might be the
case, and r-uns off quickly by the time private business
investment, hopefully, will be responding to new incentives
and improved investment. Additional of funding for training
and retraining programs will be valued to the long-term
unemployed. The Motor Traders Association. There are significant
welcome initiatives. The measures for reform depreciation
will be welcome, the capital gains tax exemption, the
firming of company tax for small business by up to 9 weeks
and including the taxation measures'. And of course, part
of that reference would have to be to the change of sales
tax on motcr vehicles.
But all of that, can I say, was not good enough for the
Leader of the Opposition. He said, ' it was one of the most
irresponsible packages that I've seen contemplated in
Australia'. The fact is, when you look at our opponents,
when I listen to their reactions to the Statements., I think,
they haven't changed, they never change. What has to be
understood about the ' One Nation' statement is this, it
addressed thie future as Labor always does, and the
conservatives never do. It's a statement of Government
engagement and not Government withdrawal as his policy is.
It is a statement of inclusion, not exclusion. It's a
statement about making this country strong and self-
respecting. In other words, it is a statement in the
traditions of Labor. It is nation building, governmentally
active, socially inclusive, it's about a greater degree of
social and economic cohesion. It's about giving greater
meaning to the idea of Australia. All these things are the
traditions of Labor. The idiom has changed. It is a modern
economic idiom, but as fits the tradition, it is we as
always who are doing it.
When I look at the others, I am amazed at how familiar the
pattern is. They want to fight an accountancy solution.
They want -to leave the draw bridge up. Don't include the
unions, don't include business, just gallop around the
country every now and then, and collect the tax on the food
they eat and the clothes they wear.
Don't kick--start the place with a payment to families.
Don't build rail highways. Don't do the macro things, or
the micro things. They think we shouldn't do anything about
the recessiLon. The fact is, there is a great philosophical
gap. We can close a lot of the gaps in this country, but
I'm sure we can't close the gap between us and them.
Dr Hewson says, this is one of the most irresponsible
packages he has seen. He said he's disappointed by it. But
the question I have to ask is, where is it irresponsible?
And why is he disappointed? Does Dr H-ewson think we should
not build a national freight highway from Brisbane to Perth?
That we should not rebuild our national road highways? That
we should riot create a national electricity grid, and
introduce competition to that system? That we should not
improve our ports or waste treatment centres or schools?
Does he think we should not transform technical education in
this country? ' That we shouldn't put it on a equal footing
with universities and colleges? Does he think that it's
irresponsible and disappointing to do those things? Does he
think we should not offer a better depreciation schedule to
business? That we should not help business with long-term
investment? Is he disappointed that we have a tax cut on
cars? Does he want that to stop too? Is he disappointed by
the equity funds for small business, by the new bonds to
help private business build electricity grids? This man is
very hard t~ o please, but I might say, easy to disappoint.
Does he think we should not help farmers and families and
particularly, one-off payment to families, to help their
spending? Will he try to stop that in Parliament, when we
introduces the Bills, or the Bills giving help to crop
growers and wool growers? What does unfunded mean? Does it
mean we should hold on to fiscal drag? And if it does mean
that, is it the same fiscal drag which is funding his
proposed tax cuts? Is it unfunded for us but funded for
him, on the same things?
The fact is, Mr Chairman, Dr Hewson has reacted to this as
he has reacted to most things. But basically, the
conservatives are always as they have always been-the
conservatives. They just simply are not about the kind of 
changes which Australia needs. They are not about the kind
of vista and program which Labor has provided.
We had John Howard talking this week, and Dr Hewson, who
said, I did not learn respect at school. And John Howard
said, I was disgraceful, and that the ' 50s was a good period
and a ' golden age'. These are remarkable statements coming
from people who fancy themselves as a Government for
Australia in the ' 90s. Nothing could better illustrate the
difference between us and between them. About John Howard's
' golden age'. The ' golden age', for instance, when GDP per
head was half in the ' 50s what it is today. When 85 per
cent of our exports where commodities, instead of 68 per
cent today. When telephones where only available to half
the community. When there were only half the number of cars
available to Australians. When pensions where half of what
they are in real terms today. When only 10 students per
thousand, and not 30 went on to university. This is their
' golden age'. But as we know, it is the age when the
Liberals put the country into neutral. When many
Australians didn't get a look in. When women didn't get a
look in. When migrants were factory fighters with no voice.
When AborigiLnes were excluded from the system. When the
Liberals were zenaphobic and provincial. This was their
' golden age'. The year of the awful cultural cringe, which
stifled our spirit and ate away at our self confidence.
This is the ' golden age'. And I mentioned on AM this
morning about the Old Parliament House becoming a
constitutional museum or a museum of Australian artefacts,
and household utilities, a sort of Smithsonian, and I
suppose we could set up John Howard and John Hewson down
there as the exhibits, with the Astor TV set, and the
radiogram, and the Morphy Richards toaster, and the Qualcast
mower. And the kids could come and look at them and say,
' Gee Mum, is that what it was like then?' And John and John
can say, ' no kids, this is the future, this is the future'.
John Hewson said I didn't have any self respect when the
Queen was here, I didn't have respect for the Queen. But I
said to him the other day, and I will say it again but I
have self respect, and self respect for Australia and self
respect for Australia' s interests which are not about
bringing the draw bridges up, about locking Australians out
of the process, about trying to banish unions of not talking
to business, of not getting the partnership together, of not
keeping Australia one nation. He is about breaking it up,
fracturing it, abolishing Unions, not talking to business,
not helping business. There is no depreciation schedule in.
his program. He's got, in fact, an increase in the company
tax rate to 42 per cent. And what have we got, we've got
what we havet always had from the golden ages a sterile
exercise in accountancy. Taxing completely the low and
middle paid, who spend all of their income, so whether you
tax their income, or expenditure is immaterial. All you do
is make the tax burden heavier on them to make it lighter on
people up the scale. No vision, no vista, no rail highways,
no ring roads, no new national road highways, no electricity 
grids, no creativity as there is under Labor, no changing of
the airline system as we propose it, no thought for the
hundreds of thousands of kids who can't get technical
training. No,' no, that's irresponsible. But his proposals
which do nothing more than simply flatten and attack the way
of life of every Australian family, well they have great
vision. Well, we'll let the Australian people judge, and I
will be happy to take questions about it all.
ENDS 
Questions and Answers
Q: Bruce Juddery, Prime Minister, freelancing courtesy of
the recession we had to have.
PM: You were freelancing before.
BJ: Don't tell Mr Packer, he was paying me at the time.
Prime Minister the Tuesday of the week before you
ascended to your present eminence you spent two hours
in your office with Senator Terry Aulich. The next
morning he went out and held a doorstop, curiously
coincidential with a speech/ talk be given on radio in
Adelaide by Peter Duncan set the hares running by
saying; that we had to settle this leadership business
quick smart. Then he upped the anti and said it before
Christmas. He set the hares running, now he has been.
dumped to number five on the Senate ticket for Tasmania
and even with Federal Executive intervention, it is
unlikely that the Federal Minister will even get up to
number three. What are you going to do for him, is the
double disillusion a useful solution?
PM: Well, the point of this one does escape me Bruce, and I
wouldn't want to say Kerry was too hard on you, but if
he heard you put that question, you know what a TV
junkie: he is, if he saw you put that question, you
certainly would have gone today if not earlier. Now
could I just say, Terry was a late convert, but better
later than never as far as I was concerned. I don't
like what has happened to sitting Senators in Tasmania
and I've made my position clear about that and it's a
matter then for the Federal augurs of the Party as to
whether they believe that is a satisfactory situation.
That will be resolved in due course.
Q: Tom Connor's from the Canberra Times Prime Minister, I
don't care if Kerry Packer is watching or not.
PM: No he sold your thing didn't he?
TC: Yes that's right. I was wondering if I could ask you
about last night's Statement. Was there a possible
alternative to do nothing on this occasion, I mean so
lot of your Minister's have kept telling us that the
economy was on the road to recovery if you did little
last night or just a little bit of fine tuning, would
we not keep more in touch with what's happening in the
real world rather than possibly head for some uncharted
waters with the current account deficit?
PM: Well I don't think so Tom, I don't think so. We have
got in there for demand 5 per cent through 1992-93 from
minus one this year and I think the place did need a 
-2
stimulus, it did need a break in this cycle of gloom
that's been around the place, it did need a spur of
confidence and this is a sensible way to do it, to
provide a stimulus while doing two things helping
families, but principally re-building a lot of this
basic infrastructure. Now it is important to Australia
now where a lot of the big macro-economic challenges
have been defeated, and we have been now, for a number
of yeEars moving into the micro-economy. It just does
matter how quickly you can get a container through a
port. Whether you can develop a block train with
containers to go from city to city, it does matter to
Australia. And that's not going to be changed by
taxing someone's food or clothing, I mean it is just
not going to be changed. It's not going to be invested
in by the private sector. It can only be changed by
government, it can only be improved. We've got the
rail system run down over a quarter of a century and we
have an inadequate highway connections in the country
and we've decided to do these things and other
efficiency things like electricity etc which I think
are both productive, long term and fit the bi. ll in
terms of the stimulus.
So as you know there was a lot of mixed reaction today
to all of these various issues, we had a few quotes
here somewhere, I don't know where they are now, but we
had for instance people saying it was entirely
appropriate, I won't go through them all, others saying
not, but by enlarge there was I think an acceptance
around the commentators and the papers that the
stimulus was worthwhile and sensible and that it will
help the economy into recovery and that's what we need,
but doing i. t in a way which adds to the basic
productive strength of the place. So when we believed
in the end of the first quarter of 1991 that the
recovery would come through under its own steam, under
the power of lower interest rates and the automatic
stabilisers and that's fine. But that's not the case
and was not the case later, certainly not the case now
so I think it was a timely package and the size of the
package and the way in which it's spent is, I think,
good for fiscal policy, good for the economy, good for
confidence, good for activity, and most importantly
good for jobs.
Q: Randal Markey from the West Australian Newspaper,
according to the tax scale released in your package
yesterday, people earning up to $ 350 a week seem to
miss out on any tax cut, yet under Dr Hewson' s tax
packagE! people on $ 350 a week will get a tax cut of
$ 14.30 according to the scales. Why should middle and
high irLcome earners gain at the expense of the lower
paid?
PM: Two answers to that question. The first is as
Treasurer I devoted enormous fiscal wealth to -the low
paid. When I become Treasurer that bottom rate above 
-3
the ta. K free threshold was 30 per cent, it is now
per cent. So I did all of the tax changing for the low
paid years ago, years ago. The ACTU style of tax cuts
always were about directing money to the low paid. As
well as that in this Statement we've got a substantial
increase for the family allowance supplement which is
$ 250 million a year ongoing on top of what we have
already done, which is now substantial payments to low
income families. The people who I think deserve the
concentration of the tax cuts now are the people
between $ 20,700 and $ 40,000 and we'll cut their rate to
per cent, which is the rate which is in Dr Hewson's
package but without a 15 per cent consumption tax.
Even the people you speak of below $ 20,000, they'll pay
per cent consumption tax. Now down there are all
sorts of tax payers, income splitters etc in terms of
people on full award wages, full-time award wages,
there would be very few now below about $ 20,000, very
few below about $ 20,000.
So the point is having spent 6 or 7 years directing
money " to that under $ 20,000 area. This time we are
going -to direct it to the $ 20-40,000 and we'll do it
without a 15 per cent string attached, without a
consumption tax.
Q: Peter Reece from the West Australian Mr Keating. This
morning your Treasurer said the Government was
considering a youth wage to encourage employers to take
on more youzng unemployed. Isn't this an
acknowledgement that the Government has been wrong on
this issue? What have you got in mind? Have you
discussed it with the ACTU, and further to that why did
you pass up the opportunity to reverse the Coronation
Hill decision last night?
PM: Well I don't think it's an opportunity at all. It's a
small raine that had a lot of national publicity because
it suited a lot of people on both sides of the argument
to give it to it. But in terms of the mineral
industr-y, in terms of it's volumes it was
insignificant, it's in the catchment area of the East
Alligat~ or Rivers region of the Kakadu National Park,
that was its principle problem, and also the
development was of difference with the opinions of the
Aboriginal people in the area. Now the Government went
through a very long debate about this, decided against
it and as far as I am concerned that's that. There is
no major mining project being held up and this hides
the sort of self flagellation that some people in the
mining industry are giving themselves is not bourne out
by the fact that Marandoo, for instance, is a huge, a
huge deposit. Coronation Hill is a thimble full of
mineral. s compared to Marandoo, is going ahead, is going
ahead. So I am not just going to be part and parcel of
this debate about Coronation Hill. There are bigger
and bet~ ter things to get on to and to get onto them
quickly. 
4-
Now the training wage is an issue which has been around
a long time. We've had conversations with the ACTU
about it, I believe we are still having conversations
about. But again we've got in this package a lot of
suppor7t for, if you like, young workers particularly
through the labour market programs, we have got $ 44,000
going in there under Jobstart and under Jobskills
another $ 45 million over the next two years. These
will be important influences, I think, in the labour
market but the training wage question is a longer term
issue and something which we have got to look about, I
think, in a longer term context.
Q: Brad Crouch, Sunday Telegraph. Prime Minister you
outlined some of the warm reactions from your Statement
from some of the large organisations at the start of
your speech, a lot of the benefits from it will take
time t~ o flow through. In light of that do you concede
that there might be a large body of people out there
who maty simply say we've heard these big promises
before! we have heard the rhetoric and you still steered
us into a recession so why should we believe you this
time?
PM: Well the whole world has been steered into a recession.
The United States is in a much deeper recession than
Australia., Britain is in a deeper recession than
Australia, the world went on the most enormous spending
spree in the ' 80s and when the spending stopped, when
the music stopped and the party finished, did everyone
really think that property prices, stock prices,
activity, employment would stay where it is? We did
our best to fine tune that decline. We wanted a slow
down, it turned, unfortunately, into a recession. But
what did the Government do? Was it the Government
priming the economy in the ' 80s. No. We had
surpluses, we were pulling the public sector back. We
actually handed the private sector $ 30 billion a year.
It was not the Government that kicked all the activity
along by running big budget deficits. We're the people
that actually pulled the budget deficits back into
surpluses. The fact is the globalisation of markets
produced an explosive mixture world wide and this was
just as true of Australia as the terms of trade pickedi
up in 1988-89 and we did our best to knock the top off
it, to get' back to where we could afford spending
within our savings and that has unfortunately lead to a
recession.' But again, you say why should we be
believed? Were we entitled to be believed when we said
in 198: 3 we created half a million jobs but in fact
created 1.8 million? Were we entitled to be believed
when on all of those 15 other occasions I've stood up
with these Statements and delivered everyone of them t~ o
the letter, in Bills for Acts of Parliament, or
Appropriations, this is not a sham? These are a set of
proposals which will be acted upon, payments will be
made for projects to the States and you'll have these 
kind of consequences from it. It will pull Australia,
I beliLeve, out of this recession and into a recovery.
That's the important thing, getting on with it. But
the fact of the matter is, just remember this, that in
1983 ' the total size of our economy was $ 170 billion,
it's now $ 400 billion, it's doubled in nominal terms
and in real terms has risen by about 25 to 30 per cent.
Now that's what Labor gave Australia in the ' 80s and
five times as much employment growth even to this date,
even t: 0 this day including the recession and the
unemp: loyment, five times as much employment as there
was in the 7 years of John Howard and his adviser John
Hewson, including their recession 1982-83. Looking at
their 7 years and our 7 or 8 years, five times as much
employment. So why shouldn't we be believed? We tried
to produce a slow down not a recession, that wasn't
possible so what do you say, forget the previous 8
years, well come off it!
Q: Tim Dodd, Financial Review, Prime Minister. Last night
you outlined a four year plan to return the Budget to a
surplus but it crucially depends on you achieving
strong growth over these years and the magical
combination of low inflation and a stable current
account. Last time, in 1988, you told us that you
brought home the bacon and your forecasts were blown
out of the water by a swing in the terms of trade, how
sure can you be that another shock of that nature is
not going to upset your forecasts and if the shock
occurs where will it leave your plan to bring the
Budget: into surplus?
PM: Well the terms of trade are always unpredictable, let's
make that clear and after the presentation of the 1988
Budget: when I stood here, the Financial Review of that
day said Governments factored in a 9 per cent rise in
the terms of trade, this is terribly optimistic and is
unlikely to happen. It turned out it was 16 per cent
rise Zand gave the economy a huge boon. So the leader
writers and the journalists of the Financial Review in.
those days were not more perspicacious about the terms
of trade than of course anyone else was. But be that
as it may, the point is still worth making that the
terms of trade are unpredictable, but what we've got in
here is 4 3/ 4 for GDP for 1992-93, 4 1/ 2 for 1993-94,
4 1/ 4 for 1994-95 and 3 3/ 4 for 1995-96. Now frankly,
if you. can't do 4 per cent in this country, if our
thinking is oh that is a high rate of growth, if we
can't do 4 per cent, we ought to pack it in the lot of
us. We ought to pack it in. What sort of country do
we want to live in? You'd need about 3 per cent growth
a year, just to take the school leavers up. So let's
say we say oh look 4 per cent is too ambitious, we'll
go back to 2 3/ 4, that means that we won't even take
the new entrants to the workforce so we'd have a
continuing rise in unemployment. I mean that is not a
possibility for Australia. All the countries near us 
-6
are gr7owing at 6 and 8 per cent, 6 to 8, and their
economiy is not spilling into imports. In other words 6
to 8 per cent they can afford and we've got in here 4s
basically and we've got the sort of debate oh that's
too fast. I mean frankly if we can't do 4 we ought to
give i~ t up, the lot of us, the commentators, the
politicians, the public service, the lot and say let's
get a whole new bunch to try and run the place at a
decent: speed. So I don't regard 4 per cent as being
outrageous.
Q: Alan Thornhill, A P Dow Jones News Services Prime
Minister, Australia has never had the great
polytechnics such as Britain and the continental
European countries have had, do you see Australia's
TAFE colleges taking that application and at last in
Australia registering inventions being applied in this
country?
PM: I shouild hope that the development of TAFE with the
funding of the National Government can develop a system
as sophisticated and as strong as we have in higher
education. That must be our objective. Now in higher
education since the middle ' 80s we have created the
equivalent of 12 universities, about 120,000 extra
places: in higher education to take the kids coming out
of tha~ t very high participation, retention rate now in
secondary school. But, of course, the great gap is in
vocational education, technical education and training,
and it. is that offer which we have made to the States
to turn TAFE into a properly funded sophisticated
systemi of vocational education and it may well be,
Alan, that the polytechnic type development is
something which the Australian TAFE system in the
future emulates. But again can I make the point it's
Labor making another vital change in our society,
giving our children a change to train themselves for
practical work and useful jobs. And I contrasted again
with the sterility of the Coalition, where you will see
Dr Hewson and his economics spokesman saying they ought
to have private places, let their parents pay for them.
If they want to go to university let them pay full fees
and what are full fees for a course of substance?
$ 12,00? $ 15,000? What does a private university wish
to charge?, And what have you got to earn pre-tax to
pay $ 12 or $ 15,000 for your child in university
$ 30,000 a year, $ 25,000 a year? So how does a two
income family earning $ 40-$ 50,000, $ 40,000-$ 45,000 go
when $ 30,000 of their gross income goes to keep one
child in university? That's the incentive and freedom
to achieve Hewson style. That's the nasty, vicious
sting of the Hewson rhetoric and ideology. Where were
saying we'll fund these places in tertiary education,
when you get a job pay us back part of the fees, part
of the fees, but what we're saying with no strings
attached we'll fund TAFE into a decent system. Dr
Hewson says it's irresponsible. Well I'll leave you to
judge about the irresponsibility of it. 
7
Q: Martin Hirst, SBS Television, Prime Minister. You'eve
invited a comparison between your One Nation package
and the Fightback package released by Dr Hewson late
last year, one area where a comparison, I think, needs
to be made in talking about infrastructure is with
immigration because there is a debate at the moment
about, for example, Sydney and Melbourne the
infrastructure cannot cope with any more migrants into
those communities. Dr Hewson's package claims to have
what he describes as a sensible immigration policy,
they're talking about a cut of between 50 and 70,000.
You have not really made any comment about this in your
package, can you just today make some comments about
that?
PM: It was not something I thought a recovery package was
about. I made it clear that in the normal annual
reviews of this program, which occur each year after
the consultation process with the various States, the
institutions, business etc, that we will debate the
matter and produce a program, composition again, this
year as usual in April and that's, I think, the
appropriate way to do it and the appropriate -time to do
it. The real issue is that migration has made
Australia bigger and stronger than it would have evexr
otherwise been, but the program has varied from over
time. Both Governments have varied the intake from
time to time. It peaked when we needed skills and
demand at about 140,000, about two years ago. That's
now down to 111,000, and it will probably go lower.
But if you take Dr Hewson s 50,000 number it would
simply mean that there would either be no family
reunion or no skills in demand or no business
migration, it will be one or the other. And what he
has never faced up to is the compositional consequences
of those kinds of utterances. So you might have heard
a ball park figure from him and you didn't hear it in
his policy statement, you heard it about a week ago,
rattled of f on a radio station, vague, vague and no
compositional details. Well that's not what we are
about, we are about a proper review and we'll do it in
time, but it has been the case that the program has
come back and will probably come back further.
Q: Don Woolford from Australian Associated Press, Mr
Keating. You have said a lot about the need to make
our transport system more efficient. When will the
Government be doing something about cabotage,
particularly on the trans-Tasman group which is causing
difficulties with our New Zealand friends?
PM: Look, we are the ones who have had to crack all of the.
difficult ones in the micro economy. By about
Christmas this year there will be a 50 per cent
reductiLon in water front employment within about two
years, the last eighteen months to two years we've seen
a 50 per cent reduction in waterfront employment. 
8-
Australian ships now have below OECD level crew manning
about them, crew sizes. So a lot of that is behind us,
in adopting that shipping package we have free entry
onto the coast for new trades and even for other tied
trades onto the coast, foreign ships have been brought
onto the coast and are now going around the coast in
various trades. So there has been a substantial change
and single voyage permits have been issued frequently
now for various trades. Again, can I say waterfront,
shipping, aviation, road, rail, electricity, I mean
who's in there breaking the barriers down? And who for
years was confident with this creaky structure? The
boys from the golden age of the ' 50s. It was always as
it was in Ming's day, no company hiring on the water
front, big pools of labour, very high manning levels,
companies and unions getting together to rip off
shippers, very high crew manning levels on ships, no
conversation from the Coalition Government, you never
heard John Howard talking about it. Don't remember
John Hewson advising him to do something about it,
don't remember even talking about the rail system,
about the fact that we couldn't even shift a container
between cities without changing gauges and bogies at
various places along the way, don't remember any
conversation about that before I sent the Industry
Commission a reference on electricity generation and it
came down with its recommendations. I didn't hear
anything from the Coalition about electricity grids. I
mean tiale fact of the matter is these people have no
imagination, no imagination and when it's all said
what's the best they can come up with well they'll
tax the food you put in your mouth and the clothes you
put on your back. That is about the long and short of
them and that's what they call real reform as Dr Hewson
Australia, real reform for Australia, real reform for
Australia. Well I don't call it real reform for
Austra. lia I call it simply praying on people who can't
protect themselves from the ravages of a sort of
Thatcherite ideology of survival of the fittest. if
you're not a millionaire you're a loafer, if you're not
a millionaire you're a loafer, and freedom to achieve
means freedom to send your kids to a university
providiLng you can pay the bill, freedom to achieve, to
look afEter yourself means you can have private health
cover and if you're low paid or you've got a large
family or you're sick too bad for you. I mean this is
what this is about, it's the same stuff the other day
we should have been polishing the British boot straps
up, tugging the forelock, I mean this is them, they
have always been the same, Menzies put the country to
sleep for 15 years. For 15 years we had this cultural
cringe that we never had an identity, I mean all this
talk of Australia returns to Britain as an infant,
growing up and now wants to be included in the
fellowship of European countries, I mean the craven
cultural cringes of it all and we have still got it
with these relics, these ideological relics like Dr
Hewson and Mr Howard. 
9-
Q: Laura Tingle from The Australian Mr Keating, you've
clearl. y drawn a distinction last night between yourself
and the Coalition in terms of the role of government in
Australia in the next few years, but I'd just like to
ask if you could define that a bit more clearly for us
in ter7ms Of government policy. First of all what is
the limit on fiscal expansion as far as Labor is
concerned? What are the factors which limit how far
you can go? Will you rule out any further expansion in
fiscal. policy for either economic reasons or to make
reforms to other parts of the tax system or for the
socia. welfare system in the Budget or in the lead up
to thet election? And third could you just clarify for
us your anti-inflation strategy because the Coalition
is nowr making this a major election issue and your
basing yours on a somewhat still undefined new
relationship with the trade union movement?
PM: Laura come off it. Ours undefined? At 1.5 per cent,
an inflation rate second lowest in the world undefined?
Undefined with an Accord process which has taken
Australia's inflation down from the 10 per cent they
left us with after the last recession and all through
the ' 7' Os, through the early ' 80s and after a big
depreciation of the exchange rate in the middle
we've got it down from 10 per cent to 1.5 with a
combintation of tax cuts through the Accord and monetary
policy and they are by their own admission about to
double it with a consumption tax and we're the ones
with an ill-defined inflation policy. I mean their's
is very highly defined, they are going to double it.
They'll take inflation from an underlying rate of at
least 3 per cent to at least well over 6 or 7 per cent
and as Dr Murphy the econometrician that Dr Hewson
bragged about on the day he launched his Fightback
proposal had to say the other day, if any of it goes
into wages, that is if the price effect of the GST, the
per cent on bread and milk and food and clothing and
dry cleaning and everything else goes into wages, then
inflation rates are likely to go back to 10 per cent.
And what can they do about it? Other than draconian
interest rates which will simply slow the place down
and produce a continuing recession. I mean they don't
have any discussion with the unions, I met 40 people
from the Wages Committee of the ACTU last week, they
gave a commitment to the Government that their target
will be with the Government's, keeping an inflation
rate around the average of our trading partners and
making their claims accordingly and their activity in
the labour market accordingly. What commitment could
Dr Hewson secure from the unions? He wants to destroy
the unions,. He said he wants to wipe them out, he said
there will not even be a national wage case, I mean
they have no anti-inflation policy other than to get
the Governor of the Reserve Bank to jack interest rates
back up to very high levels to try to squash activity
to cut inflation. That's their sole policy. But fancy 
10
breakiLng the back of Australian inflation after two
decades and getting it at a statistical rate of 1.5 per
cent and then let someone let it out of the bag again,
let it out again by willfully adding substantially to
prices and to inflation, that's what Fightback is
about. It's a vast macro-economic risk, but it's more
than a risk it will be a disaster because they have got
no possibility of keeping it out of wages, none. Why
would a wage and salary earner who's been dudded under
their tax cuts say oh yes I'll give you a wage
discount. Why? Of course they won't. They're not
going to cop a bar of it, if there was a GST it would.
go straight into wages, bang, in a decentralised
bargaining system, bang, straight into wages. And what
would Dr Hewson do about it? Put a press statement out
in the press boxes, attack the ACTU on the steps of
Parliament House, have Peter Reith do a doorstop? I
mean compare that to the proven success of Labor in
getting inflation down and by using the mechanism of
bringing business, unions and government together as I
say acrain, ' One Nation', to get over a major impediment
inflation, which we have done and which they could
never hope to do.
Q: Glenn Milne from the Australian Mr Keating, if I could
continue on the inflation and wages theme, you've
secured agreement from the unions to keep inflation in
line with our major trading partners, could you give us
an indication on what the upper limit of that rate
would be and what would be the sort of broad across the
board wage increase that would underpin that number?
And taking the wages and taxation question a . little
further, does this mean the statement last night, that
you've got no room left to move on personal tax reform
in the August Budget or is there still some scope for
that?
PM: The Government is governing, is going to have a Budget
in August. It always has policy prerogatives available
to it, I mean we have never seen Australia's change in
the post war years and the possibilities of reform has
been all tied up in one statement and while this
statement ' One Nation' is about taking Australia back
into recovery with reform it will not be the end of
reform under this Government, we will do other things
and we will do them as needs be and as opportunities
arise. Now you are asking about wages this year,
average weekly earnings are running about 3.5 per cent
and depending on what productivity is and can be, and I
think we have got a great opportunity for high
productivity growth in the 1990s. It's entirely
possible that you will see sectors of the workforce
getting wage increases with quite low inflation rates,
with quite low cost consequences because of that
productivity, so the yard stick will be not aggregate
wages but trading partner inflation rates, and as you
know that will be the competitive inflation rates of
the developed low inflation OECD countries. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
TOYOTA PLANT, ALTONA MELBOURNE, 4 MARCH 1992
1
Mr Toyoda, Premier Kirner, Mr Yamaguchi, Mr Johnston,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a great day for our motor vehicle industry. It is
also a great day for Australian industry.
The people gathered here are representative of the new
direction in Australia progress in partnerships.
Increasingly in Australia we are recognising that there
is strength in partnerships between government and
business, business and unions. Between Commonwealth and
State governments.
We are recognising how much there is to be gained from
being a nation with unity of purpose.
It is for the same reason that we seek partnerships with
business in other countries, particularly in countries in
our region.
We seek them because we know that is where our future
strength substantially lies in integration with global
markets, and integration especially with Asia and the
Pacific. Japan, of course, is one of our great partners and
there is no better example of the partnership than that
with Toyota.
Toyota came to Australia thirty years ago. It was a very
different place. We were more insular, dare I say more
British, in those days?
Certainly there was a great deal more apprehension about
the region in which we lived, and a failure to comprehend
the change that was about to occur there.
Given the speed and the dimensions of that change, it's a
failure we might be forgiven but when we failed in that
we also failed to understand much of our future reality. 
-2
Last year Toyota sold more cars than anyone else in
Australia. Today the one millionth Toyota will be driven off the
assembly line.
On a day like this there are a great many things which
could be said in praise of the Toyota company.
Not only in regard to its world leadership in the motor
industry and the role of Dr Toyoda, but its faith in this
country and its people.
It is the commitment to quality which has made Toyota the
number one car manufacturer in Australia in 1991.
But, given Toyota's legendary determination to look to
the future, it is more appropriate to talk about this new
plant this: new investment in the Australian motor
vehicle industry.
Toyota's decision to build this new plant is a very
welcome show of confidence.
It is a major turning point in our manufacturing
industry. It's no less significant for the car industry
than the decision of General Motors to build Holdens in
Australia in. the 1940s.
For with this new plant Australia will enter world
markets with a world product for the first time.
It's worth remembering that this was the first country
outside Japan in which Japanese companies established
vehicle manufacturing facilities.
It is pleasing to have Toyota say again loudly this is
a good place to manufacture.
We are delighted to have Toyota demonstrate that they
share our belief in the industry's ability to be
competitive in the world.
It demonstrates that our intention to cut tariff rates to
and end quotas has not only not meant the end of
investment, but ' a renewal of it.
Indeed, a new car industry is being built.
Above all, this new plant is proof that Australia can do
what it hiust do build an internationally competitive
manufacturing industry.
And to do that we must do a great deal more of what has
been done here.
The creative workplace agreement between Toyota and 6000
employees reached here last December sets a new benchmark
for industrial relations in this country. 
-3
All concerned will benefit and that means all
Australians. It's the kind of workplace agreement which will
increasingly characterise business in Australia.
Mr Toyada, ladies and gentlemen, you may take this
ceremony today as signalling the emergence of a much
stronger Australia in the 1990s.
Stronger through partnerships like this through
creative workplace environments such as this one will be.
Stronger through greater incentives for business to
invest in worthwhile long term projects. With low
interest rates, low inflation and low cost of labour
giving us a cost of capital regime at least competitive
with other countries.
You will see us stronger through a vastly improved
infrastructure. Through more efficient ports, new and
better roads and, at last, a highly efficient,
competitive rcail system. Through cheaper electricity
under the National Grid Corporation.
Above all you will see a stronger Australia emerging from
a clearer sense of direction, a robust and mature
national identity.
I believe you will see that manifest in countless ways:
from the new commitment, creativity and purpose of
Australian workers to the willingness and determination
of government to venture forth and strike new
partnerships in the world and in our region.
You are going to see in future an Australia of much more
independent mind and of wholehearted belief in the
future.
We Australians may take great heart from this ceremony
today. It is a landmark in our history a very
significant step forward.
In this context I want to take the opportunity to
congratulate my colleague and friend, the Minister for
Industry, technology and Commerce, Senator Button, who
has done more for Australian industry than perhaps any
other politician'this century and who will be regarded as
one of this country's greatest reformers. This ceremony
today might well'be seen as being in part a tribute to
his efforts.
It remains for me to congratulate the Toyota Company, the
unions and workers, and everyone else associated with the
project. I wish you all well with this great enterprise. 



PRIME MINJISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
ADDRESS TO ELECTORATE OFFICE STAFF, WORKERS CLUB, CANBERRA
MARCH 3 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much for that very nice welcome and thank you
Bob ( McMullanr) for the introduction and for warming up the
crowd. It is always important, I think, for people at the coal face
of the Labor Party and its representation to know what the
Government is doing and to be aware of the general direction
and detail of the policy, and so therefore I thank you for
coming today and I thank the National Secretariat for
organising it.
It is important that when people, phone your offices and
enquire about details of the various policy changes that you
are in a position to know about the details and fit them
into a bill of context. And so it is very useful, I think,
for you to bother to come and to get that perspective and
get the perspective right.
The interesting thing about the ' 80s and early ' 90s was that
it was Labor that taught Australia change. It was not the
Liberal Party. The Liberal Party put Australia to sleep, in
policy terms, for a generation. And when we became the
Government, -the public of Australia were not used to change
and they never had change. The fact is we taught them
change, we taught the media change, we taught the whole
political system change. And the thing about it is, the
public now wants ' change. It's now become a driver in
change. So instead of the Government tugging along with the
community, the Opposition and everyone else, what's happened
now is that -the public are actually interested in change and
they are forcing' change and they're requiring change. And
when they thought in the last year or so that we were not
introducing change as quickly, they looked elsewhere for
change. And whenever anyone else proposed something which
was solid, then they lifted their eyebrows and looked. And
when of course the Opposition came with its GST camouflaged
as a policy change, they even looked at that. 7. 
-2
But the fact is, it is we who have made the great changes.
We are the people who have decided that we can no longer
live shearing sheep and growing wheat, that would no longer
pay for our imports, and it would no longer produce jobs
where we needed-them in the capital cities, that would
consign a generation of Australians to the unemployment
scrap heap. These were the problems we faced when we came
to office in the early period of the 1980s.
We decided -that we had to re-modernise the Australian
economy, revitalise it, and we had to start investing in our
people. Anti we started investing in our school children by
keeping them on at school by putting them through
universities, investing in the aged as well as young peoplE.
and middle aged people. So we covered the spectrum, decided
to invest in our community, to talk to it, to operate a
policy of consensus, to get a better national resul~ t which
has totally changed the way in which Australia now operates.
That is, we have now become an international country. For
the first tiLme ever in the last twelve months the value of
manufactured exports exceeded rural exports. The big
service sect~ ors we developed in the ' 80s, like tourism and
financial services, are new to Australia and providing jobs
all over the country.
And so we have had this very big change running through the
1980s interrupted by the boon of 1988-89 and the recession
which followed. But, nevertheless, with a clear direction
out the other side to a low inflationary prosperous future.
Now the chal~ lenge to us was to keep those changes going, to
show that we were the people that stood back and said now
what should we do now, what changes are best from this point
on? And we had ' a process of consensus, we talked to people
in the business community and in professions and across the
community generally, the trade unions, the welfare
organisations and said we think we have a fair idea where
we're going, giv e us your views about where you think we are
now and we'l~ l see where that fits into our scheme of things.
And we produced ' One Nation'. And One Nation is the policy
of Labor from the ' 80s in the continuum. It's taking it
down into those areas of the micro-economy after the great
policy changes of the macro-economy have been left behind.
That is, as we now have the challenges to make Australia
more efficient and more competitive it matters greatly then
that we dea. with the States, particularly in these
instrumental. ities which have such a great impact on the way
in which the! country functions.
So we have said these things. How do we make Australia more
efficient? How do we make the rail system more efficient?
How do we get a container through a port more quickly? How
do we have FU competitive airline system? How can we supply
power at competitive prices? How can we train our kids? how
can we give capital support to do more in terms of
investment which is the sole generator of employment? These 
3
are the things we did. We sat down and said what can we now
do for Australia which is best?
And what marks us out different to the Liberal Party, when
John Hewson had to sit down as Opposition leader and say
what can I now do as leader of the Opposition, what should I
now do for Australia, what is best for Australia? He sat
down, rather, and said what can I do that makes me different
to Labor? Not what's best for Australia or how do I keep
these great policy changes going or how do I make the place
more efficient, but how can I be different? And then, of
course, he then decided on his goods and services tax, the
Hewson Consumption Tax. And he camouflaged it in all of his
other changes so that the nastiness of the tax wouldn't
become immediately apparent.
But the contrast is that's not what we did. We sat down and
said what is the next thing we should do, and we decided on
these things. We decided at a time when private investment
was down to lift public investment, not a leap of logic, not
a change of policy, though we have had some commentators
saying that the change of policy is an entirely reasonable
thing. When the economy was booming in the ' 80s we withdrew
all, or as much as we could, of the public stimulus by
producing budget surpluses. And now that private investment
is weak we've decided to lift public investment, and we've
lifted it where it matters. It matters entirely whether the
port of Brisbane is connected to the railway line to Sydney,
it matters entirely whether the travelling time between
Sydney and Melbourne on the railway train can take trucks
off the road and deliver us an efficient, competitive,
relatively cheap freight service. It matters. It matters
that Melbourne can ship freight north to Brisbane and beyond
and west via Adelaide to Perth. It matters, it matters to
Australia. It matters that a ship can dock in Adelaide,
load cargo and deliver it within a day to a factory in
Sydney or Melbourne. It matters that a ship can come into
Fremantle and land bridge freight across the continent to
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane as the case may be.
These things are the basic machinery of trade, let go by two
generations of Liberal politicians. Two generations of them
decided to invest nothing in rail, two generations decided
to let that thing go, two generations decided simply to
respond to Country Party pressure for roads and to not think
about the way in which our highway system was developing.
To not plan for trucks mauling the domestic roads of our
capital cities, to not put the ring roads in, to not do the
things which even were part and parcel of their own
strategy. So these things matter. It will matter that a
business looking for electrical power can ask for bids and
have a bid from a Queensland power station, a New South
Wales power station, a Victorian power station and have that
power station fund the grid and supply that power. And that
power price might make all the difference to whether that
investment is undertaken, whether that business succeeds and
whether the product of that business in internationally
competitive. 
4
We have a great natural advantage. Countries should play to
their competitive strengths. One of our competitive
advantages is a coal seam right down the east coast of
Australia. One of things we should be able to produce
cheaply, very cheaply, is electricity. But while ever we
run these state-bound systems with over-capacity, undercapacity
all these other problems, we will never actually
realise that potential.
Now is this going to happen by taxing your Kelloggs
Cornflakes? Is the railway line going to improve itself?
Are the bridges going to be lifted? Are the roads going to
be straightened? Are the dedicated freight lines out of
Sydney going to be created? Are the electricity grids going
to be created? by taxing the old Weet-Bix or the socks and
shirts and shoes or the dry cleaning or the other services
which make up part of daily life. And, of course, the
answer is it won't. It won't, and what we've found now with
this Treasury study is that the Treasury has blown even the
distributional features of the so called Fightback
Fightbackwards is a better name for it, Fightbackwards, the
Fightbackwards program, the backward program of the Liberal
Party, the distributional features of it actually make most
Australian families worse off, most Australian tax payers
worse off.
So not only do they not tackle the big things which are now
the next phase in our changes, cracking all of these
problems in the micro-economy, railroads, ports etc. Not
only do they not tackle those, but as well as that they
actually retard the economy with a tax which lifts the
inflation rate, slows down domestic product and lifts
unemployment so says the chief modeller associated with
the Hewson Fightback package.
Now, that's what it's all about. I mean, again here is
Labor sitting down, taking its breath, thinking, talking,
deciding and getting another great raft of changes going,
including a big tax break for capital, with a new
depreciation rate. I never minded giving capital a tax
break in this country. We're the people that brought the
corporate rate from 49 to 39 per cent. We're the people
that gave them dividend imputation. We're the people now,
giving a world ranking, competitive depreciation schedule.
Because it's capital that creates the jobs. It's capital
that puts that basic investment in. But if you look at the
Fightbackwards program, they have got the company rate going
backwards, from 39 to 42 per cent, nothing for depreciation,.
nothing that will actually change the way in which
investment operates. And with the inflation rate rising,
the inflation rate doubling on Dr Hewson's own submission
and with it a consequent rise in interest rates.
So just as a Government is providing a very low cost of
capital regime, via interest rates and depreciation, just as
we are really setting the place so the investment can really
start rolling again, here is the Liberal party saying, no, 
no, no, what we ' think we are is higher inflation and higher
interest rates. The Coalition will actually stick the
company tax right up. And just while we are at that, we'll
have a confrontation with labour, we'll try and wipe the
unions out, we'll knock out national wage cases, there will
be no concensus under us, and if there is any inflation
moving I will just say to the central bank, stick the
interest rates up further, so says Dr Hewson. And we just
slipped back into a low growth mode. Not the 4 per cent in
our program that will deliver 800,000 jobs in 4 years, none
of that, but much lower rates of growth as they hit the
monetary brakes.
Now, in ' One Nation', we've tried to bring the community
together. To bring the unions together with business, a
partnership between government and business. We're trying
to get Australia going. No ideological approach, simply
looking at the problems and trying to get a result. And the
business community basically took the same view when they
were meeting us. There was no ideology. People said, look
forget all that, we are not here to say we want this, we
want that, we just want to get cracking again. We want you
to do this and do that, if you can do it. And we have
undertaken those, things.
As well as that we've done a couple of other very
interesting things. We're going to take the TAFE system,
the weak breed of Australian education, and make it a strand
of equal strength with the universities. We are going to
take that system closest to the community, beyond school,
TAFE, where people train themselves for the first time, and
retrain themselves and give it a status and a place in the
Australian education system of substance and importance. In
other words, we said its just not good enough to be A clever
country, one has also got to be a capable country. And that
means getting that capability up across our workforce, and
so we will see a revolution in TAFE and we will do for it
what the Commonwealth was able to do for universities.
Now John Hewson says, its irresponsible and its
unaf fordable. It's irresponsible, the package is
irresponsible and it's unaf fordable. He does not want to
invest in those children. when we came to office 4 children
in 10 only completed secondary school. They weren't worried
about the other 6 in 10 that were left to wander off and try
and find their way around, untrained, uneducated around the
labour market, drifting into all the problems that young
people drift intb in that sort of state. They were never
ever interested in lifting the retention rates in secondary
school after we did it. And at the same time we lifted the
intake in the universities creating the equivalent of a
dozen universities' since the middle ' 80s, 120,000 places
in higher education. They will embeace that, but their
feeble policy to that is, it should be freedom to achieve,
so that if you have $ 12,000 or $ 13,000 to send your child to
university, -that's as it should be. Places provided if you
pay for them. But to earn $ 12,000 or $ 13,000 after tax, you
have got to earn $ 20,000 or $ 25,000 pre tax, and for even a I 
6
two income familys it's half their income to send one child
to university. That's what they call ' equal opportunity',
that's what they call ' freedom to achieve'.
And so, they're quite happy to embrace our reforms... out of
the universities, having done nothing about themselves about
it themselves, but criticise it. But on the outside we'll
take the rest of those kids who can't find a place in
university because of their marks, or the available places,
or the inavailability of places, but who can have
interesting and fulfilling lives in a myriad of places in
the economy. They are now saying that it's irresponsible
and it's unaffordable, but they won't invest in our children
in this respect. And this is unbelievable, unbelievable for
a party which claims of itself to be interested in the
freedom to achieve and the right to excel and all the rest
of it.
The fact is, as always, it's only Labor that's ever really
interested in the great body of the Australian population.
They are about basically a tax break for the wealthy, and
what the Treasury study will show you, is the Liberal party
policy at its usual, that is, Fightback is not a package of
reform and change, it's an excuse for a tax. It's simply an
excuse for a tax. And a tax which shifts income from the
low paid to the high paid. And on the way through, make
sure that all the things that are worth doing, like giving
kids the technical education, like lifting the capacity for
capital investment in Australia, like fixing up the
industrial archaeology of the railways, like making certain
that the power system operates for Australia competitively.
No, no it is: all subsumed in the barren ideology, the barren
accountancy of the ons and offs of the so called ' Fightback'
package. And that's why we are different and we're better. We've
always been better, and we're still better, because we are
the people who have decided what the change for Australia
was when Mr Howard and his then adviser, Dr Hewson, left in
despair in 1983. And Dr Hewson waddled off into private
life, and Mr Howard sat mute and chastened on the frontbench
looking at his handy work all around him. And we
said, this is the way forward, let's remove exchange
controls and float the exchange rate, let's open Australia
up, let's internationalise the place, let's cut the tariffs,
let's get the deficit down, let's produce a surplus, let's
get the tax system tidied up, make it fair, let's put our
kids through school, let's get to the point where we train
people, let's change the labour market, let's do all these
things.
Then we move onto the later phase, let's fix
telecommunications, let's fix the motor industry, now the
railways, ports, railways. I mean we are the people that
have the big vista, the big vision. And what's his big
vision? What his big vision is basically to go and tax your
Weet-Bix and your Cornflakes, and the shirt on your back and
your shoes, and to call this reform. And of course, in 
7
there the sleight of hand, he pretended to people that he
was going to give them a big tax cut, we will give you this
consumption tax, we will tax your expenditure but we will
give you a big tax cut.
And what we found was, that the GST was not going to give a
tax cut at all. The GST simply paid for a removal of pay
roll tax, cuts in petrol excise, and customs duty. In other
words, here we have this tax which is going to attack the
way of life of every Australian family which is going to
assault the low paid and the middle incomes, which is going
to totally change the way in which commerce is conducted in
Australia, which is going to lift our inflation rate, and
ought to remove pay-roll tax, cut the excise of petrol, and
reduce customs duty because the personal income tax cuts are
funded by what's called, fiscal drag, the impact of
inflation on the tax system. And so he says, aren't we
making big fellows of ourselves, we are going to give you a
per cent tax rate at 20,700 onwards through the middle
income ranges and that will give you an incentive to work,
but of course you pay a 50 per cent consumption tax. And we
said, hang on there is nothing remarkable about that, we can
give back the fiscal drag too. We always have. We have
more than given back fiscal drag from the period that the
Government came to office in 1983, with those vast tax cuts
through the 1980' s.
So we have done the same. A 30 per cent tax rate from
$ 20,700 but no consumption tax, no 15 per cent string
attached, no 15 per cent sting in the tail. A 30 per cent
tax rate by virtue of the fact that Labor can use its hard
won fiscal inheritance from all those years of producing a
structural Budget surplus and doing it with the Budget
whirling back in to surplus in 1995-96. In other words,
having produced $ 18 billion of surpluses, Labor can adopt
the ' One Nation' package and yet despite that and the
recession, and the costs of ' One Nation', seeing the Budget
come back into surplus in 1995-96.
So that's what we stand on. We stand on a package which is
about Australians working together, which is about
restarting growth and producing employment, 800,000 jobs
over a 4 year period. About breaking through other log Jams
in the economy in the micro area, underiding further
investment in our children, giving lower middle income tax
payers a tax break without a consumption tax and bringing
business back into that partnership by giving Australian
business one of the lowest costs of capital regimes in the
world. Now that's what we are for. And if that is not a
big view, if that is not the view that Australia needs to
continue to take it into the trading world, particularly the
Asia-Pacific, which is the fastest growing area of the
world, where you have got 6 and 7 and 8 per cent growth
rates where we can sell our produce into those markets, if
that's not the way forward, compared to this miserable
approach of taxing people the basic necessities of life and
then taking the proceeds of it and tipping it into the 
8
highest tax payers in the land, that's what he is about, but
that's what they have always been about.
I repeat, Fightback was never a package of reform, it was an
excuse for a tax and in Australian terms, it is simply a
backward step. ' Fightbackwards' is the right way to view
it, it is the right mind set in looking at their policies.
So, I will be happy to take some questions from you, but be
assured about this, that this Government has been the
motivator of change in Australia, it's been the agent of
change, the party which has taught the Australian people
change, has now encouraged them in change and it is the one
continuing still to make the changes, still with the big
view, the big vista, the big builders of Australia, is still
the Labor party, still this Government. And that's why we
are better, we always were better, and we will always be
better than this sort of Opposition which we now face.
Thank you. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
PM: Now don't be shy, who wants to be first? Now you can't
have read the documents that well.
Q: I was just wondering if you could comment on Dr
Hewson' s solution to what he sees as no progress in
waterfront reform and his proposal to send in the
troops.
PM: By Christmas this year waterfront employment will have
fallen by 50 per cent over the last two years. That
is, the same task being produced half as many people, a
per cent improvement in productivity. On the coast
our ships now have crew levels below OECD crew manning
sizes. And we have got to a point now where we have
got to wait for a pooled labour on the waterfront, to
waterfront employment by the stevedorian and companies.
In other words, with all the changes they could have
done in their years of sloth, in the Rip Van Wrinkle
years of Menzies, and the years which followed, we
never heard from Mr Howard or Dr Hewson when they were
running the place for seven years saying, oh look we
have really got to get into this waterfront it's a
problem, I mean low efficiency levels on the waterfront
are going to retard our national growth, going to
impede our competitiveness, never heard any of that.
The only response, and the first response we got from
him is the one you identified, we'll put the troops in.
Isn't this a classic view from somebody who does not
know about this sector of the workforce, does not know
about the change, does not know about society. As I
said, Dr Hewson would require a military map to find
his way west of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Once you
take him ou t of the comfort station of the inner
Eastern Suburbs to where the people mostly live,
whether it be on the waterfront or in the suburbs
around it, or to the west where all the problems of
housing, pollution, educational opportunities and
health, and all those other things are, this is a
matter of which he is not conscious. That is, out of
sight and ou't of mind.
So waterfront reform has been a great triumph for the
Government and is now reaching its mature point of that
change. And it will improve, as a result of these
changes, by making the rail and port interface all
around the country, more efficient. So it won't be
just a matter of having an efficient waterfront, but
having an efficient interface with the rail system so
we can actually shift. Afterall, most of our
merchandise trade now comes up in bulk commodities by
containers and they're bulky, and every 1 1/ 2
containers you see on a train is one truck off the main
highways. It's a transport system which makes sense. 
Basically rail carrying a greater proportion of
containers between cities and then the trucks doing
their distributional role in the cities. And this is
the way it should be, rather than the trucks racing the
trains up and down the highways.
Waterfront reform will be something basically the
Government has made enormous changes in, and where the
sterile, I mean, he is still on about the criticism, he
probably doesn't know that by Christmas waterfront
employment will have fallen by half. He probably
doesn't know. He still talks about it like he did
three years ago, before these reforms were undertaken.
So the fact is, they don't know what to do and wouldn't
know where to start, and they just take the changes
we've got, put it in their pockets and say oh yes we
will do better. I was making that point a year or two
ago, when they were talking microeconomic reform, I
said it was like building the Empire State Building,
and then having someone race up in the lift to put a
brick on top and say, ours is bigger. And that's the
Liberal Party they adopt all of our things and say we
will go one centimetre further, but never having the
wit or the courage to build the edifice in the first
place.
Q: Could you explain the reason for taking the 50 per cent
ownership controls off foreign investment in the coal
mining industry?
PM: One of the great concerns in the ' 70s was that we
wouldn't be able to reap appropriate national rewards
from the ex tractive industries in the hands of
foreigners without a substantial level of Australian
ownership. That's now, I think changed. There's been
a substantial change in the way in which some of these
industries are configured, we have had great change in
the ownership of the coal industry, and we now believe
that the 50 per cent rule was an impediment to further
investment in coal mining. In other words, we weren't
able to get new mines up while ever there was this
requirement that there had to be 50 per cent Australian
equity when the Australian equity paths were not really
available. And given the fact that we have now got a
much tighter income tax system, and we have got foreign
source legislation and all other sorts or capacities to
audit companies and to look at transfer pricing and the
rest, and given the fact that our big bulk commodities
have traded' into an international trading system, and
are not really in vertically-integrated companies where
you can transfer price, we thought the transfer price
risk was down, but the risk in terms of investment was
greater to us by having that rule there, so we removed
it. Which will make Australia freer for investment,
more attractive for foreigners to invest, and the more
equity and the less debt we get the better that debt
and current account scene is. 
0: Does this also apply to the tourist industry?
PM: Foreign~ ers always could invest 100 per cent in a
tourist: related investment, that is the case now. It
was onl~ y ever in mining that this 50 per cent rule
applied. But we have done a lot for tourism in the
packagE!. As I said in the Statement, tourism was one
of the great performers of the 1980s and one of the
stars I~ n 1990s. It provides a tremendous amount of
work and particularly for women, particularly and
especiEll1y for women. So for the industry we have
increased promotional budget of the Australian Tourist
Commission for simply advertising Australia abroad, we
have dramatically increased the depreciation rates for
structures, hotels, integrated tourist developments
etc, fo'r investment. And we've changed the
depreciation rates for all the things that go inside,
like carpets, kitchens and bedroom furniture and all
the other things, it is a much faster acceleration. As
is often the case, hotels are refurbished every seven
or eight years, it will mean a faster write off for
them, a. greater capacity, better cash flows, and a
greater capacity to do it. And the tax rule supporting
the development of a bigger level of tourist
accommo'dation in Australia, which will be our need. As
Australia becomes a more popular inbound tourist
destination, we will need more capacity and
accommodation then we have got now. And these rules
will greatly enhance the ability of people to add to
that capacity.
Q: I was wondering if you could explain the reasons and
timing of the tax cut.
PM: The Government has always given back more than fiscal
drag. Because it lowered the size of the public sector
from 30 per cent GDP to 23 1/ 2, it cut the public
sector back before the recession by 7 per cent of GDP
which is 30,000 million a year smaller. It meant we
didn't need a revenue share as large as we had, So
therefore we were able to finance the Australian public
sector with a smaller tax base. Therefore we were able
to give real income tax cuts in the ' 80s. So not only
do we give back the effects of inflation on a tax
system, but as well as that we're able to actually give
back some of the real level of taxation which was
formally holding a bigger public sector together,
financing a bigger public sector. Now, what we are
proposing here is because there is a cyclical effect
from the recession which has turned the Budget from a
surplus to a deficit, and because we now wish to add to
that deficit, to provide a stimulus to growth, recovery
and employment, we don't want to be making the deficit
larger by tax cuts now. But as a cycle turns and the
Budget comes back towards surplus, where those tax cuts
* become affordable, we're going to pay them at the
earliest opportunity in 1994-' 95 and ' 95-' 96, and they
will be paid from $ 20,700 upwards. So I make two 
points to you, that in the 1980s the area of employment
that we concentrated those tax cuts in most was below
$ 20,000, to the low paid. Where I lifted the tax free
threshold from $ 4,900 to $ 5,400 and cut the first rate,
the rate from $ 5,400 to $ 20,000, from 30 per cent to
per cent, providing enormous tax cuts to those people
down the bottom, and of course we introduced the family
allowance supplement, which we added to substantially
in this Statement with another $ 250 million. And it
will remain again that low paid families will get
targeted and valuable support from the family allowance
supplement and from these changes. So the tax cuts are
being paid when the Government can afford it, when the
Budget can afford it, and even paying them, the Budget
will stiLll come back to surplus. I might just take one
more, then I have got to go back to a Caucus meeting.
Q: How soon will the job creation aspects of ' One Nation'
lock in'?
PM: They will start quickly I think, particularly the road
programs which can be built up quickly, the rail
programs will take sometime to start. But one of the
things we wanted to do was to inject some funds into
the economy to get spending going in the retail areas
and through, business generally, and that's why we've
made the one-off payment to families of between $ 125
and $ 250) so that families would spend it, and that
would generate activity and start to get business
going. So there is that happening in April. And as
that happens we will have the build-up from the
infrastructure program. And no doubt the depreciation
changes will bring forward investment and cause
investment to occur which otherwise wouldn't occur with
slower rates of depreciation. And of course we have
got the stimulatory effects of the low interest rates
which I reduced first in January 1992, over two years
ago, as they become an 11 per centage point reduction
interest rates, starting to really have their impact
inside the economy. So those things, that is the
general stimulus coming from lower interest rates, the
stimulus coming from the change from the Budget from a
surplus to a deficit, the one-off payment to families
and the build-up of the infrastructure program and
depreciation from investment, should start to get the
economy cradking again, and we will start to see those
growth numbers come through 4 3/ 4 per cent through
the year in 1992-3 which will get Australia back to
growth. Employment and growth are so tied together.
If you look back right to the 1960s every time you see
a lift in GDP you see a lift in employment. Where it
trails of f you see one following the other. If we get
activity up and GDP moving we will get it employment
moving and I believe we will. 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE~ PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF RODNEY HALL ' S NOVEL THE SECOND BRIDEGROOM
ADELAIDE FESTIVAL OF ARTS, 4.3OPM 6 MARCH 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm pleased -to be here today at one of the world's great
arts festivals.
My purpose is both to launch Rodney Hall's book and to
celebrate it.
It's a pleasure to be here because I know Rodney Hall, I
know some of his ideas, I know how much he cares about this
country, and I know he is going to make a great contribution
to our national life as Chairman of the Australia Council.
I also know that this book, which was published in hardback
last year, was never officially launched.
And any book which has enjoyed such magnificent acclaim as
this book has, deserves to be launched deserves to be
celebrated. I doubt if any book by an Australian has received better
reviews than this one.
Some of them are modestly repeated on the cover the
Financial Times calls it a modern classic
Rodney will forgive me for mentioning that the Financial
Times also gave me a good review recently, for a speech I
made in the presence of Her Majesty, and another I made in
the presence of Her Loyal Australian Opposition.
This does not mean the Financial Timesq is easy to please
it means they are discerning.
On the same cover you will see that Dinny O'Hearn says the
book is evenL better than the one before it, and the one
before it was a masterpiece.
This is the sort of language I have always liked. 
In Frankfurt: they said Rodney Hall ranks with Garcia
Marquez. In New York they compared him with William
Faulkner and Flannery O'Conner.
In the Sidney Morning Herald Stephen Knight ranked him with
Patrick White.
And back to London where the Sunday Time-, said " in Rodney
Hall Australia has produced another great novelist".
For this extraordinary critical reception Rodney Hall
deserves our congratulations although I know he won't mind
my saying that you haven't really been reviewed until you've
been reviewed in the London tabloids.
" Hands orf our language, cobber!", they would have said.
Given the ex;. pert and international literary judgements that
have been made on Rodney's recent work, it would be
presumptuous of me to pass any judgement.
But I can saLy that I enjoyed The Second Bridegroom and
that it's a novel of great interest to anyone who has
thought about European civilisation in this country.
Anyone who has ever wondered what it means to be an
Australian. The novel rang a Celtic bell in me. Like most Australians of
Irish extraction, Celtic mythology and the Celtic
temperament has always seemed to me a powerful force in our
make-up, and in the creation of our legends and traditions.
This is a book with any number of political and cultural
implications for Australia.
For instance! it's a very powerful reminder that we have to
come to terms with Aboriginal Australia pre and post
European.
Until we do this until we start to make some real progress
towards closing the gap in both attitudes and living
standards I think there will always be a feeling among us
that maybe wre don't quite belong, that we're not serious,
that we're simply here for the view.
Or just here! to make forgeries of the Old World.
These are old themes in Australia: the Celticry and
Aboriginality, the business of being what Manning Clark
called Austral-Britons.
Or as Rodney, Hall puts it Australians became a race with
one foot in the ' air.
If I might tie allowed to use that phrase for my own
purposes, Rodney, allow me to say that I would like to see
Australians put the foot down. 
These cultural cross currents are no bad thing, of course.
They have produced a lot of our intellectual energy. A lot
of our difference in fact.
And, contrary to the Les Paterson stereotype with which
someone recently branded me, I don't have any time at all
for the view that it's no good if it's not authentically
Australian. You're looking at someone who has a great affection for
Europe. Whoi counts among his greatest pleasures European
architecture and European music.
But I am not: British or French.
I'm Australian. It's the land I know, the people I know,
the resonances I feel, and my commitment to it happens to be
unequivocal, unambiguous and absolute.
If Australians are encouraged to think about it, I don't
think any of' them will want the cobwebs to remain. I don't
think they want their identity compromised.
These things really should not have to be said in a nation
which in truth is not so young any more.
But, as we've discovered in the last couple of weeks, when
these simplEt, unexceptional things arp said, they produce
responses Which are quite extraordinary.
They've been said, of course, by writers and artists,
they've been~ said on the stage and on film for years since
the turn of the century and before.
That, of course, is one of the great virtues of the arts and
why a country is healthier when they flourish. They can
provide us writh a truer vision of ourselves than politicians
or anyone else can.
That is one of the principle reasons why my government will
support the arts in this country.
It is also cone of the reasons why we are in favour of
appointing more artists to arts bodies, putting more of the
focus of arts policy on artists, and doing all we can to
improve the professional standing and income of our artists
and why I'm very happy to be able to announce today that
two great Australian artists, Carl Vine and Nanette Hassall
will shortly be reccomended to the Governor General for
appointment to the Australia Council.
There is no doubt that their knowledge and expertise will be
an enormous benefit, and their presence, inevitably, a
boost to the! Council's standing. 
4
The arts of course play a variety of roles in this country
but the most significant I think is making us believe in
ourselves. I don't mean that patriotism is a prerequisite I mean that
books like the one that we're celebrating today helps define
us to ourselves and to the world, and that is very
important. I may as well tell you now, however, that I will not be
leaving it up the artists to do this you are going to hear
a lot more in the way of uncompromising belief, including
uncompromising reference to our history.
As I said there are some among us who intend to put the
nation's foot down.
Let me once again congratulate you Rodney, thank you for the
metaphor, and all of you for having me here.
ADELAIDE/ CANBERRA 



PRIME MINISTER]
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT FUND FOR WOMEN ( UNIFEM) BREAKFAST
HILTON HOTEL, BRISBANE 8.00 AM, MONDAY 9 MARCH 1992
Premier and Mrs Goss, Lord Mayor Soorley, my Minister
Assisting, Wendy Fatin, the President of UNIFEM Australia,
Beverley Perel and our esteemed guest, Ms Teresita Deles,
and friends.
It is a great pleasure to be here this morning to join in
your International Women's Day celebrations.
Sometimes the d enomination " women" obscures the reality of
women in society.
Because of the special needs of women many of them caused
or compounded by generations of prejudice and neglect it
is easy to get into the habit of thinking about women as a
minority group.
The truth is, of course, women are more than half of the
population and all government policy has an effect on their
lives, whether it is a specific measure or a broad one.
In Australia today it is not always easy to separate
policies for women from policies for society at large.
But you may be assured that this government is determined to
ensure that all government policies are assessed in regard
to their impact on women.
And we will go on making the specific changes necessary to
improve the conditions under which Australian women live and
to increase their opportunity and choice.
We will continue what has been a steady advance.
But before I talk about the government and Australian women,
I would like to make a few remarks about UNIFEM.
In recent years UNIFEM Australia has done much to heighten
public awareness of International Women's Day through
hosting a number of successful breakfasts like this. 
UNIFEM is one of the major international organisations
devoted to improving the status of women. It plays a vital
role in the developing world, giving assistance to women to
exercise control over their lives and to participate more
fully in making decisions.
These occasions provide the opportunity to highlight the
critical role that women play in development.
It is also a chance to consider the changes that still have
to be made if women are to find equal places, and equal
access to them, in the world community.
The government takes an active interest in the improvement
of women's status in the world.
At the current meeting of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, Australia will be calling for
gender equity issues to be incorporated into that body's
work. This meeting is a lead up to the major United Nations
Conference on the Environment and Development in Rio de
Janeiro later this year.
As I'm sure many people here are aware, this conference is
of great importance in the world's quest for sustainable
development. Because women have a major part of the responsibility for
growing the world's food and play a significant part in the
management of the earth's resources, Australia's own aid
program supports UNIFEM's efforts to highlight the role of
women. The integration of women into development programs is both
more equitable and more effective.
It makes better use of the talent and energy residing in all
those women at the heart of economy and society.
For the sake of equity we have to acknowledge the
contribution of women both paid and unpaid. For the sake
of efficiency and commonsense, we must harness their skills,
their ambitions, their energy and their genius.
What is true for the world is true also for Australia.
And I can say with confidence and pride that in the nine
years so far of the Labor government, women have made great
advances and their contribution grows in proportion to
their advance.
I have a feeling, an inkling, that I am not widely regarded
as a feminist:.
This may be because I am regarded rightly as that most
conservative of creatures, a family man. 
It may be because my ancestry is Irish.
It may be because ideological denominations have always
worried me a. great deal less than doing things.
My view has been that women will benefit most if the
material circumstances of Australian life are progressively
improved. That I think. is the starting point. As Treasurer I took the
view that if I succeeded in expanding the economy, making it
more robust and secure then I was expanding opportunity,
expanding thme government's ability to undertake programs of
reform and build essential services, increasing employment
and making it possible for people to plan their lives with
confidence. In doing these things, I believe I was doing things of great
benefit to Australian women.
As Prime Minister I continue to take that view, but with
more windows on to it.
As Prime Minister I would like to see less of the nuts and
bolts and more of the world outside.
I incline towards inclusion. I want to lower the
drawbridge. I think we should be looking for ways to increase the
influence of women in national policy and social development
in the culture of Australia.
We will know we are making progress when on both sides we
hear voices which are less adversarial and ideological and
more authentically the voices of Australian women and men.
I think I will feel that we have succeeded when women are to
a greater extent partners in the development of Australia,
shaping much more of the policy for the country as a whole.
I have always thought that the crime in politics was not
thinking the wrong thought, but not doing enough.
Not making the changes which your times demanded.
I have a building block model of reform. I think that if you
put one block down you create the logic and the impetus for
another.. and another.
In time the public sees the shape of your vision becoming
concrete and they actually help you finish.
As I said, my big effort in politics has always been towards
improving the material conditions under which Australians
live. 
At a time like this, in a recession, I know that might have
a hollow ring to it.
I can only say that it distresses me that there is so much
distress in Australia at present.
It distresses me all the more because in the l980s we
created jobs, we boosted business, we introduced many
measures which have improved the conditions of life for
Australians in substantial and enduring ways.
But bemoaning it won't solve it. Ideology won't solve it.
My big effort is still towards reform, improvement and
these days that means recovery. I do not know of any other
way. Recovery means jobs for women and men.
Of the 1.5 million jobs we created since the early eighties,
per cent have gone to women.
Women's wages in the same period increased to 84.5% of the
male average, which is very good by OECD standards.
We supported the women who went to work with the Women's
Employment Strategy.
We trebled the number of child care places available, and
250,000 funded places will be created by 1995-96.
In the past two years the number of families receiving fee
relief for long day care has increased by more than 200 per
cent and average, payments have increased by 60 per cent.
These initiatives which increased opportunities for women to
work, were matched by measures which increased the equity
for those who stayed at home to care for children.
Family Allowance was increased and indexed.
The Family Allowance Supplement was introduced for the low
paid and their dependents.
Supplementary payments were introduced for low income
workers mostly women.
I could list a great many other measures which have made
Australian policies in regard to women, in many cases, a
model for other countries.
We established the Child Support Agency, addressed the
poverty traps3 that sole parents face; introduced a
retirement incomes strategy which improves women's access to
superannuation while guaranteeing maintenance of the age
pension; we've trebled rent assistance; introduced the
National Women's Health Strategy; set up the Office of
Indigenous Women to work towards the elimination of 
discrimination and disadvantage among Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander women; established the National Committee on
Violence Against Women; introduced a Sex Discrimination Act
and an Affirmative Action Act.
These specific initiatives have been no more or less
important than general measures we have taken to extend
opportunity, strengthen the social net and modernise our
economy and society.
When we doubled the school retention rate, women benefited
more than two out of every three girls now finish secondary
education. More than half of all higher education places are now taken
by women.
Medicare benefited and continues to benefit women.
And of course it would be a travesty if Australian women
felt excluded from our fundamental objective and the
landmark reformsi we have made to achieve it the effort to
build a strong, internationally competitive society for on
our success in this, our future and our children's future
depend. The jobs, the opportunities, the security, social justice,
the quality of our society depend on this.
So then do women depend on it. And it depends on women.
The Economic Statement, One Nation, we released on February
26 builds on our reforms more than that, it sets the scene
for recovery.
One Natio~ n is about strength through partnerships:
partnerships between government and business, the
Commonwealth and the States, employees and employers,
communities. It's a statement of inclusion the idea is to include
everyone in the productive processes, in education and
training, in the social safety net, in the ability to make
the most of and enjoy this country.
It is aimed at creating a greater sense of belonging, a
greater spirit of cooperation, a much greater degree of
social cohesion.
As it closes gaps between people it closes distances
with a national rail freight highway which makes the
country economically much more efficient and the
highways safer for cars
city ring roads which have a similar effect: 
an electricity grid which, by combining our resources
and building in an element of competition, will make
electricity cheaper
by deregulating the airline industry which will make
travel cheaper.
The idea behind One Nation is to build Australia's strength
to build a recovery which will carry us well into the
future. The idea is to set common national goals and create a
stronger sense of national purpose.
It is to pull this vast and sometimes divided country
together. I would like to think that everyone in this room will read
the One Nati,= document.
In conjunction with the National Agenda for Women which lays
out the government's objectives through the next decade I
think it lays out real and achievable reforms, reforms which
wi1ll hP undertaken, which will benefit all Australians.
This year we will be reviewing our progress in the
implementation of the action plans of the National Agenda
and setting our goals for the rest of the decade.
One Nation will create 800,000 new jobs.
Areas of particular benefit to women include the Textile,
Clothing and. Footwear Industry which will receive
$ 51 million to help the industry adjust, become more
efficient an~ d sd create secure jobs in manufacturing.
The tourism industry, which employs a high proportion of
women, will benefit enormously from deregulation of the
airlines, the improvement to our roads and new depreciation
allowances on tourist related buildings.
One Nation also ' contains substantial new incentives to small
and medium business, many of which, of course, are owned and
run by women, and in which many women work.
Reforms to Australian workplaces which will make Australian
business and industry much more efficient will have also
have a profound effect on working women's lives.
Enterprise bargaining will make it possible to negotiate
flexible working-time arrangements and other improvements to
make workplaces more compatible with family life and
responsibilities. We have also established a Work and Family Unit in the
Department of Industrial Relations to explain to employers
the advantages of having family friendly practices in the
workplace. 
Meanwhile the government will continue to guarantee that the
wages system is equitable and protects those with little or
no bargaining power.
The government emphatically does not believe in the
" survival of the fittest" among Australian workers.
The $ 720 million we have allocated to vocational training
will be a great benefit to women, particularly as this
massive funding increase goes hand in hand with the specific
direction in the National Agenda to improve training and
employment outcomes for women.
The One Nati. n statement increases assistance to families on
low and medium incomes.
It makes rental assistance immediately available to people
in need.
This is to name just a few of the measures One Nation
contains. The statement combines, I believe, a mix of the bold and
enduring nation-building projects Australia needs, and
measures which will help people through the hard times.
The point of One Nation is the point of my government get
the economy moving, get people back to work.
Do it the only way it can be done: do it by calling on all
of our strength our resources, our institutions, our
people. Do it in partnership. Build the partnerships.
At the start I said that it is increasingly difficu Lt to
conceive of women as a distinct social or economic category.
There is a long way to go before we reach the point when
discrimination has been eliminated, the extra difficulties
for women in the community, in the workplace, the home and
in business have vanished, and we don't so frequent~ y
include women among the disadvantaged.
But I think one can read in the signs evidence of social
progress. We're getting there, we've made more headway in the last
nine years thian we made in the previous hundred, and we' re
going to make a lot more in the next nine.
I am sufficiently proud of what has been achieved and
confident enough of what can and will be, to say that I can
help. I think we can build a very good society in Australia and
its key element will have to be the opportunities, the
chance to participate and have a voice, the options of work 
and home, the security, and the centrality of women in this
one nation.
I must conclude by congratulating UNIFEM on the great work
it is doing.
I trust that my comments today were not taken to mean a lack
of interest in the condition of women in the developing
world. Far from it the government will continue to support UNIFEM
and remains committed to its objectives.
But today, I have taken the opportunity to tell Australian
women that, of all the partnerships we seek in the
One Natin Statement, none is more significant than that
between the women and men of Australia. Here, no less than
in the developing countries, Australia needs their skills
and energy and we' will only reach the goal of the good
society we want by continuing to extend their influence.
Thank you for having me. 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ALP BUSINESS LUNCHEON, GREAT HALL NATIONAL GALLERY MELBOURNE
12.3OPM, WEDNESDAY 11 MARCH 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
Your experience over the years has probably led you to
expect today the familiar post-Budget urge. The old gee-up
speech, in which I tell you what the Budget means and why
it's good for you, and urge you to get out there and do what
you do best.
This time is different.
Today I want to thank you. I want to thank you for your
contribution to the Government's Economic Statement the
commitment to this country that you displayed, your
willingness to offer constructive ideas.
It was a much better Statement for it.
And I want to thank you for your endorsement of it because
the general response from business has been terrific.
That's very important for everyone' s confidence.
I think there is a general opinion now that there is only
one way to go and that is towards growth and recovery.
There is most certainly a . general conviction that we have to
create jobs.
And we have to start doing that now.
Of course the Economic Statement was not a Budget speech
it was much bigger than a Budget. 
It ranged very widely across the Australian economy and
society. But its target was very specifically Recovery.
We called it: One Nation with that in mind.
When, after all the discussions, we looked at the measures
we'd come up with the measures we decided would do most to
bring on recovery, we realised that there was a very strong
theme running through them.
And the more we thought about it the more we realised it was
no accident.
We realised that almost every significant measure was
calculated to give us greater strength by harnessing more
efficiently our human and material resources.
I
One Nation aims to close the gaps on a vast continent
where population centres and markets are separated by
great distances
where our political evolution has frequently been out
of tune with our economic development and potential
where, at least until very recently, our industrial
culture has contained its own great distances
and where, if we are to emerge from this recession
stronger than ever and make the great leap into the twenty
first century, at this moment in our history we need all the
social and economic cohesion we can muster.
We called it One Nation because its aim is to forge
partnerships, create efficient cooperative workplaces,
involve more people in the life of the nation and include
them in the : recovery, educate more people and link our
cities and hinterland and ports by the greatest one-off
overhaul of infrastructure for generations.
I believe it is the combination of elements which makes the
Statement strong it is not just an economic package, it
has a certain chemistry to it.
It calls up the resources of our people as well as our
economic. resources. It addresses our weaknesses and calls
up our strengths and one of those strengths, I believe, is
our passion for this country. 
In tough times, in historic times as these are, that belief
in our country is very important. A sense of purpose is
very important.
That's why Dr Hewson is so wrong about what he describes as
the nationalist diversion.
He is wrong to think I intend it as a diversion.
He is wrong to think that it could only be a diversion.
He is certainly wrong to think that calling on Australians
to take whole-hearted pride in themselves and their country
is the action of a scoundrel.
Dr Hewson's problem is that he can only follow the textbook,
only obey the ideological reflexes there is no heartbeat
in either of them.
Ladies and gentlemen,
One Nation is a four year strategy designed to get things
moving. To produce jobs and reduce unemployment.
And to do so in a manner that contributes to a stronger,
more productive economy for the 1990s.
It stimulates business investment and provides a more
efficient and reliable transport system.
It encourages large projects and small business enterprise
alike. It further opens the economy to competition, while providing
enterprises with the ability to respond to the challenges of
competition by encouraging improved work practices.
It improves skills and career prospects, while providing
greater incentives for individuals to take on added
responsibility. And it does this while reinforcing a low inflation culture.
While producing a fairer Australia.
In total, One Nation is a comprehensive and integrated
strategy that will provide the platform for a stronger
Australia, an Australia better able to grow in an
increasingly competitive world. 
RECOVERY Our first task is to generate growth.
The high level of unemployment is bringing great hardship to
many families.
We have to bring it down.
And we can bring it down.
Australia is much better placed now than it has been coming
out of earlier recessions.
Inflation is low, profits are high for this stage of the
cycle, and the benefits of past structural reforms are
coming through.
In addition, our, sound underlying Budget position allows us
to provide a fiscal boost now.
We have not stood back and left the economy solely to market
forces as the Opposition would have us do.
Their prescription to get us out of this recession is to
wait and hope.
Instead we have a sensible program of spending and tax
incentives amounting to 1/ 2 per cent of GDP over the next
year to get us moving again.
Coming on top of the stimulus of lower interest rates, the
cyclical unwinding of the budget surplus, and a turnaround
in farm product,, this should see GDP grow by around 4 3/ 4
per cent in : L992-93.
A MORE PRODUCTIVE ECONOMY
Lifting employment and restoring confidence is the immediate
priority. The strength of One Nation is that it does this at the same
time as providing the foundations for a sustained lift in
Australia's productive capacity.
Such a lift in capacity will only be achieved with a private
sector able to respond to today's challenges.
The Government can and will help.
We will provide appropriate incentives, skills and the
infrastructure to support enterprise. 
We will not prop up inefficiencies, but we will help
adjustments and direct our limited resources to the areas
where they can be of most use.
Equally, we will not be relying on the hope that market
forces alone will deliver the goods.
It is the Opposition's policy to withdraw from the problem.
Ours is to engage it.
The boost from the Budget will help the recovery get
underway, but as the private sector picks up, we will wind
the Budget back and bring it into surplus by 1995-96.
We will not give away the sound underlying structure of the
Budget we have worked so hard to achieve.
Nor will we let the gains on inflation slip.
Our agreement with the union movement will keep wages
growth, on average, at a rate consistent with keeping our
inflation rate comparable to that of our major trading
partners. This is the key to achieving a low inflation culture.
To making the 1990s a low inflation decade.
Economic recovery, a sensible fiscal policy, and low
inflation will provide the basic environment for renewed
private sector enterprise.
One Nation does this and much more.
I
It will improve the structural or micro elements of the
economy that are so important to private sector decisionmaking.
We need: workplaces that are responsive to change;
a skilled and motivated labour force;
a reliable and efficient infrastructure;
an appropriate tax regime; and
a competitive environment where the best are
rewarded.
One Nation addresses each of these factors. 
WORKPLACE REFORM
Ladies and gentlemen,
We all know that inflexible workplaces have harmed
performance in the past.
To deliver lasting change in industrial relations we need
employers, unions and government working together.
In this we have made quite remarkable progress. A
centrepiece of Labor's strategy is working.
The Opposition claims that Industrial Relations reform is
also a centrepiece of their strategy.
Yet curiously they devote just three quarters of a page to
it in Fightback.
And what they say there is ill-defined and potentially very
damaging. Predictably it is about confrontation, strengthening the
Trade Practices Act and providing no support for the weak.
It is all very familiar to those who remember the early
1980s.
Confrontation and inflation.
For on top of the GST slug, the Opposition industrial
relations policy will be very inflationary.
What we need a wages policy that will entrench a ' Low
inflation culture and reform the workplace is increasingly
what we have.
More than 40 enterprise agreements have been ratified by the
Industrial Relations Commission since the implementation of
the enterprise bargaining principle last October.
This process will accelerate and we will help it by amending
the certified agreements provisions of the 1988 Industrial
Relations Act to make them more conducive for parties to
negotiate at the~ workplace.
ASKILLED WORKFORCEFlexible
workplaces with a skilled workforce will make the
1990s a more prosperous decade.
We have already done a lot in this regard. 
School retention rates have almost doubled since 1983.
The number of Commonwealth funded places at universities
will have increased by 50 per cent by 1994.
These dramatic changes will now be matched in technical and
vocational training.
With an extra $ 720 million of Commonwealth money over the
next three years, and by working with the States, we will
create thousands more places and lift the quality of
vocational education.
One Nation also directs more resources to improving
training, both for those entering the workforce for the
first time and for those currently unemployed:
* we have substantially raised the incentives for emplo
yers to take on apprentices and trainees.
we have increased funds for JOBSTART and JOBSKILL, two
programs that are well targetted to assist long-term
unemployed back into employment.
I NFRASTRUCTURE
For business to compete effectively in Australia and the
world, we need reliable and efficient transport.
We have built up the National Highway System in recent
years, and now, with One Nation we will set aside $ 600
million to upgrade roads over the next two years.
We will thus create jobs quickly, and create a better system
in our cities and on the long hauls between Adelaide,
Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane.
Strategic investments to straighten rail lines and
strengthen br7idges, and to provide more passing loops, will
see rail transit times reduced and made more reliable 12
hours, reliably, between Melbourne and Sydney by 1994.
We will final~ ly have a standard gauge line connecting our
capital citiE&amp; s from Brisbane to Perth.
Here in Melbourne we will put $ 20 million into upgrading the
terminal at South Dynon and a further $ 5 million connecting
South.. Dynon to. Swanston and Appleton Docks.
The end result will be a rail system able to compete with
road, and a rLetwork of competitive capital city ports. 
We are very much aware that upgrading the infrastructure in.
rail will only produce the necessary improvements with
better work practices.
Accordingly, our spending is conditional on commitments by
unions to a Greenfields enterprise agreement with the
National Rai~ l Corporation.
A COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT
For the money spent on public investment projects to yield
the maximum benefits, not only are flexible workplaces
required, bu~ t a competitive environment.
Management must perform; the best will be well rewarded.
Labor's reforms over the past 9 years have opened Australia
up to greater competition.
For example, our exporters of manufactured goods have made
remarkable inroads into overseas markets, with manufactured
exports increasing at an annual rate of 10.5 per cent since
1982-83.
They have increased by over 20 per cent in the past two
years. We will continue to integrate the economy into the
international economy with phased reductions in tariffs.
We have exposed other sectors, such as telecommunications
and banking, to competition at home.
One Nation takes this process further.
It introduces revolutionary change to aviation, and the
transmission of electricity.
Among other measures to make the banking sector more
responsive to change, additional foreign bank licenses will
be permitted, subject to prudential standards.
SMALL BUSINESS
This government places a very high value on the small
business sector.'
Small-businesses employ, more.. than 2 million Australians, or
nearly half of the workforce in the private sector.
They are a powerful source of employment, of innovation, and
of rising living standards. 
Small business is often the way in which Australians can
improve their lives, and improve their country at the same
time. In our One Nation program, we have taken concrete steps to
strengthen small business not with handouts, but with real
incentives to grow, to innovate, to export and to create
jobs.
We have: substantially increased the capital gains tax relief
for small and growing businesses, to increase capital
mobility and flexibility in the sector.
granted. a three month extension for 1991/ 92 company tax
payments for small business.
tripled the funding to $ 12 million for helping small
businesses ' into export markets through our " Export
Access" program.
provided for the establishment of Pooled Development
Funds which will be able to channel equity capital into
businesses with assets of less than $ 30 million.
In addition, small business, like all business, will benefit
from the other measures in One Nation such as a more skilled
workforce and the new depreciation rules.
All these measures will help small business perform.
We are about helping business succeed, not adding burdens as
the Opposition proposes.
Dr Hewson's new tax will create more than 800,000 tax
collection points.
Business people can forget their Sunday afternoons with his
consumption tax-Sundays will be spent doing the books.
It is a small business nightmare, but an accountant's dream.
No wonder six large accountancy firms are funding Mr
Hewson's GST planning and co-ordination office in Sydney!
A FAIRER AUSTRALIA
Ladies and gentlemen, a healthy efficient economy is a means
to an end that end is a good society.
One Nation builds on our very proud record on social
justice. 
Fundamental to making Australia a fairer society is to
create jobs and reduce unemployment.
We did this in 1983 and we will do it again.
Despite the recent declines in employment, we have created
an additional 1 1/ 2 million jobs since 1983.
This has allowed many new entrants, especially women, to
establish themselves in the workforce.
Indeed, female employment has risen by more than 900,000
over this period.
The measures: introduced in One Nation will see strong
employment growth restored.
Over 800,000 new jobs will be created over the next 4 years.
One Nation also will help many of those jobs go to the longterm
unemployed who currently are facing particular
hardship. The successes we had in the ' 80s in lifting employment and
investment and bringing down inflation were achieved in
large part through restraint by the bulk of full-time wage
and salary earners.
Their wage increases were responsible while many of the
benefits flowing from tax cuts were largely directed at
lower incomes.
As a result, many workers are now facing undesirably high
tax rates on. their additional earnings.
One Nation will ensure that the great bulk of workers will
face a maximum marginal rate of 30 per cent.
Those on incomes below $ 20,700 face a marginal tax rate of
cents in the dollar, a rate that was 30 cents when we
came to office.
In addition, for many on low incomes, Government support is
very important.
Labor has targetted social security and welfare spending
effectively so that those in genuine need are now receiving
much more substantial support.
One Nation will preserve these gains and in some areas
extend them.
i 
Ladies and gentlemen
I could conclude by saying a great many things about Dr
Hewson's Fightback package, but today I shall mention just
one curious and salutary point.
In it he says that he will privatise Australia's ports.
This is very curious.
The Commonwealth of Australia does not own any ports
except ports in the Antarctic, the jetty on Cocos Island,
the port on Christmas Island and the defence jetty at Jervis
Bay. Is this the one he means? Will he also privatise the navy?
Will all shipping on Lake Burley Griffin be sold to
privateers? I mention this because it is an example of our opponents'
ideological blinkers, the obsessive and rigid nature of
their thinking.
Nothing not even facts or common sense will get in Dr
Hewson's way.
You will find significant differences in One Nation. Not
just significant policy differences.
*-like we will upgrade infrastructure but they think
that' s irresponsible.
-we will expand TAFE but they think that's irresponsible
too. Etcetera etcetera., whatever does not fit with
Fightback is per se irresponsible.
But you will see more than these differences. You will see
a fundamental philosophical difference.
One addresses social and business reality, the other
addresses an. ideology.
One is a living and breathing program for Australia, the
other says cur future can be best determined by a sterile
exercise in accountancy.
One recognises people as significant factors in recovery, as
significant.. f actors in an-economy.-the other does not.
One does not want a Recovery.
We do.
Thank you. 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY ( 1O. 3OAM, 11 MARCH 1992)
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF " LET'S GO AUSTRALIA" LIFE BE IN IT CAMPAIGN
MELBOURNE, 11 MARCH 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm more than pleased to have the opportunity to launch this
Life Be In It Campaign, which has the entirely appropriate
slogan " Let's Go, Australia!".
It's appropriate not just because we need to get going, but
because we can get going.
The opportunities' are there for us to make sure that the
great qualities of our society are preserved within a
dynamic new Australia.
We have natural advantages that most other countries can
only dream of.
Think of them: the ones that nature provides mineral
resources, wilderness, space those things which are at a
premium in virtually every other advanced country.
And think of the ones that Australians made a robust
democracy, freedoms unsurpassed in the world, highly
developed social ' services, a tolerant multicultural society
with, by any measure, one of the highest standards of living
in the world.
These things were made by Australians with bold ideas,
courage and E-nergy.
They didn't drop from the sky they were imagined, worked
for, made to happen.
Just as our resources have been developed and our land
farmed by the enterprise of men and women, it is Australians
who have made a good society. 
And we can make a better one.
I take the view that if we can achieve these things, we can
achieve much more.
If we can make one of the world's most free and democratic
societies, we can make a more dynamic one.
If we can make a society as fair and tolerant as this, we
can go much further towards eliminating injustice and
intolerance, and engaging more and more people in the life
of the nation.
If we can create one of the highest standards of living in
the world, we can make it higher, and we can do the things
which are necessary to guarantee the future.
And if we are able to develop our resources, and farm our
land as efficiently as we do then we are able, surely, to
manufacture and grow new products and export them to the
world. I have no doubt that we can do these things because I have
seen so much. done in recent years.
In 1992 we are much better at working together than we have
ever been.
We are much more competitive than we were a decade ago, by
far.
We are much more aware of the need to develop our strengths,
to become a nation of entirely independent mind, to make our
own destiny. I
We know much more about the things that we have to do, and
the figures show that we are much better at doing them.
The fact is that the progress we have made can be the basis
for recovery from this recession, and more than that for
building a great Australian society in the nineties.
To do it we need the whole-hearted effort of Australians.
Our recovery and growth must come as our past achievements
have come from the efforts of Australians, for the benefit
of Australians.
It must be a recovery in which all Australians share.
As a government we want to open ways for Australians to play
their part.
Our plans are calculated to include them, and we want to
develop new plans, new programs, new ways of calling on the
energy, ambition and imagination of all Australians. 
That is why I am so pleased to support Life Be In It this
year's program called " Let's Go, Australia!", hits the mark
perfectly. As I said, we have these great natural advantages, we have
this fantastic country but the trouble with a country so
well-endowed is that it tends to make us complacent.
It has given us a tendency to cruise, and watch the world
pass by.
Now we know that we can't cruise that was the message of
the eighties.
The message of this decade is that we can look to the future
with confidence: as we engage the gears of recovery we
should remind ourselves that our great achievements did not
fall to us by chance.
We got this far by calling on the greatest of all our
natural resources our people. Ourselves. Our ambitions,
our abilities, our energy, our care, our faith in each
other and in ourselves, our love for this country.
That is what: we ' must call on now our whole-hearted belief
in this enterprise of Australia.
I congratulate everyone involved in this " Life Be In It"
campaign. Your efforts are calculated to give inspiration, confidence
and pride, at a time when Australia needs those things.
On behalf of the government, I thank you.
And thank you for having me here today.
ENDS 



i~ 9~ KL
' I Q
JOD
bo 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP,
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW LUNCH, HILTON HOTEL,
SYDNEY, 12 MARCH 1992
A little over two weeks ago I announced in the Parliament a
plan designed to bring us out of recession, and also to set
us up as a stronger and more prosperous society for the
decade ahead. We called it the " One Nation" plan to
emphasise the idea that it is not only about jobs and living
standards. It will create 800,000 new jobs over four years.
It will raise living standards. It will strengthen our
economy for the long haul. But it is also about educating
and training our kids, and about the kind of country we want
them to grow up in. Its about linking the country together,
and linking people in the workplace together. Australia
works best when we work together when employees are
involved as well' as employers, when those who have lost out
are brought back in, when we take care of our future
generations as well as our own. That is what One Nation is
all about cooperating at home to compete abroad.
Today I want to ' share with you some of the thinking behind
the One Nation plan. By and large the plan has been well
received but in the question period that follows I'd be
delighted to respond to any concerns you have about the
plan, and the direction it charts out for Australia.
It is a forward-looking plan, but it is mindful of our
experience of the eighties. In the distress of recession it
would be easy to panic and forget just how far we have
already come on the path to reshaping Australia and how
much we would have to lose in turning back. We are going
into the nineties with inflation lower than it has been for
thirty years, and with every possibility of keeping it low.
Because we have cooperated in setting wages and we have
allowed the dollar to find its own level, we are going into
the nineties: 17 per cent more competitive internationally
than we were a decade ago. We have succeeded in increasing
our exports, so that today we export twice as much as we did
a decade ago, and at the same time we have succeeded in 
diversifying them through tourism and manufactures. We have
increased the profit share, and over the eighties we so
greatly cut taxes and government spending that our outlays
today are three per cent less as a proportion of GDP than
they were in the last recession. Even when the deficit
reaches it maximum next financial year, it will still be
less than half the size of the deficit we inherited in
1983/ 84, both compared to GDP. Above all, we have cut
import protection and opened all our markets to foreign
competition, so the successes we have are real successes,
hard fought and hard won against the best the world can
offer not the phoney successes of the fifties and sixties
when we built an industrial museum and called it
" development".
From our successes in the eighties manufacturers have
learned they can put their products onto world markets and
win. Employers, employees and unions have learned that they
can work together to change tired old rules which hold back
change and diminish the value of work. They have learned
that, working together, they can transform the workplace in
ways that increase pay, profits and the enjoyment of work.
We have all learned that tourism is winner for Australia
so much so that it is now our largest and fastest growing
industry. We have learned that we can reform big government
businesses, making them charge properly for their services,
run themselves efficiently, and pay a profit back to us. We
have learned that we can control government spending, we can
cut taxes, and we can eliminate deficits in our federal
budget.
We came a long way in the eighties, but there is no doubt
the recession has set us back. We have lost a tenth of the
economic expansion of the eighties. We have lost an eighth
of the new jobs we created in the eighties. We have lost a
fifth of the gains in average incomes we made in the
eighties. The worst thing, however, is that in recession we
lost some of the confidence we gained in the eighties some
of our sense of direction.
One Nation is designed to get us back on course.
Work on the One ' Nation statement began the day after I
became Prime Minister. Right from the beginning we wanted
to link two purposes in the plan. We wanted to bring
forward the recovery, create jobs and encourage confidence
but we wanted to do it in a way which also strengthened us
for the long haul which set us up as a more competitive
economy in the nineties. We wanted things that created jobs
now and also helped us later. This basically meant
increasing public investment now while private investment 
was weak, so we could generate growth while building
something worthwhile. Right from the beginning we thought
that our public investment should help goods transport,
which is directly linked with the productivity and
competitiveness of our economy. Many of our consultations
encouraged us to think that was the right way to go. We
also knew that for the long haul we should be doing
everything we could to encourage business investment. We
have brought from the eighties low inflation, an increased
profit share, a sharply reduced cost of capital, and a
cooperative industrial relations system. The one thing more
we felt we needed to strengthen investment was a business
tax regime which overall would compare favourably with those
of other advanced industrial countries. Again, our
consultations in the community demonstrated strong support
for investment incentives.
Of course our plan had to be made in some kind of financial
framework. The last thing we wanted to see was all the hard
won fiscal cains of the eighties, all the hundreds of hours
of weary work in budget committees, blown with an
irresponsible spending spree. We had brought federal
spending under control, and we didn't intend to let it go
again. If we were to spend more now, we should wind it back
as the recovery proceeded. So we imposed three rules which
are embedded inthe projections of One Nation. We required
outlays to fall as a percentage of GDP over the next four
years. We required the deficit to fall in each year of the
planning period, from its peak next financial year to
surplus by .995/ 96. And since a surplus can be easily
achieved by letting revenues rise as inflation increases
personal income taxes, we decided to commit ourselves to
returning fiscal drag as income tax cuts beginning in
1994/ 95. A surplus built on what would effectively be a tax
increase was unacceptable to us, and I think would be
unacceptable toyou.
These three rules defined the amount of room we had to
stimulate recovery over the next few years, and the size of
the persona. income tax cuts required in the last two years
of our four year program.
I can tell you now that there were many moments in the
period from Christmas last year to February 26 this year
when I wondered whether we could meet our deadlines. We were
preparingat: least the equivalent of a budget, starting from
scratch. Throughout the whole process the Commonwealth Public
Service, and most particularly my own Department of Prime
Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, and the Department of
Finance, performed a spectacular job helping us get out
right on schedule, a 200 page document detailing over 
programs and containing projections for the economy over the
next four years.
We began implementing it on the night of the statement by
cutting sales taxes on cars by one quarter. We will
continue in three weeks with a $ 317 million fillip to
consumer confidence, delivered as a one off payment to
families with children. At the same time we are beginning
work on a massive program of public investment which will
cost $ 2.3 billion this year and next, and which will see the
creation of a national rail freight highway from Brisbane to
Perth, the creation of two new national highways, better
ports, better air terminals, and better training centres.
That is part of our public investment program but the
private investment part of the plan is just as important.
We are bringcring in a new competitive depreciation regime
which halves the write off time for longer lived assets. We
are increasing the depreciation rate on industrial and
tourism buildings. We will allow private companies to issue
tax advantaged bonds to finance land transport and
electricity generating projects. We will offer a ten per
cent development allowance to encourage major projects.
A just completed EPAC study confirms that our changes have
made Australia a world leader in business tax reform.
We will increase both public and private investment, and at
the same time create a more competitive economy. We are
dropping the separation between domestic and international
airlines to create more competition and we want to bring
New Zealand in to a single aviation market with us. We will
help the states create a national electricity grid which
serves all of eastern Australia and separates electricity
production from electricity distribution and sales.
Australia's success depends on the quality of workforce and
the cooperativeness of its workplaces, and we will improve
both. We will expand and transform the TAFE into a high
status vocational education and training system, immediately
increase the places for trainees and apprenticeships, and
substantially expand programs to help the long term
unemployed regain their skills and return to work.
We will encourage and entrench a national shift to workplace
bargaining as the major focus of industrial relations over
the next decade. It is from workplace changes that most of
our productivity increases will come, and most of the wage
increases which sustain a higher living standard in the
nineties. 
Finally, we built our whole structure on the objective of
keeping low inflation. To that end we sought and obtained a
commitment from the ACTU that wage claims would be
consistent with keeping inflation no higher than the level
of our major trading partners. I have to say in all due
modesty it was not a hard commitment to get, because
Australia's -contemporary trade union movement is as strong
on the goal of keeping low inflation as any section of the
community. The income tax cuts in two years time are designed to
promote both our inflation goal and our productivity goal.
They are focussed on reducing the middle marginal rate to
per cent, underpinning the Accord at the same time as they
increase the incentives to work and save.
Turning the -plan into reality is the top priority of the
government. Cars are cheaper already, and I saw in Financial
Review yesterday a report that sales are expected to pick
up. Two days after the statement was delivered, I went to
Melbourne where the ACTU executive unanimously committed
the trade union movement to the principle of wage outcomes
which allow us to keep inflation to a level no higher than
the level of our trading partners. And as I mentioned,
early next month qualifying families with children will get
one-off payment to help them meet their needs, and kick
the economy along a little at the same time.
Meanwhile, we are moving rapidly on our public investment
program. My colleague Bob Brown, the Minister for Land
Transport, has already approved " black spot" road
improvement projects in the Paramatta area of Sydney, where
the need for better roads is great, and unemployment is
high. South Australia has now sent in a proposed black
spots program, and the programs for NSW and Victoria will be
along in a week or so. Discussions with the states on the
national roads strategy, funded from the One Nation program,
are scheduled to commence today.
The National Rail Corporation is now convening working
groups to develop programs for improvements to the
Sydney/ Brisbiane corridor, the Sydney/ Melbourne Corridor, the
Melbourne/ Adelaide corridor, and the Perth/ Adelaide corridor.
Throughout the system, skills assessment groups are setting
out to collect the information required for a greenfields
industrial agreement, which we have made a condition for the
project to go: ahead.
My colleague Kim Beazley, the Minister for Employment.,
Education and Training, has begun discussions with his state
counterparts on our TAFE program and the Treasurer, John 
Dawkins, is pressing ahead to introduce legislation to give
effect to our business tax changes in this session of
Parliament. So that is the essence of One Nation plan for Australia. It
builds on our strengths of low inflation, the Accord,
stronger and more varied exports, fiscal reform, improved
competitiveness, and a better balance between profits and
wages. It builds on them by increasing public investment in
services directly related to economic growth, and by
increasing the incentives for private investment. Far from
being an old style Keynesian program to boost consumption
spending, the direct effects of the program will
predominantly be on investment. It's a supply side program.
Certainly we are doing something substantial to help
consumer demand over the next few months, but over the next
two financial years three quarters of the One Nation
spending will be on public investment programs and private
investment incentives. And most of that additional spending
will be finished by 1994/ 95, when we begin to return fiscal
drag to taxpayers at the same time as we sharply restrain
outlays and bring the budget back to surplus. Our goal is
to enhance our capacity to produce for home and abroad, not
just our capacity to consume. 
TRANSCRIPT OF~ THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
FINANCIAL REVIEW LUNCHEON, QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, SYDNEY,
12 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Q: role of Australia in the Asia-Pacific?
A: I think our future is in the Asia-Pacific state.
Already 70 odd per cent of our export goes to the APEC
area and about 67-68 per cent from memory, of our
imports come from there. We are all really largely
integrated with the region, but, of course, more will
happen. It's the fastest growing part of the world and
we are now well set up to participate in that growth.
Whereas because of our reliance upon border protection,
tariffs, quotas, and the fact that we had a largely
uncompetitive financial system back in the ' 50s and
the trades in goods and services passed Australia
by. Now we have removed exchange controls, broken the
tariff wall down and now where national savings will be
funding productive things. Our exports this Year, for
the first time in our history, our manufacturing
exports are, larger than our rural exports. We're now
set up with a low inflation rate and with flexibility
now coming into the labour market on an enterprise
basis, we're really set up to participate in this
growth which formerly we were not. So, we've got to
the point for our exports again in the Asia-Pacific
area, the gr~ eat bulk of our imports come from there,
obvious: ly we are now better positioned to take our part
of that trade and to share in that growth than we ever
were. That's why I think it is important that we continue to
improve our competitiveness, and we break down all
these areas of inefficiency. These are the first order
issues. The first order issue are continuing the
change : Ln the micro-economy that we formerly were doing;
and successfully in the macro-economy, that is ports,
wharves, railways, airlines, power generation,
training, enterprise bargaining these are the things,
not whether we tax our Kelloggs or our income. It is
an tenth order issue. The first order issues are 
those, and if we concentrate on the first order issue
that One Nation concentrates on improving the capacity
of containers through our ports and onto our rail
system, on our roads, training our kids and
underwriting a tax break to capital, to investment.
These are the things which will set us up more
adequately to participate in that growth which is where
our future must be.
But again we have got to be confident about our future,
confident about Australia and look as though we are
confident. I think that is terribly important to the
chemistry of the region, that at least they think we
know who we are and what we are and what we're after.
Q: Mr Keating, my question is about inflation. One Nation
predicts inflation at 3.75 per. Will this blow out due
to enterprise bargaining in wages and higher growth
rates than predicted?
A: No, because it is no accident now that for 9 successive
years we brought wages, the average weekly earnings
forecast, which was put together by the Government with
the ACTU under the Accord, we brought it in under
target. We brought it in because of that
understanding. I said in my speech that the ACTU as a
constituency was at least as interested in lower
inflation as any constituency in the country. The
truth is it has been much more interested in low
inflation than any constituency in the country.
Because interest is between it being prepared to
cut demands back where most other sectors haven't. And
it is because it understands how pernicious inflation
is to the low paid, to the retired, to people trying to
buy a house and carry large price increases in
properties, but most importantly retarding investment
and with it employment. It's been about knocking
inflation down and the fact that on the large booms as
we've seen in the post-war years, 1988-89, when
employers were offering wage increases of 12-15 per
cent. But the year AWE number came out at 6 1/ 4 shows
just how entirely committed in the face of that
enormous demand for labour the ACTU has been.
I
Now we are not focussing on average weekly earnings.
Because we have got inflation down, the thing to do now
is keep it down and we are now focussing on major
trading partner average inflation and imputing in that
a wage number which is consistent with that, that is to
which the ACTU is committed. But if you take the view
that we can't open the labour market up, that we've got
to remain with the Arbitration Commission for all
adjustments in relation to the economy, then I think
what you'll end up with is a colony of losers-out on
The economy just won't be as competitive as it
ought to be, it won't be as clever in managing itself
and remember this, we are not the New Zealand Labor
Party, there is no blunder and stumble here into 
deregulation. We've actually broken the craft system
up. The craft system of industrial organisation meant
that if someone on the metals construction award on a
Sydney building site paid an increase, that went
through the whole of the metal industry in Australia.
That's now been broken into much more discrete
elements, and by going at it on an enterprise basis if
a union wanted to claim and use its industrial muscle
to claim an increase which destroys the business, it
takes responsibility for it. Where formerly this was
happening with the Arbitration Commission, who had no
great relationship with either the business or the
union. Now a union can sit down with the company and get it
managed better. And you've got the metals industry for
its unions groups talking about advanced manufacturing
technology. They now go and say what's your long-term
corporate plan, what's your long-term investment plan,
and how can we help the business grow. That's the sort
of mindset of maturity, not the confrontation. The New
Zealand trade union movement never spoke to the Labor
Government in all the years it was in office, and the
Government didn't speak to it, there was no accord.
They had a sort of cold turkey system that Dr Hewson
will give you, you go and have a punch up over wages
and the national interest invariably loses out. That's
why whe~ n David Lange or Roger Douglas come here to
listen Politely but take no notice of them at all. I
mean good intentions, but good intentions were never
enough.
Q: Why are you waiting to give tax cuts for two years.
Are you holding a carrot for the election?
A: To not do it would definitely see the tax burden
That is, even with low inflation, the effect of low
inflation on the tax which will see the real tax
burden ' And this Government has been pursuing a
policy of handing back fiscal drag from the system and
more. So the reason we are not doing it this year is
because we think fiscal policy can't afford it and at
this point the build up is simply not there to return
but over the next couple of years there will be a build
up in the revenue, particularly as growth picks up and
as more time goes by, with inflation even at low
levels, to have an impact on the tax scales.
And by that stage, as the, if you like the hump of the
deficit starts to decline as the economy comes back, as
revenues pick up and unemployment benefits and the
other things start to diminish and the deficit starts
to come back towards surplus, that's the point then
that we can make these tax cuts. All of Labor's tax
cuts, every single one there's been many of them
since 1983 have all been honoured, every one of them
has been honoured. It won't be a repeat of the John
Howard, John Hewson and Malcom Fraser show in 1977, 
remember that campaign they had, ring up and find out
how much your tax cuts were. Well 3 months later they
took it back, they legislated them away. There won't
be any of that. And they'l11 be there as they've always1
been. I think they will create a very good climate in
the labour market. People will think they are getting
a fair go out of the tax system by creating employment
and it will provide a certain per cent rate of tax for
people between $ 20,000 and $ 40,000. People on medium
incomes where the incentive is to work and do more at
per cent rather than 38 in the dollar. But I hasten
to add 30 per cent, the same as Dr Hewson's but without
a consumption tax, without 15 per cent.
That's -the point and I don't know how you are going
with your businesses at the moment but what's going to
happen -to you is that in the nostalgia area as you give
your Sundays away filling in, as you'll be a tax
collection point on the GST, you'll give your Sundays
to remitting money to the tax office, you will be
nostalgic you will be nostalgic for a Labor
Government if it were to ever come to pass
Q: Will an international increase in interest rates affect
One Nation forecasts?
A: We've based it on what we think is a, in part, the
trading environment over the forecast period. And the
trading environment we are tied up to mostly is the
Asia-Pacific environment which I think is growing at
per cent in forecast to 92-3 and 4.5 the following
year. I don't see that sort of change, I don't see now
the prospect of that changing with some shift in
interest rates. It needs to be borne in mind that
we've still got a tighter monetary regime applied now
than ever applied from the 82-3 recession. In 1982-3
interest rates came down by about 12 per cent and
same in this recession. By then we had inflation
running at 10 and now we've got inflation statistically
running at 1.5 or a trend to 3. So there is a 7
percentage points difference with inflation and yet the
fall in rates has been the same, ie therefore this
regime haas been as it remains, much tighter than 1982-
83.
Q: current account deficit/ foreign debt?
A: It says in the text that systems stabilisation, the
Treasury says that. This has been consistent with a
slight drift up in the ratio of net external debt to
GDP. And the ratio of debt to equity financing have a
return -towards levels which existed prior to the
excessive leveraging of the late 1980s. Net external
debt to GDP ratio could stabilise or decline slowly.
In other words we shouldn't take as the comparable
period, the high leveraging phase of the ' 80s, but
something more sensible when that balance between debt
and equity is more of a guide to how the economy will 
be in the ' 90s. So any 2-3 percentage points the
current account forecasts, will forecast by other
people looking at the performance of the ' 80s. Now
that has changed markedly, I can't remember the numbers
exactly but I think we went from about 90 per cent debt
in 89-90 to 90 per cent equity in 1990-91. One has to
assume, I think, more sensible behaviour in financing
levels assume that this is consistent with the
stabilisation of debt and GDP or a slow decline.
Q: In regard to the Monarchy and your comments about
Australia, if Australia becomes a republic what form
will it take, will Bill Hayden be president for
example?
A: Well just remember what I said. The remark which was
objected to by our conservative friends, forelock
tugging mates, was that I said in the presence of the
Queen, I was congratulating her on her 40 years as the
Monarch and to make the point that in the 40 so much
had changed. In 40 years, I said to her, Britain had
joined the European Community and Australia's largely
devoted itself to the Asia-Pacific, we were necessarily
more independent of Britain than Europe, but that she
was part of that change. She was part of that
independence by taking the royal style and title of
Queen of Australia in 1973 a thoroughly unexceptional
remark. But our friends in the Opposition had to jump
all over it. Dr Hewson said I didn't have enough
respect for the Queen of Britain outrage, he'd like
to slip right back to the torpor of the 1950s. As I
said he would be our first candidate for an exhibit in
the constitutional museum down there at the old
Parliament House. Like I said in Parliament, we are
going to put him in there with the Morphy Richards
toaster and the qualcast mower and all the other bits
and pieces that we all remember affectionately and
well. That's what I was saying. I was just saying that
Australia isn't necessarily more independent and needs
to be clear about itself, needs to be confident about
itself. It's very bad for these people who wish to
lead us in ' the ' 90s, but who harp back and want to be
part of the ' 50s. What I'm saying is they are not the
people to lead us. The people to lead us are people
confident about Australia, confident Australians,
people that know that we are good enough to make our
way in the world and know that we are entitled to and
have indeed an identity of their own. If one of our
national leaders in the 1990s thinks that we shouldn't
have an identity of our own but we should in some way
not even be referring to changes in constitutional
arrangements with Great Britain, then I say well thank
you but we don't need you.
That was one of my remarks, I was not talking about a
republic or what sort of republic we ought to have or 
what constitutional arrangements should be. That's
something for the public debate to comprehend as time
goes by.
Q: When can we expect announcements on the simplification
of superannuation and the clarification of pension
rules?
A: Well when the Government has adequately considered the
area. It's a complex area and when you take any system
like superannuation, which is again, part of the torpor
of the ' 50s and ' 60s, it was a gift from Mr Howard and
Mr Hewson when we had only a very small proportion of
workforce accessing the superannuation concession. And
when we've opened it up more generally the workforce
and then more sensibly taxed superannuation earnings,
to do that and not disrupt the expectations of
Australians who are near retirement, at retirement,
some proximity of retirement, has meant that
necessarily we've had grand provisions what have
you, to protect them. This is a matter of
inconvenience I know to the industry, but there is more
than industry inconvenienced in all this. There is
reasonable expectation by those who believe they've
grown up in the system which gave them certain
entitlements. And it's not easy therefore to change
superannuation, arrangements for tax computation
without having due regard for those things.
We've tried to do that. We've tried to make the system
more simple but at the same time make it fair. There
is probably areas where simplification can occur but
they have to be proposals which we can adopt
confidently and that will take examination and
we've done more than any government in history.
Q: Can you explain what assistance there is to small and
medium business in the One Nation Statement and what
does it do for women?
A: I'll deal with the second part of the question first.
The thing that I've had most in mind for women in this
country since I've been a Minister was jobs,
participation, choice, opportunity and of those
million jobs we created between 1983 and 1992, 60 per
cent of those went to women. In terms of my own direct
responsibility beyond employment, a number of
significant things which the Government did for women
in the ' 80s and that is opening up child care
opportunities for women to go to work if they choose,
which didn't exist formerly. The child support agency
where women are supported by their husbands or former
husbands, as the case may be, in support of their
children, in supplementary payments for low paid women,
in medicare which is an obvious support for women
because women mostly have the burden of worrying about
children and regardless of their circumstances are
covered for health protection. I mean it is just one 
thing after the other, equal opportunity legislation,
affirmative action legislation and we're continuing
that tradition and of course access to superannuation.
Before we came along there was no preserved benefits
and women who entered the workforce, left the workforce
to have children and came back and had no preservation
of benefits. They were effectively chopped out of
superannuation.
These are quite milestone reforms. I notice the
Opposition talking about pay rates for women, Dr Hewson
said he will oppose national wage cases. A lot of
women are in the low paid sector of the economy
process workers, shop assistants who rely upon national
wage adjustments for maintenance of their incomes which
they say they are opposed to. So, as usual, it will be
Labor who provides, again, for Australian women.
c ( 2&gt; t' 3 N3 U dW
I I 
In relation to small business, waive got a number of
changes in there which I think are important. The
firist thing is growth. That's the most important
thing small business lives of f the growth in the
economy. And we've got growth through the year
forecast at 4 3/ 4 per cent. The secon~ d thing is,
there has been claims by the small business
community about the mobility of capital between
businesses. We've now decreased sharply,
dramatically, the concession for good will, the
taxation of good will under the capital gains tax,
exempting up to 50 per cent of the value of good
will up to the value of a business of $ 2 million,
which should help, at least some people rolling from
one business to another. We've also changed the
rate at which smaller business meets the
sueanuto guarrantee levy. We've also changed
the timing of the taxation payments for small
busiLness. So, there Is a fair bit there for small
business. Let me say that I am not advocating any
enviLronmental vandalism or scorching the earth, but
what absolutely escapes me this time is that we
desparately need to create jobs, we desparately need
to create foreign revenue, but we persist with the
poliLcy which allows some projects which have got
potential to create lots of jobs and earn lots of
money for this country to just sit on the back
shelves. And it looks to me as if you are just
pandering to a small political minority group as we
persist with the uranium policy, which makes this
country a laughing stock, where we are allowed to
mine this mine but not allowed to take uranium from
that: mine. I don't understand why we do that, why
we don't use all of our resources and why we don't
stand up to this vocal minority and get on with it.
PM: I don't think that a vocal minority is holding major
projects back. The only uranium mine which has ever
been an issue in Australia is Pan-Continental In the
East Alligator River's flood plain. And, for
exactly the same reason that the former Coalition
Government did not agree to this development is the
same reason why this Government concerned with the
prospects of mining uranium, building a retaining
dam In the middle of a flood plain. And it's a real
livel issue, in terms of the environment. But that
is niot a new issue, it's not something that has
risen in the last few years, it's something which
has been there in the last 15 to 20 years. Now,
Roxby Downs is larger than three or four
conventional mines put together. So there's no
prohibition to the actual export of uranium, it's
only about the development problems of particular
mining sites. And the only one that I know that is
a problem is basically Jabaluka and Pan-Continental.
And that's because of the flood plain problems, it's 
right in the middle of the flood plain. If you had
seert the escarpment and the flood plain, you know
what: the problem was. The latest, largest project
to tie, if you like begun, in terms of quantification
and preserves is the-monster out in Western
Australia in the Pilbara And whij--there were some
objections to that this last week, it is now
proceeding. And one of the reasons we put this
per cent development allowance in is to say to
people who are running companies, that are not
certa~ in about their timing or whether they should
enter the market and are Bitting on the Bide lines
waiting and looking at particular commodities and
market opportunities, and then sort of blaming the
Government, to say look there is a 10 per cent
investment allowance in there, so if you
procrastinate now you have got to really want to
procrastinate, because if you do you will lose the
per cent. In other words, it is a carrot sitting
out there, and if they don't take it they will lose
it. It is time limited. So if you are here now,
getting up and saying we are being held back, you
know either they really are, because if they're not
they are simply going to do their company a
disservice by losing a very important component in
their cash flows in their early years. So that's
why it's there. It's basically there to support the
ones who have got bigger projects together which are
which go through all these various states and
what have you, and get environmental assessments and
the rest. It's to support them and to at the same
time encourage them. Now, in the one Nation
Statement we have announced a one enviornmental
process, intergovernmental agreement, environmental
assessment which will now take place between the
Commonwealth and the States in one process, which Is
a very great change. And also, the coordination and
acceleration of projects which will now be conducted
under the agis of the Prime Minister's Department,
supported by my Parliamentary colleague,
Laurie Brereton, to try to hurry and bring the
projects through these approval processes. So don't
believe that minorities are holding up major
projects. The one major project that has been a
problem ' for years is basically the pulp mill in
Tasmania.. Now, the pulp mill in Tasmania was not
held up because of wood or forest resource issues.
It was held up because the company said they could
meet the organo-chloride emmission targets of the
Government, but they wouldn't be required to meet
them. And that's why it didn't proceed three or
four years ago. And part of that was because of
Naranda,, the Canadian company, who wouldn't be
required to do things in Australia who might then be
required to be done in Canada. So, just a Little
bit of guile helps here, sorting out what is true,
what is ' fact and what is fiction. There's no doubt
there is environmental differences in this country 
a legitimate one, but again I believe they can be
balanced of f in a sensible balance for development
in Australia, and that there shouldn't be a
preoccupation or a view that major projects can't
start in this country. I just don't think that
that's true.
0: Actually, Mr Hunter is being a little coy since he
has two questions and I'll save him the trouble by
asking it. Is the Prime Mininister of Australia
being trounced in cricket, yachting and boxing.
Does this reflect on the new leadership as the
previous incumbent has had no such problem?
PM; I'll let that go to the keeper. We might have
spurred the English team on, I'll take some
responsiblity there.
Q: Prime Minister, you've already referred to the
avia-tion' policy in the One Nation Statement. Can I
take it a little further and ask your predictions
for the likely outcome of the 1992 round of the CER, 1
and secondly if you could give us guidance on your
thoughts for the longer term direction for both
countries under a CER-type agreement.
PM: Well I think it is important that Australia and New
Zealand are more integrated as economies, and
particularly in things like aviation where there's a
group of people who are closer to Sydney then indeed
to Perth is, and where it makes sense to run an
airline system in Australasia. And a lot of the CER
arrangements be concessioned by Australia to Now
Zealand, letting a country with a smaller market
access to a larger market. And that mostly costs
us. I've never minded the cost because I think it
matters politically and strategically in the long
run -to keep New Zealand as a country which is
economically strong and able to have access to
larger markets. But I think it is important to get
the airline agreement into piece and we've got some,
now absurd, blanket claims like Air New Zealand who
want 50 per cent of the on-carriage rights Out of
Australia to Air New Zealand, which is of course
absolute nonsense, absolute nonsense. I don't mind
helping the New Zealand aviation industry, but i-f
they think help means scraping more of our plate
onto theirs in absurd arrangements, then they are
cracking jokes. So, we'll be in a good negotiation,
a meaningful, sensible one, but we're not about to
be pillaged in the interests of bon honmie and the
fellowship of man in the South Pacific.
0: Primea Minister, just on one aspect of your One
Nation Statement, do you think that the electricity
grid will overcome State rivalries that currently
exist, and are you hopeful that there will be more
competition in the industry.? 
PM: Are you from the industry?
Q: Yes.
PM: well, one of the problems is, one of the great
comparative advantages Australia has is that it can
produce cheap electrical energy. We have a
colosseum all the way down the East Coast of
Australia and therefore it is one of our
comparatives strengths. It is nevertheless true
that we are not able to fund cheaper power in the
important industries who rely on it because of the
control of the State Electricity Commission in
particular states. The sensible thing is to set up
an interstate grid company which is owned by the
Commonwealth of the States which will be the
distributer of power and the electricity commission
will be the generators of power and that they will
then tender a price to supply power to the grid, or
that if a company wishes to use power, in the use of~
that power, they can get a tender from Miraring or
Loyang or somewhere else and then that power station
funds the grid and we can get competitive power
price3s to businesses around the country. That's the
point of the grid corporation and which I think will
be a very healthy thing for business and
competitiveness and for consumers in the Eastern
Coast of Australia, Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia. Now the opportunities
which I think will manifest there and it is
important to bring them home and that is another
important change. But can I just say, these are all
the changes which Australia really does need. I
mean, putting a national grid corporation together,
or building a railway highway from Brisbane to
Perth, or tying the ports to that railway highway,
or extending the road highway system, are all things
that can only be done really by Governments. And
they can't be done by taking money away from Budget
in these respects, which is what the Opposition
wishes to do. It is not going to happen by simply
taxing your Weet-Six or your clothes or your shoes.
I meein it will not matter if you tax your clothes,
your shoes or your Weet-Bix, it will have no impact
on the curves and gradience of the Sydney-Melbourne
railwray lines, or the ridsheights, or whether one
has t~ o follow a route from the Port of Melbourne
or the East Swanson dock to the railway yards.
Whether a truck can only take one container not two
because it cannot go onto the railway line, because
it isn'tr mean these are all physical
practical things that need to be done to make the
country efficient where it matters most. Moving
goods and around and being able to trade. Dr Hewson
calls that irresponsible. He calls that spending
irresponsible, he knows that no private company is
ever going to Invest In the railway system in terms 
of the permanent wave, he knows that. He knows that
without Government action we will not get a better
electricity distribution system. He knows without
Government spending we will not invest in our
children in technical and further education, and we
can't have now as Labor has, 7 out of 10 children
completing secondary school, but not enought uptake
in-the TAFE system, to take them up and train them.
But we can't have a clever country without a trained
worklforce in this area. He knows all these things,
and yet we are given only the ideology of the GST as
the solution to Australia's problems. In other
words, we are supposed to say, well look, we've now
reformed the macro-economy largely, we are now
producing competitively, we've now got our inflation
rate down, now is the time to crack all these other
areas, ports, wharfs, rail, road, training. All of
these things. But we will not do that, what we will
do is we will go and tax expenditure but not income
and that will solve the whole problems. That will
solve the whole thing. But of course it is
nonsense. It is a tenth order matter, and
regardless of what everybody things about t: axing
expenditure, nobody is going to accept that: someone
on $ 20,000 who spends all of their income, that is
in material whether you tax their income or
expenditure because it is one of the same, they
spend the lot and mostly more, they do save, whereas
some~ thing on $ 150 or $ 200,00 who is spending half
their income and saving the rest, not only is not
taxed fully on that income, but as well as that,
receives a very big tax break. Nobody is going to
wear that, nobody is going to wear that. And so not
onlyr is it going to be, is it a focus on things
which ate not material to improving Australia's
competitiveness, but it will actually be divisive.
And as we add 4 percentage or 5 percentage points to
the price system, and inflation rate doubles, more
than doubles and goes back towards double digits
agaaln, Dr Holwson will require the workforce
undorcompensated to take a real reduction in income
by a discount to wages which will preserve the low
infl~ ation rate, which of course they won't, they
will. just go and recover it in the market. And
there wil be a lot of buzz in the news then
about inflation. A lot of buzz about inflation
rising.-And what will he do then to repair it, lift
the interest and slow the economy down, so you will
end up with structural high level and structural
unemployment, lower levels of economic activity and
that is supposed to be a solution. The fact is you
can't run Australia without an agreed basis of
income determination. Whether you call it Accord,
or conVeWTsation with the Government and the unions,
or aL partnership with business, a partnership with
the unions, you can't run this country without some
agreed basis of income determination. And to throw
a sort of hand grenade at the system with the 
doubling of the inflation rate throught GST when we
have the unions now prepared to make our enterprise
efficient, committed to low inflation, wanting to
train our children and prepared to come to into,
agree with enterprise agreements on things like
rail. ways, ports, power generation and the rest, and
say oh no, we don't need that, we can have the
luxury of not worrying about those things which have
bedeviled us for half a century and will go for Dr
Hewson's GST. And then when the system is inflamed,
with higher inflation and lower growth, and the
whole micro-economic change stalls, people might
then say, well that was a mistake. It is a mistake
becaiuse, it is a mistake for this reason, Dr Hewson
had exactly the same opportunity as I had when I
became Prime minister, and that was to sit back and
say well, what needs to happen to Australia next,
what: is the logical thing to be doing now? He sat
back and said, not what should happen for Australia,
or what is logical, he said, how can I be different?
What can I do that marks me out to be different?
And he said, I got it, it's a consumption tax. So
then he has put this consumption tax and wrapped
around it other policies on the basis that its
canioflauged and hidden and disguised for all to say,
oh that's clever Dr Hewson, that is terrific,
terrific little result. He is going to double the
inflation rate, blow the wage system out of the
water, derail micro-economic reform, just what we
need, just what we need. But he had such a dream
ride for 3 or 4 months, that he actually believes
that the policy brought down actually has some
quality to it. I hope that I have punctured that
dream.
ENDS 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
CEREMONY TO MARK THE COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF
STAGE I OF THE ASSISI HOME FOR THE AGED
MARCH 1992
Your Grace, Mr Valmorbida, Ladies and gentlemen
Each time we welcome to this country people who have been
bold enough to move their homes, their affections and
their allegiances across the world, I think we are the
bolder for it.
When people start a new life here they give new life to
the nation as a whole.
That is the history of this country. Migration has been
our lifeblood and our strength.
The energy and initiative migrants bring is vital to our
economic health.
The cultural diversity they bring makes us richer in
countless ways.
They open our eyes and our minds to the rest of the
world. Quite simply migration makes Australia a better place,
and better in the eyes of other nations.
Italians have been migrating to Australia for a century
and a half.
There were Italians on the Australian goldfields. It was
an Italian who wrote the classic account of the Eureka
Stockade in 1854.
Italians were pioneers in our horticultural and
agricultural industries before World War II.
Since World War II, of course, Italians have been perhaps
the major players in transforming the cultural life of
our cities and towns: while their hard work and
PRIMIE MINISTER 
initiative in all sectors of the economy has been of
inestimable value to the nation's growth and wealth.
But Italian people have been more than agents of change
in Australia.
They have been important in renewing old and essential
values values which have at times shown signs of
weakening. Italian people have been models for all Australians in
the community spirit they have brought, their religious
values, their7 commitment to family values and in their
care for the aged.
The Assisi Home for the Aged bears witness to all these
things and I am therefore honoured and very grateful
for your inviLtation to become your patron.
The government is conscious that we must do all we can
for the gener: ation which did so much for Australia.
Obviously the Italian Australian community is aware of
its responsibility, and I'm pleased to say that the
government has matched this by providing $ 3.7 million to
enable this great project to begin.
Today I can assure the Italian community and all
Australians, whatever their national origin, that we
remain committed'to encouraging that climate of cultural
diversity and freedom, tolerance and mutual respect,
which are the true aims of multi-culturalism.
We also remai~ n committed to caring for the aged to
further expanding programs already much expanded in the
1980s.
As we undertaEke this essential work over the next few
years the Assisi home is certain to be a model of what
can be done by communities, and how they can work
together With government.
For their vision and dedication, I congratulate all those
people who have taken on this project, and wish them well
in the future! stages of its development.
And thank you. for inviting me here. 



1.6.
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH TO THE IRISH-AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
ST PATRICK'S DAY BREAKFAST, MELBOURNE
17 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Gerry, Padric Flynn, Your Grace
Archbishop Little, Joan Kirner, Martin Burke, the Irish
Ambassador, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here this morning on
St Patrick's Day. I stayed last night in the Windsor Hotel
in Bob Menzies' old suite, contemplating St Patrick's Day,
and I thought I heard the chandelier moving, and I certainly
saw the wall-paper curl from the walls revealing a sort of
1950s look and beyond it. And I thought of that remark that
was passed so long ago when another famous person was lying
in his deathbed, another Irishman's deathbed in a Paris
hotel, and hie said either something has got to give here,
either the wallpaper or me. And of course, it was him. And
the wallpaper reminded me of that particular occasion in the
Windsor Hotel. But the temptation on St Patrick's Day is, I
think, always to trivialise the Irish. I'm not having a
shot at you Brian, not having a shot at the comedians, but
it is nice to0 be here with the Irish Chamber of Commerce for
the breakfast because it does reflect upon what Ireland does
export. And what Ireland exports to the world is nothing
trivial. It: is everything that counts, its Guiness, poetry,
passion, prose, and politics, and of course people, people
who have shaped nations. And as Padric said, and as Gerry
said, Australia without the Irish, a reflect on it would be
unimaginable!. In fact Australia without the Irish would be
unthinkable, Australians without the Irish would be
unspeakable. For the Irish in Australia have been the fount of Australian
nationalism. It is a bit like Oscar Wilde himself in that hotel room,
that rare combination of folley and mobility, are the Irish.
The jokers in the pack, but also the adventurers, the
lifeblood of the place, the people who know all about
I 
independence and its importance. And it is one of the
reasons why ZIll value that history of Ireland by the
Keatings, Padric, that you've given me this morning.
Indeed, my remarks a couple of weeks ago which Gerry refers
to about independence from England, struck a cord with the
Irish press and in Ireland, which I was very surprised at.
I doubt if any two cultures were more fundamentally opposed
than the Irish and the English, in religion, in tradition,
and more part~ icularly in history. Irish history, once you
got passed the Celtic legends, was the history of never
ending resist~ ance to England. In Australia, as Robert
Hughes put it: in his recent work, ' The Fatal Shore', he said
the Irish felt twice colonised, doubly aggrieved.
The remarkable thing is that an Australian identity emerged
from these two broad streams, the English and the Irish, and
of course I t~ hink we must say three, put the Scots in there
as well. In other words, even before post-war European
migration, before we regarded ourselves as having presided
over a multicultural triumph. We in fact pulled off a
multicultural triumph ourselves. An idea that Australia had
been formed out of a traditional difference in hostility.
And it is an amazing to think about that, that Australia as
a nation before our post-war program was formed out of these
peoples with traditional differences and hostilities. An
idea that suggested that Australia was a country wit~ h a
separate destiny, a separate future, and of course a
separate past:.
In 1992, I think two lessons present themselves to me. The
first, that is to turn our multicultural society into an
Australian strength which is becoming, which it will. become.
In second, to recognise that our destiny is separate. That
ours is bound to-be a destiny which is separate. Being
clear to ourselves and the world that we mean to make our
own way, a feeling which will be very important, the
harnessing of national will, reviewing our confidence and
pride in ourselves, including that sort of pride which lifts
us beyond social ' hatred against the original Australians,
the Aboriginals-That manifestation of a feeling which will
give us a much more powerful identity in the world as well.
I said a few things recently about the flag, but let me say
this. We've got to be certain of who we are to take our
place in the world, and we can't fly two symbols wit~ h our
nation for much longer.
A nation is eternally uncertain about its representational
image is of course a nation uncertain about itself. I spent
a decade trying to transform the Australian economy, Brian
remarked on it earlier, to make it a country with an
international economic ambition. It became increasingly
plain to me lthat'another kind of transformation is
necessary, a social transformation, a mental transformation,
because we ar. e not going to make it simply by getting the
nuts and bolts together, by getting the macro-economy right,
or Joan and me getting the railways right, or something else 
right, we won't ever get it right until we get that mental
transformation that Australia is a country of its own
character. Australia is a country which will make its own
way in the world. That's the transformation we need to
really pull off our internationalisation, our true
independence. Recent events have made that quite clear to me. The uproar
when I made those quite unexceptional remarks to Queen
Elizabeth on her recent visit. The same sentiments which
have left this country always hesitating, always drawing
back, always missing the main chance, never seizing our own
history. Well that's the one thing the Irish can teach us,
their history and their destiny is forever their own and as
always remains forever Ireland's.
But when it said in Australia that the contribution we made
to Britain in World War I was not returned in full in World
War II when an Australian view is expressed scandal and
outrage. Yet those who care to consult the histories, even
those written by Englishmen, will find that it's not wrong
or even indeed those who recently consult the Financial
Times or the Guardian or the London Times, will find that it
was not wrong. Yet my dissatisfaction and disaffection is
not with Britain or the British, it is with those who cannot
find it in themselves to speak with an unashamed and
wholehearted Australian voice, who not only fail at the
essential task to grasp the future but will not even grasp
the past.
The Irish can teach them something about honouring their own
history and their traditions. But nor am I much impressed
with the new tack of those conservatives, those conservative
Australians, the idea that if we are not tugging the
forelock to Britain, we must be tugging it to Asia. It is
possible, you know, not to tug the forelock to anyone.
Padric, we have got to be in this country like the Irish
are, proud without being silly, parochial without being
unworldly, culturally secure without being culturally
arrogant. This is the great Irish legacy to Australia and
we thank your country for it.
Thank you.
I 



PRIME MINISTER
EMAICOED UNTIL DELIVERY ( 8.30 PM, 19 MARCH 1992)
ADDRESS BY Tffl PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRIME MINISTERIAL WOMEN AND SPORTS AWARDS
THE REGENT MELBOURNE
Thank you very much. It's my great pleasure to be here.
You will have probably heard me say on the odd occasion that
I want to see Australia become more competitive in the
world. It has been one of my ruling passions for the past decade.
More recently you may have heard me utter the words " One
Nation" this is -set to become a ruling passion for the
next decade.
Competitiveness is an essential part of the concept behind
One Nation.
Early in the statement you can read the following.
" The Keating government's goal is an internationally
competitive economy that continually strives for world best
performance and provides equal opportunities for all Its
citizens one nation, co-operating at home and winning
abroad". Read in one context, you might take this to mean that I am
about to give you another one of those boring economic
speeches. And shudder. Or yawn.
. aut I-ask you-to read those words in the context of this
gathering tonig.; ht.'
The values we are honouring tonight are those of
competition. rhey, are also the values of participation and
equity. Tonight we are paying tribute to people whose personal
ambition and personal effort lifts the national ambition and
the national efEfort.
~ JT7JLR1l( O 
These awards are a measure of the value of the competitive
spirit. But the value of participation is equally reflected.
For the achievements we honour here tonight, it has to be
said, have bee~ n made against the odds.
Take the Olympics.
The Olympic hockey competition which the Australian women's
team won in Seoul was only the second to be held.
The women's marathon was not introduced until 1984. The
men's was first run in 490 BC1
Unfortunately we can't blame it all on the International
Olympic Committee.
Of the 76 national sporting organisations in Australia, only
14 have women in the top administrative position.
Of the 6.5 million members of sporting organisations in
Australia only a quarter are women.
It has to be said, therefore, that to some extent our women
athletes have -cone it against the odds.
Their achievements, of course, are outstanding.
For a very long time Australian women athletes have been at
the absolute pinnacle of international sport.
Their successes are measures of ourselves of our
confidence, of our' values. They are cultural measures.
Sport is one area where women can be numbered among the
Australian lege~ nds I mean the likes of MarJorie Jackson,
Heather McKay, Dawn Fraser, Betty Cuthbert, Evonne
Goolagong, Shane Gould. These names mean more than sporting
success: each of them stands for character for something
which we identify as Australian.
The list, of course, is much longer than that.
And it should be said that any list of Australian sporting
greats would have to include the hockey team, who recently
-beat . the Geirmans, the cricket -team who beat the English, and
the netball team wh~ o beat New Zealand in one of the great
sports highlights of last year.
Now a government cannot make people competitive we cannot
insist that our athletes become the best in the world, any
more than we can insist that Australian companies become the
best in the world.
But we can do a lot to create the conditions which will give
us the best chance. 
3
That's what wet're doing with the economy and the industrial
culture. That's what we want to do with sport.
We want to broaden the base of the pyramid.
That means giving every Australian, regardless of gender,
every opportunity to participate in sporting activities.
There is no better way to increase the numbers who reach the
top no better way to increase the chances for women to
realise their highest ambitions.
But it will be Just as important for those women and men
whose sporting ambitions are more modest.
I mean those who want to play sport at anW level of
expertise or exertion and I am not merely thinking of my
own tennis those who want to play sport for its social and
recreational value.
Beyond all this, of course, lie the physical, communal and
spiritual values which every nation needs and which sport is
uniquely capable of supplying.
We should remember that, when we exclude women in any way at
all from sport, we exclude them from sharing in the
expression of -those values and, what is more important,
from shaping them.
The idea of One Nation is the idea of inclusion.
The idea of closing gaps between places and people. Of
building partnerships. Of making the most of all our
resources and Australian women surely number among the
greatest of thom.
In sport, as in every other aspect of our national life, it
is our intention to lower the drawbridge and let all
Australians in.,
There is more 1to do there nearly always is but in a
number of ways, from broad social and economic reforms, to
specific programs like the Women's Sport in Media project,
the Gender Equity Guidelines and the Active Girls campaign,
mo~ nrore women are finding the! r -aif ntth e niaional
life, including the sporting life of Australia.
In this the efforts of my colleagues, Roe Kelly and Wendy
Fatin, should riot go unacknowledged. Both have been and will
continue to be great contributors, great encouragers great
at creating opportunities and openings.
By recognising those individuals and corporations who
encourage women in sport, and who create the opportunities,
these awards play their part in the goals of excellence and 
4
participation which is in essence the goal of national
growth. I said that we want to see partnerships: tonight we see them
between government and corporate sponsors, between
community, medlia and sporting organisations, between men and
women. I want to thanxk and congratulate all those who have played
such constructive parts in women's sport, and take this
opportunity to express the hope that these awards will
rapidly come to play their part in advancing the cause.
ENDS 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J7 KEATING, MP
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FOOTBALL LEAGUE LUNCHEON
FOOTBALL PARK, ADELAIDE
MARCH 19912
Ladies arnd gentlemen.
This is my fourth visit to Adelaide in as many weeks,
and it is a. lways a pleasure to be here.
This is a remarkable city by any standards, I always
think of it as a brave city a civilised and cultured
place at tha bottom of the world between the desert and
the deep blue sea.
The Adelaide Festival is the great measure of that of
course. It is one of the great arts festivals of the world.
It's a statement of confidence in ourselves the kind
of confidence which looks outward to the rest of the
world and welcomes the world in.
I came over for a couple of days a fortnight ago and
while I was here I spent an hour in the Adelaide Art
Gallery which is probably the best small gallery in
Australia. Look around in there and you will see how the idea of
Australia, and ' what it is to be Australian, has
developed over thi past two hundred years.
You can see howj this place was first seen through
European eyes, and how those eyes steadily opened. You
can see the vision grow stronger and our regard for the
place grow deeper.
Until you see in those fantastic canvasses of Roberts
and Streeton 100 years ago an image of Australia which
could only be Australia.
The image continues to be our own today. 
Keep looking in the gallery and you will see twentieth
century images-of Australia and Australians all of
them Influenced by European styles and taste, but all of
them ultimately, expressing something quintessentially
Australian. It might seem strange to begin this little speech by
talking about art, but I think there are a couple of
broad contemporary lessons in there for us.
To begin with, the Adelaide Festival and the Adelaide
gallery both tell us that it is futile to be parochial,
to close ourselves of f to overseas influence. We need
to keep the windows open so we can see out, and the
world can see in.
Broaden the vision. Don't be frightened of the light.
That's how we grow.
The second lesion is the other side of the coin.
You know what the critics said about the first Roberts
and Streetons. They said they were awful a " pain to
the eye".
They said as their predecessors had said, and even as
their successors were saying well into the twentieth
century, that Australian subjects were basically not fit
for great paintings, and that the modern way of seeing
things was horrible and to be resisted at all costs.
I could point to many other examples of this ancient
cultural cringe but I will attempt to put it in a more
positive way.
There was bound to be a tendency in Australia to shrink
from our owin reality, from the uniqueness of the place
just as there was bound to be an equal tendency to
exaggerate our virtues and achievements.
Both jingoism and cringing are debilitating
afflictionst. I
But in the quest for national growth in the effort to
realise all our potential and make this country as great
as it can and should be I would prefer to err on the
parochial side.
I'd be the last to say that we should reject our
European heritage.
But I do have a complaint against those who have allowed
themselves to become less than whole-hearted in their
commitment to this country.
The fact is that over the years we have been damaged by
the people who have talked us down, who shrink from the
Australian reality, who resist change even when change
I tvr) J TCO OKI t7 7 , t7T 7 r _ IV~ LI'(-170 1 
is imperative, who hesitate who say, but what will our
old masters think?
There will tie chaos.
You know, mayhem and anarchy like an Australian Rules
Football match.,
It's a peculiar game, Australian Rules to an English
person or a Sydneysider, very peculiar at first.
As it evolved from the marriage of the British and Irish
to Australia there have always been those who despised
it as a rude colonial thing.
Many of these disparaging types, I confess, lived in
Sydney. But you're : looking at a convert.
It is a definitive Australian game the unique one.
Mainly skill but with an element of chance and all
played out on a great broad slice of turf of
indeterminate dimensions.
It's a measure of our character, our spirit and our
capacity for invention.
I like the hip and shoulder in Australian Rules Football
-I like it because I do like to keep my own shoulder
against the door keeping the pressure on for change.
I believe we need to do that in Australia.
In our post colonial culture there are still a lot of
people whose instinct is to resist change who would
watch opportunity, even necessity, pass them by rather
than make the changes necessary to grasp it.
In 1992 we have to grasp these opportunities.
That is why-, as we continue with the changes we started
in the eighties, as we implement the strategies for
recovery and growth in One Nation as we take these
necessary structural steps, I have also been arguing for
a more robuist independent outlook.
Dr Hewson is wiong when he says that this is a
distraction. He could not be more wrong.
He is also wrong when he says that the drive for an
Australia which speaks with a mature and unambiguous
voice will not create jobs.
Not one job, he says.
I do not believe that business people will agree.
I/ Od ITO00N t7Z: tT Z6JWO : 131 
Unless they believe that ambition, confidence, pride,
common goals; firmly held, cohesion and cooperation,
enthusiasm unless there are business people in
Australia who think these things are not important to
success, Dr Hewson will not find many people to agree
with his assessment that I have been creating a
distraction. These things are essential in business, as they are in
football. They are essential to the success of
Australia. To speed the recovery, to make the most of our
strengths, to come out of recession stronger than ever
before and we can do all these things we need
confidence iLn ourselves.
We have every reason to look forward to the future in
this country but we won't make the future as good as
it should bia if our view is obscured by a patina of old
protocols, and our energies dissipated in reflexive
salutes to other countries before we salute our own.
We must not let the faint-hearted, or the knockers, or
the whingers and the cringers, get in the way of the
future.
One Nation is aboutñ the future.
One Nation is a program for recovery which calls on
Australians to pool their resources, to enter into
partnerships with each other, to commit themselves to
cooperative enterprise.
By investment in major infrastructure projects,
particularly road and rail, in the reform of aviation
policy, in seeking cooperative relationships between
business anid unions, the states and the commonwealth,
the private! and the public sectors in these various
ways it seeks to close the gaps between Australians.
It seeks to stimulate the economy, and to make
investment in the sorts of businesses Australia needs a
much more attractive proposition.
It seeks and will deliver low inflation growth over the
next decade,. It will deliver tax cuts equivalent to
those promised by Dr Hewson but without a consumption
tax.
One Nation is a document of inclusion.
For instance, huge amounts will be invested in technical
training to bring this third strand of education into
line with the other two that is to say, giving more
kids many more kids life opportunities by
participating in education. This same step will of
course be of great long term benefit to business and
industry. 
There is a certain deliberate chemistry to One Nation.
We consulted with business so that we could find the
most practical solutions, the most effective ways of
getting the recovery going and seeing that it was
strong.
We consulted with unions, states and the community for
the same reason and to maximise the level of national
commitment. It is a social document as well as an economic one it
recognises ' how essential it is that everyone contributes
to the recovery and everyone shares in its rewards.
Ladies and -gentlemen.
South Australia will share in the benefits of one
Nation. It will share in the programs designed to bring benefits
to all Australians programs like the overhaul of TAFE,
the reform of aviation, labour market programs and in
specific programs in this state.
To mention three of the major ones:
As I am sure by now you are aware, one of the major
undertakings in the infrastructure program will be the
conversion of 775 kilometre Melbourne-Adelaide railway
to standard gauge.
As you also know, we have offered to take over
responsibility -for substantially upgrading the Sydney
Adelaide road link, which, together with the Melbourne
Brisbane link will provide a high quality highway
network between our four largest cities.
We have provided SO million for the construction of the
rail loop at Outer Harbour, as part of a $ 100 million
upgrading of the port directed at handling timesensitive
cargo between East Asia, Sydney and Melbourne.
All these projects, along with every measure in the One
Nation document, are designed to bring on recovery,
create jobs, build our strengths and deliver to all
Australians hope arnd opportunity.
With low inflation locked in, with a vastly improved
industrial culture, with manufacturing exports rapidly
growing, with a much more competitive and efficient
financial and business culture we can come out of this
recession much stronger than we have ever been.
In* J I Tn, nNi " 17 +, T 
One Nation is designed to assure us that the recovery
will be faetter and stronger.
That our economy will be strong, and not least because
the nation will be strong.
it's appropriate on this occasion to borrow an image
from football the strongest team is the one which best
uses it strengths, which develops its skills to the
highest level and deploys them most effectively, which
works cohesively with a common desire for success, and
which does not let the bumps and misfortunes along the
way, knock them of f their stride.
That is the aim of One Nation. To make us stronger
within so we can be strong in the world.
Ladies and gentlemen.
It seems to me that there are two broad models of
society of how a society best operates.
The first one I believe broadly describes the way
Australia has for too long been conceived and operated.
It is the castle with the drawbridge raised the few
inside attempting to extract by various deceits and
stratagems enough energy from those outside to make the
place economically viable.
Now and then some new measure occurs to them you know,
inviting a few select ones into a garden party to get
them on side: or now as Dr ftewson proposes, they go
galloping out into the provinces to collect a tax on the
food they eat the clothes they wear, and the services
on which they rely.
The other way -and I believe it broadly describes one
Nation lowers the drawbridge.
It's principle is inclusion. It broadens the social
base pool~ s our energies and talents, aims at growth,
encourages wholehearted loyalty and commitment,
cohesion, natio3n building.
It assumes that a popularly elected government is
elected to govern not to pull out of the social
equation.
That is my philosophy. It is the philosophy of One
Nation. If this is more of a republican philosophy than my
political opponents then I am more of a republican.
But that is not the key word: the key word is Australia,
the future of this country and its people. 



ILL ZU Mar. IJ 1u : 64 NO.-UU? -~ UI/
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P j KEATING, MP
OPENING OF T14E GMX' S ENAMEL FAINT FACTORY PROJECT
ELIZABETH ADELAIDE, 20 MARCH 1992
Mr Smith, Premnier Bannon, ladies and gentlemen.
This ceremonvy marks another significant investment by GMH
in Australia, and further entrenches its commitment to
this state and this nation.
It is a $ 120 million re-affirmation of confidence in the
future of car making in Australia.
More than that, it demonstrates the company's confidence
in the industry's ability to be world competitive.
It is an investment which recognises not only the need to
embrace international best practice in quality and
standards, but our ability to do it.
I congratulate GMH on their confidence and vision.
I also believe the union movement has reason to be proud
today. The success of this investment is assured by their
recognition of the need for an effective partnership with
management. Such partnerships are at the heart of the government's
strategy for our economic future, which is embodied in
the One Nati~ on statement.
In recent years there has been a great change in the
industrial cultu re of Australia, and that is what we are
going to build on.
There is a new understanding, a new recognition of what
can be done. 
101 -2
With it comes new confidence and, with that, most
importantly, new jobs.
And there are more grounds than this for confidence.
The productivity and export competitiveness of our
efficient manufacturing industries is growing year by
year. In the motor vehicle industry exports have increased by
more than 1.50% since 1984; from $ 369 million to over
$ 950 million i-n 1990.
The figure for 1991 is expected to be in excess of $ 1.1
billion, and by the end of the century our automotive
exports will exceed $ 2 billion in today's dollars.
Ladies and gentlemen.
Just as we are witnessing the emergence of a new car
industry, so w-e will see the emergence of a much stronger
Australia in thie 1990s.
The fundamentals are being put in place.
Low interest rates, low inflation, lower labour costs and
the new industrial culture are making us more competitive
on world markets.
The initiatives taken in the One Nation document will
take us further -much further.
This new emphasis on partnership, on pooling our energy
and ideas, on shared national goals, combined with the
great infrastruCture projects, higher quality training
support, greater incentives to investment -when One
Nation begins to work its chemistry we will see just how
strong Australia can be.
Ladies and gentlemen.
General Motors H-olden has long been a household name in
Australia, and this new project says very clearly to the
country that It will continue to be.
We welcome that and congratulate the Company and all
those associated with this project.
And we wish it: well in the future.
Thank you. 



TEL: 24. Mar. 92 19: 38 NO. Ui0 r-ui'v7
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE VICTORIAN STATE ALP CONFERENCE,
MOONEE PONDS, MELBOURNE, SATURDAY 21 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Comrades, delegates, thank you very much for that warm round
of applause and reception, Paul ( Slape) Victorian Party
President thank you for your kind words, Joan the leader
of the Labor Party and Premier of Victoria, our candidate
Sill Kardaitsis and his wife Haroula, Jenny State
Secretary and friends one and all.
Well these are challenging times and it's nice to be amongst
friends, and I haven't always been amongst friends this
week. But in engaging times like these one needs to know
where one is;. We need to know where we are and what we are
and where we're going. We have to have a very good fix on
what our political policy and strategy is because parties
lose their way and many parties in the past have. But
fortunately that has not happened to us. Not in recent
times. But you might have heard me say that we've been working in
this century between two competing ideas in politics. One
has been that private reward and private initiative was the
main spring of all endeavour and human progress, and on the
other hand, state socialism and government intervention was
the way forward. We have seen these philosophies, Adam
Smith on the one hand, Marx on the other and various shades
in between become the polarity of public life in the
twentieth century, the tug and pull from the poles of those
two competin~ g ideas.
We saw it in the United States with conservatives like
Calvin Coolidge, articulating the policies of reward for the
wealthy and the owing to the reaction against it in the
depression, to the need for governmlent involvement which
came with Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal. And we saw the
swing back t~ o the years of Eisenhower, where again, we saw
the same conservative incantations ran out. And then the
swing back as Americans wanted better with Lyndon Johnson's
New Deal and, support for blacks. And then again back to the
years of greed is good, and that private initiative and 
private reward is all that matters in the years of Ronald
Reagan. And we saw it in Britain, with Churchill after the
war and the swing to the government of Clement Attlee, where
government involvement and government initiative was
regarded as being important. And then the swing back to the
dry radicalism of Margaret Thatcher where basically again
the strong prospered and the weak were left in their wake.
We came to office in 1983 against that tide. When we came
to office the political tide was away from government
intervention, government involvement, government engaging
problems in society and the economy. Blut we stood against
that tide, against the tide of Reaganism and Thatcherism,
which was then the international trend. We stood up against
it and we pulled the pendulum back. We dragged the pendulum
back, not to state socialism which we knew was not working,
never worked, and wouldn't work, or to massive central
planning, but to a peculiarly and proud Australian policy.
one that-you would expect from the oldest Labor Party in the
world able to make its own policy and not be caught up in
the fashion of these two competing political ideas.
And we camne up with a policy which was about opening
Australia up, about economic restructuring, of letting
markets have A role in the country, keeping a focus on
efficiency, but at the same time looking at the needs of
people, trying to fashion a social wage which made the lot
of Australians better.
So Labor in the 1980s had a growth model. When I used to
stand up as the Finance minister or the Treasurer at the
OECD and say we have an employment objective, a specific
employment objective, people would look at you as if you had
a sort of case of rabies or something, and they would say
they thought there was something wrong with you. Because
then, employment for those people, for those countries,
employmnent: was the residual, it's the thing that dropped out
the bottom~ f. And if what dropped out was 10 per cent
unemployment or 15 per cent unemployment, so be it. That
was the price, they said, of giving the wealthy t~ heir go, of
letting the goers go and leaving the other people in their
wake. Now, of course, we had big objectives, we had to come out of
a recession, we had to bring Australia back up, we had to
restart investment, we had to get employment going, we had
to overcome inflation and put a suture on our debt. But we
did all of that within a growth model, in partnership with
the trade unions under the Accord. In other words, Labor
included people in. We brought in the unions, which have
always been a strength of Labor and said let'-s to this
together, let's devise a policy which is Australian, which
deals With Australian problems which does not see us as a
government: with a slosh of the pendulum from one side to the
other, being drawn around by these international trends.
Let's decide our policy and let's do it our way to make
things better for Australians work, but with reform. That
is, a role for government but without suffocating 
. a L4-' 1 k V
3
creativity, without suffocating the role of the sensible
operationa of the market and with a focus on the things we
knew it had to be on economic efficiency, getting
companies going again, restructuring our old industrial
structure, turning our industrial museum back into a modern,
sophisticated industrial society and getting on with it.
We never accepted the Thatcher view that employment was a
residual, that if the rich got their go what would fall from
the table the crumbs would go to the working anid middle
classes. We never accepted that view. Nor did we accept
the market puritanical view of the New Zealand Labor Party,
of Lange and Roger Douglas. We wouldn't cop them either and
Paul is quite right to make the reference to New Zealand.*
They've basically disseminated a generation over there. In
fact, we had'more growth in the Australian economy in the
1980s than there is total GDP in New Zealand. We had
actually more growth here than there is total product in the
New Zealand economy.
We in fact absorbed Thatcherism and Reaganism, took it in
our stride, used those precepts about markets and efficiency
as we warited to use them in the Labor way, in the Labor
context in the Labor model and followed a Labor policy and
talked to our fellows in the trade unions, our friends in
the trade. unions as the New Zealand Labor Party didn't, and
as the British Labor Party couldn't.
And that's what made us different.
in the 180s we freed up savings for investment, but we
developed this enormous social wage which started caring
about things like:
Health -with Medicare the right to health insurance
whether you were sick, sore or sorry, rich or poor,
single or with a large family, you had health
protection under us. That was an important part of the
social wage.
Women's issues which we promoted strongly all the way
from the 1980s, whether they be equal opportunity, or
affirmative action or access to superannuation, or what
have you.
Pensioners and lifting up the unemployment rate, which
had fallen in real terms under Fraser, as had the age
pensiLon, which we improved dramatically through the
180S.
Income support for the low paid with a family
allowance supplement directed to low paid, low income
famil~ ies, or support to families generally with a
family allowance.
Increased retention rates in school because we knew
that not only was it unfair to our children not to give
them the opportunity to complete secondary school but 
4
we would never make it as an advanced country while
ever we took the view that 3 kids in 10 completing
secondary school was good enough. It is now 7 in
and wo then created the equivalent of a dozen
universities to take them as they left the secondary
systemi. And now of course, we're pulling TAFE up
behind it.
Aged care where we're the first government to develop
a comprehensive policy towards the aged. That is from
geriatric assessment, through to home and community
care, through to the hostel program, right through.
Child care giving women the opportunity to go to
work, and giving those who are at home relief with
occasional day care in the course of the day or week.
Superannuation giving Australian workers a chance to
have a standard of living in retirement greater than
that than can be provided by the Commonwealth through
the age pension. Building on the age pension, but
something better, and at the same time develop a pool
of savings for the nation to employ in terms of its
capital re~ tructuring.
We made in fact, a smaller public sector, a better
public sector, by focussing the need, and of course
smaller as a per cent of GDP but with large increases
in spending where it needed to be.
So that was our ' 80s model. We rejected all these
international fashions, we rejected the half hearted view
from the Right. We took our policy, we still opened the
economy up., wellet the market forces take over in many
respects, that is through the exchange markets ae, but we
had a Labor stamp on it.
And now we've developed it further with ' One Nation'.
What ' OneNotion,' does is build on that experience. It sets
out a ole-ar f6le for the public sector beyond the social
wage and income support. It gives the public sector a
further role, a policy of engagement of national problems
not a policy of Withdrawal. Not the policy of withdrawal of
Professor Hewson who wants to tear everything out of the way
to let again the wealthy push their way through the economy,
but basically using and declaring that the public sector has
a role in shaping the fortunes of Australia, particularly in
a difficult period coming out of recession, making that
recovery faster, providing the stimulus we need, getting the
focus back on employment and jobs and recovery, and doing it
in a way which again has Labor leaving its mark and its
stamp on Australia, using the public sector to declare
change in the country, things which only the public sector
can do. Like for instance, rebuilding our national rail
network because we know no-one else is going to build it, no
private company is going to rebuild the Sydney-Melbourne
railway line, no private company is going to standardise the
j j I u u. Lu r ud4/ v 
1
gauge from Melbourne to Adelaide, no private company is
going to tie the ports together. It has to be done by the
government, by the public sector. It's not going to be done
as proposed in the Liberal program of withdrawing money
from the rail system, but rather injecting money into it.
To bring u. p, to give us again a choice in transport.
Because wis know we can't carry bulk commodities on our
roads, we know that we can't continually grow in the economy
with road transport alone which is breaking up our highways
and causing congestion and road accidents and the rest on
our roads. We know, as a modern country with vast
differences between our cities, we must have a rail system
and only the public sector can provide it.
' One Nation' makes that declaration, as It does about roads.
Building ring roads around the capital cities, supporting
the states, supporting the Victorian Government in a ring
road around Melbourne and around Sydney and Brisbane and in
the other capitals. Building national highways.
making a decision about our children, again, with technical
and further education. We're not saying leave them out to
make their own way, as Professor Hewson recommends that
people take opportunities in tertiary education by paying
full fees, $ 12,000 a year, so if their parents can afford a
pre-tax income of $ 25,000 to pay for $ 12,000 after tax or
thereabouts, which for most two income families is half
their income to send one child to university that's what
they think is freedom to achieve. They're not interested in
those hundreds of thousands of other people, children, kids
who can't find a place in university, for academic or other
reasons, but who need to be trained, who want to be trained.
Bill ( Kardamitsis) and I went through TAFE a couple of days
ago in the electorate of Wills, just seeing what people are
doing, with very important courses which let them into the
workforce like English literacy, expression, basic computer
literacy, advanced computer literacy, graphic design,
programs to care for the aged, administration for aged care,
administration for child care. All these sorts of things,
and of course the trade courses which can be such an
important part of not only providing employment opportunity
but making Australia a better, more clever, more capable
place. The Government must do it, not by withdrawing but by
engaging ii: which is what ' One Nation' is doing.
As we are assisting big projects with a development
allowance. We're supporting the private sector to go and do
it, but we're doing it in a way which we think maximises
advantages to Australia. Establishing development bonds so
we can see private provision of public infrastructure
nothing wrong with it, nothing wrong with seeing a private
company in transport infrastructure, say the fast transit
line from Tullamerine to Melbourne, no problem it is a
private com~ pany. No problem if we see the electricity
industry of this country change the private provision of
public infrastructure. The main thing is that the services
are there. And setting up pool development funds for
i ial a. v -j o ii u Q LQ r v. o 
equity, for the small and medium businesses that just can't
get any support with equity. We're in there doing that.
So ' One Nation' is about those things but it's also about
making markets work sensibly for the nation. It's Labor
deciding that certain markets should work better and looking
at areas of market failure and it's again an ascertain, a
declaration that the public sector has a role in further
designing Labor's grander redesign of Australian capitalism,
which we've undertaken from 1983 onwards. In such things as
the aviation market, we think it is important to create a
market, to. provide services, to get away from a two airline
policy with fares so expensive that an Australian worker
can't fly from Melbourne to Perth, or Melbourne to Sydney
and return, to create a market which serves Australians well
with cheaper fares and destinations outside of Australia.
A national market for electricity with an interstate grid,
so that businesses that need cheap power can get it, because
this country has got a coal seam all down the east coast of
Australia. If there is no other thing we can do well it's
provide cheap electricity. But we're not getting it always
were we need it, in the companies that can be competitive
with cheaper power, and we're creating a market to let that
happen. The most general creation of a market, a more flexible
labour market which is coming now again under the Accord
with enterprise bargaining, where we're seeing a market
exist in the thousands of enterprises across Australia which
was formerly never operating as a market. International
competitiveness, preserving our low inflation rate.
Inflation w~ hich has ripped Australian workers savings to
pieces and put heavy mortgages on peoples backs and made t; he
country uncompetitive. We're basically in there protecting
and pinning that low inflation rate. We're enhancing bank
competition by again bringing more emphasis to banking
system and trying to make the banking system work better.
In other words, ' One Nation' is about making markets work
sensibly. It's not about deciding, as was the case in those
polls I mentioned earlier, of trying to set up state
socialism or government planning but sensibly letting the
creative elements of people and organisations work, but with
Labor, the government, the public sector leaving its stamp
upon it. And that's what ' One Nation' is about.
it's a poliLcy of inclusion, of bringing people together, as
I've said, lowering the drawbridge, letting people in, to
participate, to become more cohesive. And the concept
encompassesJ the Accord where Australia's workers are part of
the process, part of the conversation of government with a
Labor gover7nment. The consultation with business who are
part of the consultation, the inclusion, under ' One Nation'.
The partnerships for progress between government and
business, government and unions, business and unions, the
Comnmonwealt~ h and the States, political government and the
public service. Bringing people together with common goals
41-1-J. 
a&amp; Policy Of inclusion with the drawbridge down, not the
drawbridge uip. ' With the elite sitting inside with the Power
and the money looking at the others outside that is flot
our model. Our model is the drawbridge down and the people
-in as part of it, Common goals, working together, making
Australia better.
The only way we can prosper as a nation is working this way.
Having respect for our Institutions, the arts, the public
institutionil like the public service, our central bank with
its balanced objectives of employment and development
against inflation and price stability. All in the sense of
civilised design in the central bank act ought to have the
respect of t: he political system. Or the public service
which carries out the functions of government. Or as I say
those other institutions. The policy of inclusion goes to
those institutions.
And it is about having a national identity. About
understanding that we are able to make our own way, that we
are Australians and we're whole hearted about it and the
policy is ark Australian policy. It's not an American policy
or a British policy, it's not like Professor Hewson's who is
borrowing from the late ' 70s of Margaret Thatcher. It's not
like Labor In New Zealand. It's ours. It's Australian
Labor, it's Aust ralian and it's ours. It's ours because
we're clear about our national identity and we are not half
hearted about it and we're not hesitating about it, we're
declaring it end we're going for it, and we're moving with
direction and purpose in doing it.
go as one nation we are pooling these things for recovery in
jobs, 800,000 jobs we expect over the next 4 years by
government involvement and infrastructure, making markets
work, partnerships f or progress between government and
business, busines's and unions, bringing institutions
together and having an identity, being clear about who we
are and therefore having the confidence to push our policies
and nation forward. In other words we're about, basically,
building on the successes of the 1980s in this way.
Now comrades, I ask you to contrast this with the Liberal
Party, now a party of primitives. A party of primitives,
the throw-backs to the 19th Century robber-baron capitalism,
the Adam Smiths and those who believe that what we should do
is make way for the wealthy because in their slip stream the
rest will pick up something on the way through. Survival of
the fittest if you're not a millionaire there is something
wrong with you and therefore those who have got money
should, be given the opportunity to make their way best.
it's called in Liberal parlance, ' freedom to achieve'.
Justice and opportunities for the wealthy. I notice the
opposition spokesman on education, Mr Kemp, last week
complaining about lack of opportunity for the wealthy. No
role for government, they want government out. Now this is
the party that offers itself as the next government of
Australia. It wants no role for government, it distrusts 
the bureaucracy. In the last week the Deputy leader said
they'll ' knee-cap the public service. It distrusts the
central bank who it says doesn't properly focus on the twin
objectives under its acts of employment and price stability,
it's politicised they said by the Government. It distrusts
the Australian taxi office and wishes to compromise its
Commissioner with a board from the accountancy profession,
the same accountancy professors who are now funding the
Fightbacc research centre, the GST research centre, the
major accountancy firms who would send a representative on a
cord to manage the tax office.
And, of course, business is distrusted. They've been
described as bludgers coming for handouts from the
Government. Dr Hewson attacked them again last week. lie
said the saddest thing about them is they turned up and
asked the Government for favours. So these are the people
who want to run us, these primitives. No role for
government, don't trust the bureaucracy, don't trust the
central bank, don't trust the Tax office, don't trust our
institutions, don't trust business. And what the want to
give us as part of their philosophy? Well they want to
lower the drawbridge and run out with the GST and levy it on
everyone's food and clothing and then run back in. That's
their idea of inclusion, that's their idea of cohesion,
that's their idea of making Australia one nation. Go and
put a flat tax on everybody regardless of income, don't
compensate them, let the wealthy get the big break, clean
away all of the other impediments to profitability and then
maybe the rest of them will pick up something on the way.
And when Mr Reith was asked about his inflation forecast of
o to 2 par cent, meaning as it must higher interest rates,
he denied the journalist the words he had given her, not
having the courage to face the consequences of their own
policy, 1: heit own policy meaning higher interest rates and
higher unemployment, all in the manic determination to
simply ideologically serve this rhetoric about Inflation.
A barren, sterile, ancient view of managing a modern
society. The selfish, nark view of the world. The nark
view of the world, the drawbridge up, the wealthy inside,
the government withdrawing from the social equation. That's
their policy. Their fundamentally different from us, but
they always have been. We imagine Australia's future,
determined by imagination, opportunity, inclusion,
togetherness, co-operation, cohesion, pride. They imagine
it determined by cost accounting and privilege. That's
them. Now Professor Hewson is totally limited in his thinking.
Ideologically hamstrung, ideologically divisive, politically
barren, ak cold fish washed ashore by the recession, but a
primitive species we have seen before. And we've Seen it
right through this period whether it's Thatcher, or whether
it's Reacran or Coolidge or any of the others, we've seen
these peo) ple before. We've seen their barren ideology
before. 
9
Australia can't afford Professor Hewson or his party or his
policies. Look at their candidate in Wills who our
candidate Bill Kardamitsis is opposing, who says there ought
to be a 30 per cent cut in social security, who said that
pensions should be out and migrants should be driven back
home if they haven't got a job and if someone dare pay money
to the disabled in a sheltered work shop they should chop it
out. These are the sort of primitive views and wasn't it shocking
that that got into the public debate. I mean it was a real
incursion into privacy. Here is somebody running for public
office that's embarrassed by the fact that they actually
believe in cutting pensions and payments under the social
security system by one third, who believe pensioners ought
to be cut back and migrants sent home. Have the disabled
disadvantaged further by withdrawing the support that they
have already from the Government.
Dr fewson is always about saying that I create diversions.
We're saying as a big matter of news for the day that he was
going to the Privacy Commission about letters written by a
political ca ' ndidate or political person in office about
matters of public policy. What a hide they have. This is
revealing of them, very revealing of them. And in fact all
that's happen is that their candidates reveal the policies
they really have, because even though he wrote that in the
middle ' 80s it is still their view. They want to cut
billion out of Commonwealth outlays. They want to levy this
very heavy tax on Australians, they want to heavy this goods
and services tax on all food, clothing, services etc and
that's the limit of their creativity and ability.
Now on the other hand, we offer something better and
brighter. We offer breadth, as we always have, vision,
opportunity, we are as we've always been the builders. And
whether it be the rail network, or the highways, or the ring
roads, or the electricity grids, or the ports, o~ r the TAFE,
or the universities, or the Family Allowance Supplement, or
family a: llowance, or superannuation or Medicare, it is
always Labor doing the building. And we will be the
building. We are the reform party in this country. We're the creators
of the new concept. And we're the people holding our hand
out in friendship to workers, to business, to minorities, to
blacks and to anyone else that needs a hand. in friendship
and in expectation, and hope, hope for Australia, hope for
one nation, one proud nation, one independent nation.
Thank you very much. 



TEL: -30. Mar .92 18: 25 No. 623 P. 01/ 04
AQ AL
PRIME MINISTER]
EMBARGO AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P , J KEATING, MP
1991 NATIONAL LANDCARE AWARDS, GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA MARCH 1992
Thank you very much. It gives me great pleasure to be here.
This Landoere program is the product of the irresistible
force of common sense.
It is an example of what can happen when groups when
partnerships are forged in the national interest.
The average Australian would probably tell you that the ACF
and the national Farmers Federation were sworn enemies.
Not so. They have come together in the interests of the
country, formned a partnership of real strength.
That's why I say it gives mes great pleasure to be here tt
a ceremony where people who have made the national interest
theLir conumon interest, receive acknowledgement.
At another function recently I spoke about the way in which
the first,-Europeans to paint Australia painted it in the
image of the~ ir own countries.
It took a century of experience for the vision of the
Heidelberg school to emerge end with it, in the paintings of
Roberts and Streeton and others, en image of Australia which
could only he Australia.
The significant point is that the scenes they painted were
those of Eurpgean occtipation they were populated with
Europeans, their animals, their work, their architecture,
their values.
They were scenes of European Australians making this country
in their own image exploiting its resources and altering
the landscape to suit their needs and fancies. 
TEL 0. Mar-40 -T ' 6Y15 No. 023P. 02 / 0 4
2
This produced wealth and comfort and gave us an enviable
standard of living. It also produced terrible damage to the
original environment and gave us problems which threaten
to umdo-rminn those achievements.
Before the New Right cry foul and call me an enemy of
progress and a defiler of the memory of the pioneers, let me
say that we are not about saying mea culpa we are about
rectifying the mistakes and finding new and better ways to
go forward.
We know better these days and we've got to build on that
knowledge. Like the painters of the 1890s we now have a clearer vision.
We know we cannot literally do what we like with the land.
We can't make it alien to the prevailing environmental and
climatic conditions.
We can't put it outside the boundaries of ecological and
economic sustainability.
We must set about restoring the land, rebuilding its
productive capacity, and its sustainability, and returning
it to a state of ecological resilience.
I have never been one who subscribes to the theory that
economics and environmental protection don't mix; the theory
that it is matter of jobs versus the environment, green
growth versus economic growth.
We do not need to lower our environmental standards to gost
greater production and greater economic growth.
It is not a case of us being unable to afford to protect the
environment. In truth, we can't afford to degrade it.
This is crystal clear in the case of land degradation:
0soil erosion,
6salinisation as a result of tree clearing, irrigation
and unsustainably heavy grazing,
so8i1 acidification,
* and changes in vegetation species in rangelands
these have all cost us dearly, and continue to do so.
Land degradation has Cost Australia billions of dollars in
lost production, and ruined millions of acres of land.
The environmental losses have been economic losses. The
environmental costs have been environmental costs. And for
some time now, the environmental imperatives have become
economic imperatives. TEL: 
TEL:~ 30. Mar. 92 18: 25 No. 023 P. 03/ 04
3
So allow me to say with pride that the nine-year strong
Labor Government has been the first to develop a
comprehensive policy to tackle this problem, and it is doing
so with significant success.
Landcare has been a central part of this success. It is
exciting, not merely because of its style, its broad base
and its concept, but because of its results.
And it is not a static program.
It had a suitably co-operative, partnership-oriented
beginning. It began with a joint approach to the Federal
Government by the National Farmers' Federation and the
Australian Conservation Foundation.
The National Decade of Landcare Plan has been developed to
provide a framework for action to achieve sustainable land
use and rehabilitate degraded lands.
Concern has been expressed that there were problems for
Landcare groups in getting access to Landcare grants
programs. So my Ministers Simon Crean and Ros Kelly worked in
partnership to introduce simplified grants program
arrangements. And instead of having to approach a large range of
Commonwealth agencies handling such programs as the National
Soil Conservation Program, Save the Bush and One Billion
Trees, groups can now get advice from a single location and
fill in one form for one, community-based assessment
process. In the early 1980s, there were no Landcare groups. Now,
there are more than 900. By 1995, there is likely to be
another 300.
They are getting involved in a range of activities, and now
recognising that they need to think beyond simple issues,
and consider overall land use in an integrated way.
This trend to integrated management of our vital natural
resources is recognised in the growth of catchment groups.
In the Landcare scheme we have something very Australian
partnership, protecting something very Australian our land
something economically and ecologically vital, something
centred on Government engagement and community spirit.
That all appeals to me greatly, and we all owe those
involved a hearty thanks.
To the members of the Landeare groups throughout Australia,
I say that you are all winners. You can't lose doing what
you are doing. 
. TEL: w ^ ar. 32N. 3 P. 04/ 04
4
In a sense, the winners of the 1991 National Landcare
Australia Awards are representing all the other winners
throughout the rural communities of Australia.
I hope the award winners here tonight, and other Landcarers,
get great encouragement and incentive from these awards, and
I congratulate them all for their achievements. Australia is
the richer for them.
Thank you. 



I L-L; W--A I
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA ANM ASIA: KNOWING WHO WE ARE
LECTURE TO THE ASIA-AUSTRALIA INSTITUTE
SYDNEY 7.15PM, TUESDAY 7 APRIL 1992
In 1935 the magazine, Autralian Quarterly-, Carried a long
article entitled " Australia's Place in the Empire." It was
the text of an address delivered in London by Robert Gordon
Menzies. An address delivered in the circumstances he loved, to the
audience he loved.
Menzies love the English. Five years later in a speech
to the British and Foreign Bible Society he said that he
believed the English had " never., wilfully broken [ their]
word." Never.
The virtues of the English race and Australia's filial
loyalty were themes of his 1935 address. " The thing which
sticks firmly in the mind of the average Australian is that
he is British.." he said.
He told them that they should recognise our rel. ationship was
a " blood relationship" before it was a mercantile one.
And he asked themn a question which he said would determine
our relationship with Britain not merely for the next five
years, but for the next five hundred.
" Does Great Britain keel that its sons and brothers.. are its
own flesh and blood, or does it regard them as remittance
men?" Now, in my view, Winston Churchill gave Menzies the answer a
few years later. " Australians", he told Lord Moran, " come
of bad stock." I L. L. * nr. 
1 T E L 00 04 p r 9 1 9 I4 N oI2 u z z
2
It is also my view that Churchill answered in more concrete
ways: in the abject disaster of Singapore and Malaya and in
the attempt to prevent the return of Austral. ian troops from
the Middle East to defend this country the country which
lost 60,000 under the Union Jack in World War 1.
But what I say is not what some people have called Ponbashing.
Nor is it Paul Keating's idiosyncratic view of
history. It is a view corroborated by any number of
respectable Australian and British historians whose
references I am happy to provide.
It is a view corroborated by fact.
Nothing I say tonight, and nothing I have said in recent
weeks, can reasonably be interpreted as criticism of the
British people, and least of all those British men and women
who fought and suffered and died in the war against Japan
and Germany.
My criticism is directed at those Australians or, more
accurately, that Australian attitude which still cannot
separate our interests, our history, or our future, from the
interests of Britain.
It seems to me an attitude which still exercises at least a
subliminal influence on our thinking persuading us that
someone or something will do it for us.
just as we went on believing that Britain would, long after
it should have been obvious that Britain would not.
I say that this attitude has long been, and remains,
debilitating to our national culture, our economic future,
our destiny as a nation in Asia and the Pacific.
I spent the last decade attempting to make the necessary
changes to the Australian economy facing it toward the
world and opening it up, to make us more competitive and
give us a chance.
I know just how entrenched conservative Australian thinking
can be on both sides of politics.
we're talking about cultural changes, new ways of thinking
and new ways of doing things.
I know how hard it is to change Menzeen attitudes. And don't
forget their economic manifestation: M4enzies believed in
what he called a " balanced economy."
In Britain the balance was between manufacturing and
protected agriculture. In Australia the balance had to be
the reverse. TEL: 7. Apr. 92 19: 48 No. 024 P. 02/ 12 
TEL: 7. p TO R;. 024 P. 03/ 12
3
It was all terribly simple and cosily interdependent: and
the cost to us was in the sort of inefficient manufacturing
which threatened until very recently to place us among the
world's economic museums.
We've altered a lot of the practices and habits of mind
which emanated from that way of thinking at least as far
as the economy goes.
We've also gone a very long way towards getting rid of the
industrial Culture of hostility.
But altering our political perspective, which includes
regenerating our spirit, pulling us together as a nation,
focussing our sense of ourselves all these things, I
believe, remain tasks for the nineties.
These things, I assure you, are not meant as a distraction
as some people have~ suggested. They are central.
They are centrdl to our developing relationship with Asia
and the Pacific.
I am pleased, though not surprised, by the positive reaction
in South-East Asia to the recent surge of independent and
republican thinking in Australia.
Let me go back to Winston Churchill for 8 moment and ask a
simple question of the people who say my talk of nationhood
is a distraction: Why should we have expected Winston
Churchill to have acted in our interests? Why, despite his
foresight and courage, should we have expected him to
perceive the world through our eyes?
Because of blood?
Now the truth is, Churchill has been, if not a hero, a
favourite historical figure of mine since boyhood. Menizies
preferred Chamberlain. I admired the Churchill who stood up
every week in the House of Commons and told those myopic
equivocating cowards in his own party that Hitler was a
criminal. That Churchill, and the Churchill who inspired his people in
World War II, wa~ s a hero.
But that does not mean, and should never have been expected
to mean that he would automatically act in Australia's
interest. John Curtin acted in Australia's interest when he insisted
against the wishes of Churchill and another man I've always
admired, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, that Australian troops
be brought home not left in the_-Middle ast, nor diverted
to Rangoon where they would have been killed or captured.
Curtin insisted and won. He turned to America. 
Robert Gordon Menzies called this " a great blunder."
All this, of course, might be called ancient history. it
might be called irrelevant. It might be said that Menzies
was a man of his time and should not be judged with
hindsight. But Menzies is a man of Q~ time too.
His unnaturally long political era made possible by the
split in the Labor Party his endless, and almost endlessly
rgeasia-~ gye era sunk a generation of Australians in
Anglophilia and torpor.
The Menzies attitudes are still with us, as we sew when a
few weeks ago I delivered a speech in the presence of Her
Majesty the Queen of Australia.
The sentiments I expressed then were nothing more then
thoughts on behalf of Australians who valued their
independence, appreciated the fact of our separate destiny
and our need to grasp it, and who esteemed the Queen.
The response from some prominent Australians indicated how
far we still have to go before we can say that we do have
the necessary independence of mind, the necessary
appreciation that we have to make our own future, or, for
that matter, the necessary mature esteem for our Head of
State. These things we need in the next decade if we are to take
our place in the region and in the world.
My point is that we can no longer be Australian in the way
Bob Menzies was Australian. And in making that change, like
John Curtin, we can say that it is without prejudice to
Britain. It is equally without prejudice to those generations older
than my own, whom I know regret the passing of the old
Australia. I know there is apprehension among them about the change
some of it takes the form of very vocal opposition to all
suggestions of reform or new directions.
I think their position should be respected but
conservatism has had its day, and, in truth, it was too long
a day for the country's good.
My responsibility is to this generation and succeeding ones,
and these echoes of Menzies cannot be allowed to get in the
way.
We cannot pretend to ourselves that we are insulated from
change in the world.
11 ONOMMUmm 
In any event, the ol0 traditions of Australia will remain
with us.
We are not about disloyalty but its opposite. We are about
nationhood, and the democracy which is at the centre of it.
That is something I think Australians must realise: that we
don't go to Asia cap in hand, any more than we go, like
Menzies went to London, pleading family ties.
We go as we are. Not with the ghost of empire about us. Not
as a vicar of Europe, or as a US deputy.
But unambivalently. Sure of who we are and what we stand
for.
If we are to be taken seriously, believed, trusted, that is
the only way to go.
Sometimes, perhaps it's necessary to state the obvious:
facing Asia we do nothing more or less than face reality
and that is what Asia does in facing us.
We might learn something from the geophysics of the
situation. Geophysically speaking this continent is old
Asia there's none older than this. It's certainly not
going to move, and after two hundred years it should be
pretty plain that we're not going to either.
in 1992, we shouldn't think that we're anything less than a
rightful presence In the region.
It is sometimes argued that Australia's democratic
institutions and traditions of tolerance and open debate
somehow disqualify us from forming successful relationships
in Asia.
My starting point is that Australia's democratic
institutions and traditions are non-negotiable.
Many things have changed and will change in Australia our
ethnic composition and, with it, our culture; our economic
and industrial practices; our world view a great deal will
change. But traditions of democracy, fairness and personal liberty
which we have fought wars to defend, will remain this
country's guiding principles.
Sacrifice and achievements of Australians will not be
forgotten in the new Australia indeed in a less ambivalent
Australia their memory will grow.
We recognise that it is thanks largely to our British
heritage that we are a stable and mature liberal democracy
of long standing. -W g7-1T -4g-024-P. 05/ 12 
Il j* i ~ 4o i4o U24 t' Uo'
6
I cannot accept that this deeply rooted democracy is a
disadvantage in dealing with Asia. it is a region, after
all, which contains stable democracies like Japan and
India, and a number of societies whose economic advance has
opened the way to political liberalisation. South Korea and
Taiwan to name just two.
Given these developments in Asia, along with the democratic
revolutions of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, I
find it hard to accept that our going into the world will
mean compromising our democracy.
I incline very strongly to the view that, on the contrary,
Australia's democracy is an advantage.
In other words, In the growing political liberalisation of
Asia we're not an aberration, but a natural fit.
We don't need to be intrusive, but we have nothing to shrink
from and plenty to give.
What is true politically is also true economically.
It is important for Australians to realise that this
country's economic weight is considerable.
Our GNP is third In the West Pacific and equal to the
combined GNP of all the ASEAN countries.
We have much of what the countries in the region need
resources, space, a skilled work force, education services.
We have the English language, adn a rapidly increasing
number of young Australians who are competent in Asian
languages. In 1990, 53,000 Australian students were
studying Japanese in high school: this year the figure is
95,000. The success of multiculturalism in Australia, and increasing
immigration from Asia, have stimulated our awareness of
Asian societies and improved our standing in the region.
Recent changes in Asia are perhaps not so dramatic as they
have been in Europe, but they are greater than is commonly
understood. During the 1980s, North-East and South-East Asia constituted
the fastest growing region in the world, expanding at
approximately twice the world average growth rate. Together
these countries account for about 1.7 billion people.
That is change on a grand scale.
we do not yet know what the shape of Asia geopolitically,
or economically will be. But we do know that the key
question for Australia is how to position ourselves to take
maximum advantage of the changes. 
The Cold war strategic structure of Asia is fading.
The Cambodia peace settlement is a Striking example of the
benefits that derive from more relaxed relations between the
great powers in Asia.
We also welcome the two Koreas joining the United Nations,
and new openings in South Korea's relations with Russia and
China. Set against these positive developments, of course, there is
continuing concern about the possibility of North Korea
developing nuclear weapons.
Although Russia retains formidable nuclear end conventional
military capabilities, its projection of power in the
Western Pacific is constrained by economic pressures and
greater priorities nearer home.
Considered overall, the risk of military confrontation
between the great powers in Asia is now significantly
reduced. The economic dynamismn of Asian countries also contributes to
regional stability. So too do the related processes of
economic interdependence.
As we seek the Strategy most likely to succeed in this
generally favourable environment, three key questions
confront us.
First, what level of strategic and economic engagement with
the Western Pacific will the United States sustain over the
medium to long term?
Second, what quality of international leadership will Japan
achieve in the period ahead?
Third, depending on the outcome of the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations, what type of trade
alignments are likely to evolve in the Asia-Pacific region
over the next decade?
The questions are obviously inter-related. The issues have
been much discussed and I don't wish now to add to the
available body of analysis and speculation.
Let me offer. instead, some comments on Australia's
OrAf~ rannc. 1 in each case.
1. The Bush Administration has announced a series of
phased reductions to its military presence in East Asia.
It is also currently withdrawing from the Subic Say
naval base in the Philippines.
At the same time, the United States has emphasised its
determination to remain a strategic power in the Western
Pacific over the long term. 
I-
8
Even in a post-Cold War environmient, Australia
considers that US strategic engagement in the Western
Pacific, and the maintenance of existing US bilateral
alliances, make a vital contribution to regional
stability and confidence.
Maintenance of a close security relationship between
the United States and Japan is especially important. It
provides not only assurance for Japan itself, but sets
out a framework which helps legitimise Japan's defence
posture in the eyes of other Asian countries.
Despite increasing Japanese influence in the region,
the United States remains a key economic partner for
most Asian countries. The United States is still Asia's
single most important export market, though it has been
overtaken by Japan as the main source of aid and
investment. in recognition of the United States' continuing
importance as an economic partner of the Western Pacific
region, Australia welcomes its active involvement in the
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC process.
2. Japan's impressive economic achievements are widely
recognised, but their translation into international
influence has been uneven.
Given the perception that overall US influence in East
Asia may decline over time, there is lively interest in
whether Japan will fill the gap by assuming more
international leadership.
Our firm preference is for a more active Japanese role
internationally. We are pleased to be working closely
with Japan in the Implementation of the Cambodia peace
settlement. We would support Japan's participation in United
Nations peacekeeping. I am not talking here about a
wider regional Japanese military role, which in any case
is not sought by Japan.
3. Against a background of frustratingly slow progress in
the Uruguay Round, concern is often expressed that the
international trading system will gradually degenerate
into three trading blocs one in Europe, one in the
Americas, and the other in East Asia.
As is widely recognised, Australia has a considerable
stake in a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round.
An unsatisfactory outcome to the Round would
undoubtedly Increase pressure on the multilateral
trading system. The GATT framework would remain in
force, but there would be increasing resort to bilateral
and regional approaches to trade problems. 
T C. Z -_ 7-7 77. NO. VU 4 v ' L
9
In the modern globalised trading environment, it is not
inevitable that the Americas and East Asia would
separate into rival trading blocs if the Round failed.
Even if they did, Australia would still have viable
trade policy options though undoubtedly inferior ones
to those a multilateral system offers.
Looking at our relations with Asia more generally, we are in
fact more successfully engaged with the region than we
commonly appreciate.
Vindicating the efforts of Australian business to expand our
commercial relations in the region, more than 60 per cent of
Australia's merchandise exports now go to Asia.
Those Australians who continue to doubt that this is where
our national interests truly lie should take note.
Those who know this but are still inclined to recoil from
Asia should, I think, take heart.
Every year our interdependence with Asia increases in
proportion to the rest of the world.
In 1991, the ASEAN countries became our second largest
export market, taking 12 per cent of our exports, and moving
ahead of both the United States and the European Community.
With levels of growth in most Asian economies well above the
world average, this upward trend in our exports to the
region should also hold good.
The opportunities for Australia cannot be overstated.
Asia remains a major market for our traditional commodity
exports, and these remain vitally important to our economy.
But the Asian market has broadened. Over the period
1983-91, Australia's manufactured exports to Asia grew twice
as fast as the traditional areas of our trade.
Exports of services grew even more rapidly. There was also
expansion, albeit less dramatic, in Australian investment in
Asia. It is all reason to believe that we can live and prosper in
the Asia-Pacific.
Most pleasing of all has been the emergence of new business
links between Australia and the countries of South-East
Asia. I look forward to seeing examples of this first hand when I
go to Indonesia later in the month. 
TEL:
Just as Australia's economic engagement with Asia is more
advanced than is sometimes realised, so too we have more
scope to contribute to regional political affairs than is
commonly appreciated at home.
We start from the best possible position, having no
historical or fundamental conflict of interest with any
country in the region.
We have institutional strengths to draw on. We have
well-developed foreign policy expertise in the government
and academia.
We must be careful not to overplay our hand, but if our
timing is good and we choose things which genuinely serve
the wider interest, we can help shape the regional agenda.
Our role as a catalyst In the Cambodia peace process is one
good example. We have also played a useful role in launching
and helping advance the APEC process, and in encouraging
regional security dialogue in Asia.
As I see it, the quality of Australia's future relationship
with Asia very much depends on what happens with regard to
trade alignments in the Pacific.
The scope for Australia to achieve its broadest aspirations
in the region will be that much reduced if the countries of
East Asia see themselves as an economic bloc in rivalry with
Europe and North America.
That is why, without any illusions about the bad effects of
US trade policies on Australia, when President Bush was here
in January I put the case vigorously for continued US
engagement in the Western Pacific.
I mean a strategic presence and an economic presence and a
presence in our regional institutions.
The United States will be better for that, so will Asia.
All this points to the wisdom of Australia's effort since
1989 to establish and develop APEC.
The general virtue of the process is its promotion of
regional economnic cooperation within a framework which
embraces North America and East Asia.
A particular virtue is that it also provides a convenient
framework within which Japan and the United States can work
out their respective regional roles, without increasing
pressure on their bilateral relationship.
Regardless of the outcome of the Uruguay Round, APEC's value
will grow considerably if a process of non-discriminatory
regional trade liberalisation can be carried forward with
conviction. T7EL.: Rpr. 92 19: 48 No. 024 P. 10/ 12 
TEL: 7ARpr. 92 19: 48 No. 024 P. 11/ 12
The objective should be to promote an open regionalism which
is compatible with a wider Multilateral trading system.
Another way of promoting cooperation in the Asia-Pacific
region would be to establish a process of periodic
heads-of-government meetings, say every two or three years.
The absence of such a process is conspicuous in a region
whose weight in global affairs is steadily increasing.
Various formulas for participation are possible, but I
personally would find most attractive a mechanism based on
APEC membership, because it embraces the most important
economic linkages throughout East Asia and across the
Pacific. I discussed this general idea with President Bush when he
visited Australia. I hope to pursue it as opportunity
allows with other Asia-Pacific leaders.
Without doubt the appropriate note on which to conclude is 8
positive one.
We have come a long way In the last decade: there is every
chance of a quantum leap in the next.
We won't make that leap in the way Bob Menzies might have
tried to make it. Blood will not determine it.
To do it, we need to recognise that we have become a player
in these affairs and have a stake in them not by
accident, but by initiative.
The key to our success now rests with ourselves. In
initiatives we have taken abroad. And in the ones we have
taken at home.
Sometimes it seems to me that Australians have ceased to
believe that we got here largely under our own steam.
In truth we did. in truth we've not done badly.
But we'll do best when we've removed all signs of our being
a branch office.
We'll never get anywhere but into trouble if we drift as
we did in the fifties.
In the eighties, we took hold of the rudder and set about an
essential economic transformation which leaves us able to
hold our own in Asia in the nineties.
We can confidently expect further success to follow in the
course of recovery and from the major Infrastructure
projects, investment incentives, huge investment in
vocational training, and continuing micro-economic and
industrial relations reforms announced in the One Nation
statement last month. 
TEL 12
AS I said earlier, I have spent much of the past decade
engaged in structural reform.
That has also meant something equally as difficult perhaps
more difficult. I mean cultural reform, the reform of our
outlook. Success at home depends on this change. Success in Asia
depends on it too.
It depends on the individual and collective faith of
Australians: It depends on establishing beyond doubt
S that Asia is where our future substantially lies;
S that we can and must go there;
S and that this course we are on is irreversible.
What John Curtin said in 1942 is right for us in 1992: " On
what we now do depends everything we may like to do."
7: Flpr. 92-19: 48 No. 024 P. 12/ 12 



I CLL.;
SPEECH BY THE PRIKE MINISTER, THE HON P. J. 1CATING
OFFICIAL BANQUET GIVEN BY PRESIDENT SOEHARTO
ISTANA NEGARAt JAKARTA, 21 APRIL 1992
1 am very pleased to be here in Indonesia on this my first
visit abroad as Prime Minister. As one of the new Heads of
Government in the region, i appreciate the warm words of
welcome from the region's undisputed elder statesman.
I wish to congratulate you, Mr President, on your election
as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement. The Movement's
summit in Jakarta this September will demonstrate once again
the leading role Indonesia plays in important international
forums.
Mr President, more than forty years ago, the political party
which it is my privilege to lead the Australian Labor
Party lent its support to the people of Indonesia in their
struggle for independunce.
We in the Australian labour movement have always respected
Indonesia's determination to pursue an independent course in
the world. Indeed, that same independent frame of mind in
something which my government is Meen to foster in
Australia. It is important to our strength as a people and as a nation.
Mr President, at a time of rapid economic and strategic
change, Indonesia and Australia have more in common than our
dirrerent histories and cultures would suggest.
We both understand that Our ability to participate fully in
the rapid economic growth of the Asia-Pacific region depends
on more than the natural resources with which our countries
are so richly endowed.
Nations need more than this. Success also depends on what
you, Mr President, have long referred to as " national
resilience". We recognise this in Australia. 1i Hpl J i NO U 1-Ui/ 
TEL: 21. Apr. 92 19: 41 No. 017 P. 02/ 1
We know that to reach our full potential we must work
cooperatively, combine our talents and energy, harness our
human and material strength, and lua~ e Australia more truly
one natio~ n.
I think you will understand some of the challenges we see
ourselves facing.
Australia is a vast continent. It is also a sprawling
federation. The great distances, and the cultural gaps which emerged
over time, have consequences for economic and political
efficiency, for national cohesion for our ability to
pursue and achieve national goals.
in the 1990s I believe you will sea Australia face these
long-standing realities am never before. I think you will
see us pursue our goals as never before with an
unparalle). ed sense of purpose and efficiency.
Under your leadership, Indonesia has undergone an economic
transformation which has dramatically improved living
standards in your own country, and contributed to wider
regional stability,
You have made the difficult Judgements, the tough decisions,
required to turn your economy towards the glal economy.
We have * ought the same goal of international
competitiveness end, in the past decade, we have rollowed a
very similar path towards it.
As our two countries have become more outward looking, our
trading relationship has become more significant.
Australian exports to Indonesia are nearly four times
greater than they were ten years ago. Indonesia, which was
Australia's 17th largest export market ten years ago, is now
our loth largest export market.
Our trade has diversified in much the same degree as it has
grown. minerals and primary products remain important but they no
long3er dominate.
Much of the increase in exports to Austr~ alia in recent years
has been in manufactured goods.
Australian exporters have found in Indonesia now markets for
manufactures, machinery, computers, and telecommunications
products, as well as in education services, engineering
consul. tancies, construction, banking and finanae,
14r President, our countries also share rundamental interests
in the stability and security of our region-
Both governments were active in the long negotiations
leading up to last October's signing of a comiprehensive
political settlament in the Cambodia conflict.
Australian and Indonesian armed forces are now serving
together in Cambodia as part of the United Nations
peacekeeping force.
Let me also take this opportunity to applaud the active and
substantial role that Indonesia has played in ASFEAN, I
ASEAN's creation in the 1960s, and its success and maturity
today owe much to you Mr Pros ident. The recti-on owes much to
you. We are very conscious of the benefits which flow to
Australia from Indonesia's positive contribution to regional
affairs. we also welcome the ASEAN countries' recent decision to
create an ASEAN Free Trade Area.
Hr President, your country's role in ASEAN has been
complemented by the active role you have played in APEC. We
both understand the contribution which APEC can make to the
development of the broader Asia-Pacific region.
As fellow members of the Cairns Group, we are also united in
our appreciation of the need for a successful conclusion of
the Uruguay Round,
An open multilateral trading system with strong, clear rules
covering all areas of international trade including
agriculture is in our interest, just as it is in the
interest of the other members of the GATT.
In the post three years, our two countries have begun t6
build a network of connections and institutional links which
has given greater substance to our bilateral relationship.
The hallzark of these growing connections has bean practical
co-operation and substantive dialogue.
Of particular importance has been the 1989 Timor Gap Zone of
Co-operation Treaty, which establishes a system for joint
exploitation of petroleum resources in the Timor Sea.
Xn 2.989 our two countries also established the Australia
Indonesia Institute in order to promote greater mutual
unddrotanding, especially in the fields of culture and
education. The growing web of bilateral connections has also been
strengthened by the greatly increased numbers of ministerial
visit. These substantive links have enabled our GovernmeUnts to
maintain a frank and constructive dialogue, especially
Hpi' I j 4j 140 V. L I r Q. L, k 
4.
during the past few montne, following the tragic events in
East Timor last November.
The signing of a number of bilateral agreements during my
visit is an important demonstration of the sorts of l. inks
which we would like to see developed.
We are especially keen to expand bilateral commercial links,
and to encourag e vur private sectors to take advantage of
the opportunities created by the reform of our economies.
Mr President, a hundred years ago, in what becaue known as a
Golden Age, th. infant Australian nation forjel an identity
and political system which still very largely defines us to
ourselves and to the world.
It was a reflection of the country's origins and the
imperial values of the day that the identity and the system
were often, in both spirit and substance, anti-Asian.
In the 1990s I~ believe the AU~ tralian identity is being reshaped
in a way which is consistent with the multicultural
realiLy of our society, and the final paesing of the
vestiges of our colonial past.
Much will not be changed. Much we would defend AUjj
change. But the new identity Will be emphatically different in this
it will. positively. engage with the region in which we
live.
Mr President, it is my Toat sincere hope that we shall
continue1 1U make our relationship broader$ deeper and more
stable, in an important sense, each of us is the other's best test
of how effectively we will be able to deal with -the social
and political diversity, and the rapid change, which will
mark our region and the world in the 1990s.
My visit may be seen as a signal of Australia's
determination to pass that test#
Mr President, I am very glad to be here. I look forward to
our discussions tozqorrow on important bilateral, regional
and international 4evelopments.
Your Excellencies, Distinc5Uished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen, I would now like to ask you to join me in a toast
to the health of His Excellency the President and Mrs
Soeharto, to the prosperity or the Republic of Indonesia,
and to further progress in friendship and co-operation
between our two nations. 



TEL: 22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 01/ 13
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
JAKARTA WEDNESDAY, 22 APRIL 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I have come to Indonesia, on this my first overseas visit as
Prime Minister, because Indonesia is in the first rank of
Australia' s priorities.
As our close neighbour, as the fourth most populous country
in the world, as a rapidly growing economy in the most
rapidly growing part of the world, as a key player in this
region where our future lies, Indonesia commands Australia's
attention. It Is often said that no two neighbours could be so
dissimilar as we are.
Culturally we are very different demographically,
historically. It is not surprising that we have sometimes been at odds:
or that relations have occasionally been strained.
But our relationship is changing.
in recqrat years we have built substantial links diplomatic
links, cultural links and in particular, commercial links.
it is remarkable how a relationship can grow when concrete
common interests are found and we determine, jointly, to
pursue them.
Very different we may be, but we have found, I think, that
the destinies of our two countries are joined.
I should like this visit to signal that.
in fact the threads of our relationship are long and strong. 
TEL: 22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 02/ 13
2
The Second World War brought Australians arnd Indonesians
into extensive contact with each other.
After the war there was widespread Sympathy among
Australians for the cause of Indonesian independence.
The sympathy found concrete expression when, in the Course
of the Indonesian struggle, the Australian labour movement
imposed boycotts and black bans against Dutch shipping.
In 1947 it was Australia, together with India, which brought
the matter of Indonesian independence before the UN Security
Council. Shortly after, Australia was nominated by Indonesia to sit
on the three-nation United Nations Good Offices Committee..
As one commentator said, this display of confidence in
Australia by Indonesia was the high-water mark of relations
between our countries in the early post-war years.
Australia co-sponsored Indonesia's admission to the United
Nations in 1950.
The achievement of your independence was thus one of the
proud moments in the history of Australian diplomacy.
But of course the historical threads go well beyond the lost
fifty years.
Australia, after all, was once called New Holland.
Not many years after the Dutch established themselves in
Indonesia, one of their number, named Abel Tasman, sailed
from Jakarta or Batavia as it was then known along the
west and south coasts of Australia.
He left Australia, rather ungraciously remarking, " there is
no good to be done here"
And he sailed on to trade with places in the north,
including Japan.
Asia hdS long been a theatre for trade between dissimilar
societies, and Australia and Indonesia have long been a part
of it.
Before Europeans traded In the region, fishermen from the
M'akassar area in what was then called the Celebes, were
trading with China in trepang gathered of f the northern
Australian coast.
This was Australia's first export commodity; and a valueadded
one at that for, with the cooperation and assistance
of the Australian Aboriginals, the trepang was cured and
smoked on Australian shores for export to China. 
.22Apr. 9129 : 23 NO. U25 e. U3'/ 10
3
The cultural influence of this trade can still be seen in
the language and culture of the Australian Aboriginals who
came in contact with the peoples from the Makassar area.
In the era of colonial Australia and colonial Indonesia,
Jakarta was a refuge and source of supplies for British
ships beginning with James Cook's Endeavour.
In the first half of 1790, the infant British colony at
Sydney Cove, cut of f from home, terribly alone, and as yet
incapable of making the new environment yield food, sent a
ship to Jakarta for supplies.
By the time it returned, British ships had arrived and the
colony was saved, but the ship from Jakarta was very welcome
nonetheless. Ladies and gentlemen, as we plan our strategic, trading and
cultural relationships in this last decade of the twentieth
century, it is worth bearing these historical threads in
mind. Together they suggest a pattern of interdependence.
They hint at what can be done.
Today we believe a great deal can be done not merely in
response to immediate needs, but in pursuit of 8 worthwhile
and enduring relationship between our two countries.
In quite different ways we have both emerged from a colonial
past. We have both committed ourselves to the kind of
radical economic reform which will give our nations a secure
place in the world.
The Australian government believes that all we do in the
world, in Asia and the Pacific, all we do in Indonesia, we
will do best as a nation of independent and unambivalent
mind. We have long been independent.
But, perhaps because we are a European country living
alongside Asia, the residues of colonialism have tended to
persist i.
There is a conservative element in Australian society not
so strong as it was, but influential just the same which,
through its attachment to the past and its anxiety about the
Asia-Pacific future, tends to resist the full expression of
Australian nationhood.
It is the same element which opposed Indonesian independence
in the 1940s.
Attitudes are often the last things to change. 
TEL* 9 92 N&amp; o. 23 P. 04/ 13
4
As I'm sure it affected Indonesia long after independence,
the colonial legacy still affects us, arnd we still face
questions about what part of it we should retain and what
parts cast off.
A great deal of our British colonial heritage underpins our
political and legal institutions. It remains a defining
element in our culture.
We do not seek to change these things.
But our population is no longer the overwhelmingly British
one it was.
Contemporary Australia is multicultural the old
Australians of English, Scots and Irish stock having been
joined by large numbers of people from all the countries of
Europe, the Middle East, the Americas and Asia. By that
measure alone we are very much part of the world.
Multi-culturalism has Cone much to break down our fear of
cultural difference, and therefore our old fear of Asia.
We are substantially changed in this.
We are more worldly, more mature.
So should we be.
By most measures we are not a young country. The
Commonwealth of Australia is almost 100 years old.
Australian democracy, founded in the 1850s, is much older
than most democracies in the world.
There should be no question about our identity or where our
loyalties lie.
For far too long we have measured the strength of our
society, the level of our sophistication, the worth of our
achievements, against Britain and Europe and against the
United States.
At times we have done this while clinging to such vestiges
of the pid imperial power and culture as will, we think,
earn us respect in the world.
We think the time has come to step out of the colonial
shadow and make our position clear:
we are Australian
we are engaged with Asia.
We are different -culturally, historically, politically
but we can handle the difference. 
TEL: 22. Fpr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 05/ 13
We believe we can contribute something to what is already a
diverse region. The Asia-Pacific, as well as Indonesia, can
achieve unity in diversity.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Australian government is actively
and unequivocally committed to this region and to
developing, in particular, a relationship with Indonesia.
In significant ways we have shared the past. If we are
prepared to put in the effort, we can share a much more
substantial future.
In the forty-two years of our diplomatic relations, there
have been substantial achievements as well as periodic
setbacks. If we reflect on that experience, I think we will see that
we have made progress when we have been realistic.
we have achieved things, end been able to protect those
achievements, when we have found a tangible basis for our
work. We have been disappointed, I think, when we have failed to
take sufficient account of our different outlooks.
We are very different countries. We will always see some
things differently.
What we need for a successful bilateral relationship is the
firm ground of tangible achievements, and real incentives to
see us through the times when good will is not enough.
We need to identify our shared interests and create the
institutional links which will consolidate our progress.
We need to create the conditions in which new shared
interests will emerge.
To point the way towards a more secure relationship, let me
say where I think some of our most important common
interests lie.
Most obviously we share an interest in success.
More, probably, than most Australians appreciate, our
country has benefited enormously from the success of yours
in recent years.
Our experience of nation-building has not followed the same
path as yours.
As a consequence, we are inclined sometimes to underestimate
how difficult it is to achieve orderly development in a
nation as vast as Indonesia, and as culturally, ethnically
and religiously diverse.
The achievements of President Soeharto's New Order are very
great. 
TEL 6
Between 1966 and 1991, Indonesia's real GDP rose 450 per
cent. Its real growth rate over this period has been one of the
highest among developing countries.
Structural change has been rapid: agriculture's share of GDP
is half what it was a quarter century ago.
in the late 1970s Indonesia was the world's largest importer
of rice. In 1984 Indonesia became self-sufficient.
The people of Indonesia are now better fed, housed and
educated than ever before. Infant mortality rates are
approximately half what they were.
These are triumphs.
But the achievements of the Soeharto Government spread wider
than this.
In establishing political stability and economic progress in
Indonesia, your government has contributed to stability and
prosperity In the wider South-East Asian region.
Australia is among the beneficiaries.
We gain commercially, of course; but just as importantly,
our national security benefits from 8 benign environment
where not so many years ago there was great uncertainty and
volatility. We share with Indonesia a fundamental interest in the
strategic stability of our region, and in limiting the
potential for external powers to introduce tension or
conflict. Recognising this shared strategic interest, we are keen to
work with Indonesia as equal partners to strengthen
bilateral defence relations.
There is scope for building closer links between our armed
forces and defence organisations. We can do this with more
high-livel visits and consultations, combined exercises,
training and other exchanges.
Earlier I referred to those seamen from the Makassar area
who for hundreds of years made annual calls to harvest the
trepang from the shores of Aboriginal Australia.
Plainly, for hundreds of years a commlon Interest was
recognised and practical arrangements devised.
So now our practical interactions as neighbouring countries
create another category of shared interests.
our maritime border is the most obvious of these.
TE2L2: . Rpr. 92 19: 23 No. 026 tF. Ub/ l1. 
TEL: 7
Most of the sea-bed boundaries were formally delimited
twenty years ago, but there remained important areas where
agreement had not been reached.
The most extensive of these was the Timor Gap, covering
potentially rich reserves of oil and gas under the Timor
Sea. Rather than attempt to reconcile different legal
interpretations of rights over the continental shelf, the
two governments established a joint development zone for the
cooperative exploration and exploitation of the area's
petroleum resources.
The Timor Gap zone of Cooperation Treaty, which entered into
force in February 1991, is a triumph of creative cooperation
between our two governments. It is the most substantial
bilateral agreement we have concluded.
It demonstrates conclusively that we can find imaginative
solutions to bilateral problems when we recognise the common
interest and apply to it the necessary political will.
Ladies and gentlemen, earlier today three more bilateral
agreements were signed.
They deal with double taxation, extradition and fisheries
cooperation. in practical ways they each expand and strengthen the
framework to improve the bilateral interaction between
Australia and Indonesia as outward-looking neighbours.
Ladies and gentlemen, as everyone here is aware, the
situation in East Timor has been a recurring and sometimes
divisive issue In ou relations.
I should take this opportunity to explain that the
disproportionate attention East Timor receives in Australia
does not mean that we are not interested in the welfare of
the 182 million people who live in Indonesia's 26 other
provinces. The atl~ ention East Timor receives, internationally and in
Australia, is a natural consequence of the territory's
uniquely troubled history, beginning with its neglect under
Portuguese rule.
We carry no brief for the Portuguese occupation of the
territory, or for the manner of their leaving or their
recent diplomatic manoeuvres.
Australia's outlook has been shaped by the additional
factors of our proximity to East Timor, the fraternal links
we had with the people of East Timor during the Second World
War, and the sizeable East Timorese community which now
lives in Australia. T2E2L:. fRpr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 0( 11.5 
TFLL 8
Australia made it clear that it did not condone the manner
in which Indonesia acquired East Timor, but since 1979 we
have accepted Indonesian sovereignty over the territory.
The Australian Government has made clear its views about the
tragic events in Diii last November.
We consider the subsequent actions of the Indonesian
Government, including President Soeharto's public statements
and the measures announced by the Army Chief-of-Staff on 27
February, to constitute a credible response.
Our continuing concern is with what practical help we might
be able to give to the people of East Timor.
Our aim as concerned outsiders is to assist where we can in
measures for their welfare, and to support a process of
reconciliation between them and the Indonesian authorities.
I am pleased that during this visit our two governments have
been able to sign a memorandum covering an 11.5 million
dollar Australian aid project to improve water supply and
sanitation in parts of East Timor.
Ladies and gentlemen, in coming to terms with a more fluid
political environment in Asia, Australia and Indonesia have
ample scope to cooperate in helping shape the regional
agenda. Indonesia.' s regional credentials are very clear.
it is a leading member of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations ( ASEAN), which is a focus of wider dialogue
and cooperation.
I should like to think that Australia, too, has demonstrated
an ability to contribute usefully to regional diplomacy in
recent years.
Our two countries have invested considerable effort in the
long negotiations leading up to last October's
comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict.
our arrqed forces are now serving in Cambodia as part of the
United Nations peace-keeping presence.
We have also worked closely together to encourage a regional
dialogue on security issues, centred on the ASEAN PMC
process. Ladies and gentlemen, I said at the beginning of this
address that it is remarkable what can be achieved when
common interests are identified and pursued. And they will
be pursued the harder if they are material common Interests.
ZZ MfJF V4 A7 LV I I U I 
TEL 9
It is one of the happy coincidences of the history of our
two nations that in recent years we have adopted economic
strategies which greatly multiply our common interests.
We were both overly dependent on commodities. We have both
sought to correct our external Imbalances. We have both
liberalised our economies.
Since coming to office in 1983, the Australian Government
has removed exchange controls, floated the Australian dollar
and made it a more competitive currency, deregulated banking
and radically reduced import protection.
We have cut back the government Sector and cut taxes. We
are now encouraging an historic shift from industry-wide
labour relations arrangements to workplace bargaining.
In the same period Indonesia has transformed its economy by
implementing strikingly similar policies.
Banking has been deregulated and monetary policy changed so
that it now relies on interest rates instead of credit
restrictions. Indonesia has cut protection against imports, increased
manufacturing production and reduced dependence on
commodities. You too have cut back on government spending, rationalised
taxes and created a competitive exchange rate.
Both our economies are now much more open and outward
looking. Both are more competitive and more diverse I would venture
to say, more creative.
I would 81s0 go so far as to say that what we have done has
given our countries a better chance in the modern world.
Our own success might be seen in the growth of our economy
by more than one third in the past decade, in the fact that
we are exporting more, that our trade is increasingly with
our regional neighbours, and the contents of exports now
includds a significant proportion of services and
manufactures, in addition to our traditional strengths in
food, minerals and other raw materials.
Indonesia's success might be measured in those dramatic
improvements in living standards I referred to earlier, and
in average real GDP growth of about 6 per cent during the
1980s. Ladies and gentlemen, this common strategy of creating
liberal market-oriented economies produces, as I said,
common interests.
Concrete common interests. TL! 22. Hpr. 2qz 1Y: ZO riO. VZ 
TEL: 22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 10/ 13
It has taken longer than it should have, but in recent years
Australia and Indonesia have discovered each other
commercially. We have discovered that we have goods and services to
exczhange and investments to make.
Between 1989 and 1991 two-way trade increased by 66 per
cant, to be worth approximately 2.4 billion Australian
dollars. Australian investment in Indonesia has increased markedly.
Indonesian companies are now also starting to invest in
Australia. The trade in services is also growing in tourism,
education, medicine, and support industries for the major
mining ventures.
There are many other areas in which Australian expertise
should be able to find niches in Indonesia. Pleasing as the
trend of recent years has been, we know that we have the
potential to play a much bigger part.
We have much to offer in the way of raw materials, capital
equipment and technology.
Australia's experience in coping with similar climates,
extensive coastlines and long distances has produced
technology and solutions well-suited to Indonesia often
much better suited than the products of, say, Japan, Germany
or the United States.
Our experience and expertise in many other other areas is
second to none in the world in forest management, solar
technology, food processing and coal-fired power stations
for instance.
We can assist as exporters, but just as readily as joint
venture partners.
I'm confident that we will find the larger role we seek.
As both countries expand along this liberal economic path we
can expect the trade to grow. We Can expect the range of
shared interests to grow.
We can expect, I believe, a much more productive and durable
relationship between our two countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, in recent public statements in
Australia, I have emphasised the need for us to come to
terms with the economic vitality of the Asia-Pacific region.
Our external policy reflects the interest we share with you
in maintaining a sound multilateral system for international
trade. 
ILL: L LL. Hpr JZ Z Pflu.'
Indonesia and Australia have worked together within the
Cairns Group in order to achieve the result we both need
from the Uruguay Round the liberalisation of international
agricultural trade.
We have also both given strong support to the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation or APEC process.
I do not believe it Is in the interests of either of us to
have the international trading system degenerate into rival
blocs. We would both lose in a situation where the countries of
East Asia saw themselves as an economic bloc in rivalry with
those of Europe and North America.
The central idea of APEC is to build on existing networks of
economic interdependence throughout the ASia-Pacific region.
I believe we should continue to work through APEC to promote
an open regionalism which is compatible with a wider
multilateral trading system.
Regardless of the outcome of the Uruguay Round, APEC'S value
will grow considerably if a process of non-discriminatory
regional trade liberalisation can be carried forward with
conviction. Australia has assured Indonesia that our vigorous support
for the APEC process in no sense qualifies our recognition
of the achievements and potential of ASEAN.
We appreciate the great value of ASEAN.
We share its members' belief in the advancement of political
end economic cooperation.
We admire its contribution to wider stability and harmony in
the Asia-Pacific region.
The adoption at lost January's ASEAN Summit of a proposal to
establish an ASEAN Free Trade Area highlights the continuing
vitalitX and significance of the organisation.
Australia particularly welcomed Indonesia's strong
endorsement of APEC at the ASEAN Summit.
Your position underlines the compatibility of the ASEAN and
APEC mechanisms.
Ladies and gentlemen, we who live in this part of the world
live in dynamic times.
Our two countries which, on the face of things, are so
different have these times In common.
We have shared much in the past. We now share the future. 
TEL: 12
We need not compromise the integrity of our cultures or our
beliefs arnd values to work fruitfully together.
We know that we will each be stronger for the other's
success. -In coming years I think you Will notice that there has been
a change in the way Australia does things.
in the 1980s some of us were struck with the thought that,
if we did not change, the Society we had built would not be
sustainable.
We had to change direction: and in the past decade that is
what we have done.
Australians have taken up the challenge of economic reform.
They have made the cultural leap necessary to change the
industrial culture the culture of work and management.
Just as we have learned how to build a tolerant and fair
multicultural aociety, where once we were fearful of
difference, we have learned how to build a competitive
economy, where until very recently we were less than
Competitive. These days few Populations are so economically aware as
Australia's. It is the sharpened awareness one has when a
disaster has been narrowly avoided.
We know what has to be done.
If these have been dramatic changes, so too-has been the
change in the way Australians perceive themselves in the
world. It has taken longer than perhaps it should have, but I think
it can now be safely said that most Australians see Asia
and the Pacific as holding the key to our future.
This thought is not new. There have been Australians saying
it for ' fifty years.
The difference is that this time we have not only recognised
that our future belongs in the region, but we're engaging
with it as we never have before..
Along with our efforts to build our economic strength, the
talk now is about nationhood and being Australians of
independent mind.
It requires a considerable conscious effort to overcome all
the effects of even a relatively benign colonialism.
TEL: 19~: 22235. FNlOp. rV. Z9O2 r'.ñ izi 
TEL: 13
As I said earlier, attitudes are often the last things to
change. Among the other lessons we have learnt in recent years is
that, like the colony at Sydney Cove as it waited for the
ship to return from Jakarta, we really are on our own.
That is why more than ever before we have to think for
ourselves, be sure of ourselves be, without a trace of
ambivalence, one Australian nation.
We urge you not to think of Australia as the place it was
twenty years ago, even a decade ago.
Think of it as the place it is now, and as it intends to be
a partner in the dynamic new world of the Asia-Pacific
region. Increasingly, that is how we Australians are thinking of it.
22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 13/ 13 



1r "
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATIN, HP
TO THE EAST JAVA CHAMBER OF COMMC] C AND INDUSTRY
SURABAYA, THURSDAY, 23 APRIL 1992
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address you this
evening here in Surdbaya where the great success of
Indonesia's economic transformation is perhaps most obvious.
Where the newly liberalised Indonesian economy is serving to
restore a city to its historic commercial pre-eminence.
Ladies and gentlemen, Australia is also in the process of
transformation.
our perspective on the world is changing.
As never before in our history we recognise that our future
substantially lies in our own region. In Asia and the
Pacific. in Indonesia,
That is where the great opportunity is.
we know that seizing that opportunity will be no easy thing
to do.
It involves something like a revolution in the way we do
things, and the way we think about ourselves and the world.
When you have been for so long a branch office of empire
there is tendency to go on expecting special treatment long
after head office stopped opening the mail.
If this were characteristic of Australia once, it is not
true now.
We do not entertain the notion that someone else will do the
hard things for us.
or to us. we do not accept the idea that we are forever at
the mercy of the major economic powers. I.. r P I V) I IU VI II W 
2
In 1992 we k~ now that we need a degree of national energy,
inventiveness and purpose which we have not had before In
peacetime. You will see evidence of this emerging attitude in AUStralia
now. In the near future, I believe, you will see evidence of it
in the Asia-Pacific region. You will see evidence of it in
Indonesia especially, perhaps, here in Surabaya.
These days to the majority of Australians the-need to
integrate our economy with that of the region is selfevident.
we long since ceased to believe that we could sustain
ourselves by exporting commodities, and manufacturing for a
tiny market behind tariff walls,
The seventies and the early eighties showed us we had to
change. As a result of the economic policies of thei Australian
Government since 1983, Australia is now a m~ ore efficient,
productive, competitive, and outward-lookipg nation,
It is more geared to exports, more receptive to foreign
investment, and more resilient in the face of external
economiic pressures.
Like Indonesia, Australia reformed its economy in the
eighties. We floated the dollar, and allowed a more competitive
exchange rate to be determined by the market.
We reformea our indmstrial relations, so that we have far
fewer strikes, greater flexibility, and lower labour costs.
We reformed our financial system, so that interest rates and
not quantity controls balance supply and demand for funds#
and moot financial business can be transacted free of
government control.
We reformed spending and taxing, so that we now have one or
the lowest tax regimes and one of the most disciplined
government sectors of any OECD nation.
We adopted industry policies to lower the crippling level of
protection we inherited, so that we are now one of the most
open economies in the world.
The results of reform have been spectacular in Australia, as
they have been here in indonesia.
Over the eighties Australia's economy expanded by more than
one third. Today we export more than twice the quantity of
goods we did at the beginning of the eighties. 4 H p I-' LC , 1,4C j ij i I 
i LL 3
Led by tourism, we have more than tripled exports of
services. We export nearly four times the val~ ue of
manufactures we did in 1980.
The meazures introduced in our One Niation Statement in
February will build upon these earliñ er ref orms and entrench
the trend towards a more open and outward looking economy,
while at thie same time stimulating growth.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the change in your own economy has
been no les3 dramatic or fundamental. The economic
transformation of Indonesia over the last 20 years has been
nothing short of astonishing.
Between 1966 and 1991, your economy expanded 450 per cent.
Over the last few years growth has averaged around 7 per
cent and growth rates of 5 to 6 per cent are expected to the
end of the century.
Indonesia has gone from a commodity-based economy to on6
geared to industrial expansion and manufacturing exports.
Through a sound policy of encouraging foreign investment,
bureaucratic reform, financial deregulation, support for
manufacturing, and lifting of trade barriers, you have
emerged as a dynamic and competitive economic force.
Today, our very different countries are changing in ways
which will enable us to find much more ' common ground the
economies of Australia and Indonesia are beginning to
complement each other.
Certainly, I see the strengthening and broadening economic
relationship between our two countries * as representing the
direction-in which the AuStralian economy must go.
Towards the world. Toward greater diversity in our exports.
Above all, toward stronger connections with our region.
The developing economic relation with Indonesia shows the
way we must go.
our exports to Indonesia are rapidly increasing, as are our
imports from Indonesia.
The trade is also demonstrating greater diversity, with
Indonesia manufactured goods joining timber and petroleum in
sales to Australia, and Australians construction, banking,
telecommunication, engineering and legal services joining
wheat and metals in our exports to Indonesia.
Manufactured goods, machinery, computers, telecommuunications
products, power generation equipment and motor vehicle* have
all grown to form a larger proportion of Australia's exports
to Indonesia. H pf-IlL, : Uv i1o ul I r 
I L 4 H I. 1 C * U H i~ J i r
4.
Ten years ago, Australian exports to Indonesia totalled
$ 356 million.
Today they are worth nearly $ 1.5 billion.
Over the last two years imports from Indonesia have nearly
doubled.
Just as trade has grown in recent years, invest" Ont between
Australia and Indonesia has also diversified and
consolidated. Australia is now the Sth largest foreign investor in
Indonesia, accounting for about billion in assets.
There are more than 120 Australian companies with
Significant interests in Indonesia. In the areas of coal
mining, and to a lesser extent gold mining, Australia is the
dominant source of investment.
The number of companies investing in manufacturing
industries is also rapidly increasing.
In services too, such as business and engineering
consultancy, Australian companies are becoming a significant
presence. Ladies and gentlemen, one area which has enormous economic
potential for both our countries and where Australia is
already making a significant contribution is right here in
East Java.
For many years novr, Australia's development assistance
program in Indonesia has had a strong focus on the special
needs of eastern Indonesia,
East Java is the fastest growing commercial area in
Indonesia. Already home to key agricultural industries, it
is quickly becoming a major industrial and manufacturing
region with activity in petrochemicals, shipbuilding,
cement, metal processing, machine tools, and
pharmaceuticals. The manufacturing sector has already attracted significant
foreign investment, including from Australia. Ready-mix
concrete, plasterboard, roofing tiles and medical products
are areas in which~ Australian companies have existing or
planned investments.
Infrastructure development, such as in natural gas
production and processing and bulk water supply, is also a
major area for investment, and one in which Australian
companies are already or potentially involved.
Tourism 13 a growth area, as is evidenced by the presence of
aQNTAS office here in Surabaya. 
24. Apr. 92 16: 09 No. 017
S
Now Australian business is beginning to realise the
potential of the area in such fields as dryland farming,
tourism, mining and manufacturing.
Through your introduction of special tax incentives to
encourage foreign investment in eastern Indonesia, this
potential can be more easily realised.
Ladies and gentlemen, as our commercial relationship
continues to grow, institutional arrangements will need to
be developed to manage the relationship at all levels.
On thio visit we have concluded five important bilateral
agreements ranging from taxation to science and technology
collaboration. -I
We have agreed in principle to conclude four other
agreements from investment protection to maritime
boundaries.
And most significantly, we have agreed to explore the idea
of setting up a regular ministerial meeting, chaired by our
foreign ministers, and including economic ministers, which
will give a more coherent framework to the multitude of
ministerial exchanges now taking place.
Just as such institutional arrangements can assist bilateral
commerce, regional institutions can and do play a critical
role in regional economic development.
in the regional sphere, Indonesia's active participation in
ASEAN and APEC have been crucial in ensuring the success of
these forums.
since its formation in 1967, ASEAN has proven its value as a
vehicle for economic growth in the region. The cohesion and
stability it has provided has enabled Australian business to
develop links with the region with confidence.
Today, the fastest area of growth of Australia's exports is
to the ASEAN Group. It has now displaced the EC as our
secon? lairges-t export market after North-East Asia.
As the largest member of ASEAN, Indonesia has played a
pivotal role in providing clear direction and stability
within ASEAN itself.
Jutt as ASEAN has provided the basiS for long-term growth
and stability in South-EaSt Asia, APEC will, I believe, form
the foundation for economic cooperation throughout the Asia
Pacific region. The 15 members of the APEC group accounts
for half the world'a GDP and 40% of world trade.
APEC provides us with the first ever opportunity to harness
and direct the powerful economic forces at work around the
Pacific Rim. TEL 
iLL Z4.. rip' jz it IO. U r. UO/
6
By bringing Japan and the US, the two most powerful
economies in the Pacific, together with the other economies
of the Pacific Rim, APEC can work to ensure that these
forces develop to the benefit of Us all and to the benefit
of the open, multilateral trading system which has
underpined the economic dynamism of the region.
Indonesia's response to the APEC initiative has been one of
the most positive and construtlv-e of all the APEC nations.
Your strong endorsement of APEC at the recent ASEAN Summit,
and your offer to host the 1994 APEC Ministerial Meeting,
signal your continuing commitment to this very important
initiative. In the multilateral sphere, Indonesia and Australia have
worked together in the Cairns Group in suppbrt of a
successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of negotiations
in the GATT.
As we have discussed with our Indonesian hosts, Australia
and Indonesia are now concerned that a protracted stalemate
in negotiations may jeopardise a successful outcome of the
Round. The open trading system has been a key factor in the growth
of countries liXe Indonesia and Australia, and it is
important that the major economies continue to work to
strengthen and develop wurld trade.
Ladies and gentlemen, Australia is changing. Our economy is
emerging from a recession in more competitive shape than it
has ever been.
We are casting aside the baggage of the past and directing
our energies towards greater integration with our region.
And within this region we look especially to our
relationship with Indonesia our largest and most important
neighbour as a material and symbolic example of the way
our two countries are resolving themselves for the 21st
century. TnTQ1. P. P* 



P. M~ s FE. OFFICE 2. Apr. 92 9: 48 No. O05 F. 0I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THL PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, IO
PNG OFFICIAL DINNER, PORT MORESBY
7: 35PM FRIDAY, 24 APRIL 1992
Thank you for inviting me here. I am very grateful for the
welcome you have given me, and for the opportunity to
speak to you tonight.
It is 20 years since I first v4sited Papua New Guinea. I
was an Opposition backbencher in the entourage of an
Australian leader who was to leave his mark on the history
of both our countries, Edward Gough Whitlam.
Cough Whitlam was one of those Australians Who had no
difficulty rec6nciling his love of classical European
civilisation and institutions, with a passionate
Australian nationalism and genuine excitement at the
prospect of the countries of this region emerging Into the
world independent and strong.
one of the places he was excited about, of course, was
Papua New Guinea. He was a great believer in this country
and so much that you have done since independence
Justifies his faith.
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to visit Papua
New Guinea again.
The occasion of this visit, the commemoration of the
sacrifices made by our countrymen and women during the PNC
campaign of World War II, adds to the privilege.
Australia and Papua New Guinea are close neighbours,
enduring friends and partners involved in and benefiting
from the world's most dynamic region.
During the past decade, the economies of North and Southeast
Asia have been expanding at approximately twice the
world average.
Australia and Papua New Guinea are strategically
positioned at the southern reach of this dynamic Asia-
Pacific region.
We both know that we must seize the opportunity. 
F FF: E2F5~ .3 ARpr .92 9.: 4 tl . C'Cii F'. CJ0"
2
We both know that we Must engage in the region as never
before. This is why, on my first overseas tour as Prime minister,
I AM Visiting Indonesia and Papua New Guinea.
In Indonesia my object was to restore and enliven the
relationship with a close neighbour which is destined to
play an increasingly dynamic role in the region and the
world, It soems to me that. the degree of our success in building
bridges into Asia and the broader Asia-Pacific might will
be the measure by which future generations will Judge us.
That is Why I say strengthening our regional linkages,
initiating dialogue, multiplying our common interests
through widening our trading relationships these
mneasures will stay true to the interests of the new
generations of Australians.
It will be hard work. it will require imagination and
tenacity. There will be setbacks.
This is an historic opportunity and that for any~
responsible government is the same thing as a necessity.
Like the region around us, both Papua New Guinea and
Australia have changed profoundly since 1975, when you
became independent.
Papua NeJw Guinea has made remarkable progress in building
a nation. You have hold fast to the principles of
parliamentary democracy, social justice and human rights,
which you established for yourselves under your
consti tut ion.
It i* a tribute to thie people of Papua New Guinea, that
the democratic process, in which you are now engaged
again, remains so vigorous and competitive.
But even with your relatively Short constitutional
history, you, like othors of us, have recognised that
constitutions can always be improved. You have
introduced important constitutional reforms designed to
make Papua NeW Guinea's democracy work More effectively.
Your economy has grown and diversified. And you have
taken some difficult decisions under your structural
adjustment program to make your economy more competitive
and to help it cope with the stresses imposed by the
consequence of the Bougainville rebellion.
As a result, real GDP grow by 9 per cent in 1991, an
impressive achievement by any measure.
On the Bougainville situation, I should restate here 
Frfs FRE"-i:' OFF ICE c. ipr 92 9 4 tN o. 0C' 55'. CI3
Auttralia's fi. rm belief that the problems on that island,
which is an integral part of Papua Now Guinea, can only be
reeolved by Papua New Guineans themselves.
We hope that that resolution will be achieved peacefully,
because it is only through discussion that reconciliation
Can take place.
Australia has made it clear that we are willing to help
with the reconstruction that will be needed on
Bougainville. In the meantime we have been glad to assist with the
provision of urgently needed medical supplies. We
believe it is important that humanitarian asgistance
continue to reach the people of Bougainville. We want to
worX with the P'apua Now Guinea government to facilitate
such help.
Like Papua New Guinea, Au~ jtralial too, has changed
greatly since you bu~ came independent.
We have shaken off our cultural and 4tconornic torpor.
We have had to undergo sometimes painful economic
restructuring. we have had to transform our industrial and labour
practices.
We have had to overcome our complacency and our
prejudices, and to recast our view of the world and
ourse lves.
Such fundamental changes have had profound implications,
not only for the structure and competitiveness of the
Australian economy, but for the way we engage with our
neighbours. There is perhaps no more telling example of this than the
changing nature of ) Xustralia's relationship with Papua New
Guinea.-That relationship is no longer based on the persistence of
old ties with the colonial past. It is based instead on
the fundamental principles of political and economic
sovereignty and mutual respect articulated in the 1987
Joint Declaration of Principles.
Since the signing of the Joint Declaration of Principles,
our two countries have reached other agreements on trade
and comiiercial relations, security co-operation and
development assistance.
All these agreements share a commn theme: they recognise
the right and need for Papua N4ew Guinea to ta)~ e
responsibility for its own problems, with its own
resources, while signalling Australia's tustained 
06 2732923
FFE$$ OFFICE 25 Rp r 99~: S ; D-t4 o0 0 PF. 1
4
commuTitment to assisting in the development of Papua New
Guinea's national self-reliance.
One Cf the relationship's strengths is the " habit of
contact" which has developed between us.
Prime Minister* Namaliu has visited Australia twice since
taking off ice, and I am pleased to have so early an
opportunity to visit Papua New Guinea.
The Australia-Papua New Guinea Ministerial Forum has
becom~ e a valuable mechanism for contact between Ministers.
Its broadening agenda now covers regional and bilateral
economic relations, development co-operation, internal and
regional security and the environment.
Our respective Parliaments hiave worked to develop contacts
anld exchanges.
But parliamentary, mininterial even Prime Ministerial
contact is not the sole measure of a relationship.
Contact between Australia and Papua New Guinea has most
importantly been a story of contract between people.
That contact has left on both sides a most important
legacy of understandSng and goodwill.
As I began by saying, one particular aspect of that legacy
is the main reason I am here. I have come to mark the
achievements of Australia's forces in Papua New Guinea
durin7 World War Two, and of the Papua New Guineans, both
in uniform and out, who assisted them.
That asbistance hats left an enduring mark on our
relationship. Quite literally, Papuians and New Guineans
helped to save Australia in 1942.
The Australian and PNG media have recently carried reports
about unresolved compcensation claims for some of the PNG
carriers who assisted Australian forces in the PNG
campaign. I under~ tand that. this issue was discussed by the
Australian~ and PNG Governments during the 1980s.
Australia agreed with the PHO proposal that the PNG
Government be responsible for handling any outstanding
claims. The Australian Government, therefore, feels it should not
intrude unilaterally into this issue. At the same time,
considering the invaluable contribution the PNG carriers
made to tho war effort, we are not happy if genuine claims
for compensation have not been dealt with.
We suggest the best approach Is for the P140 Government to
advise us if there are any outstanding aspects of this
issue that we need to reconsider together. 
r . M's FPRESS OFFICE 25 Apr .92-9i tNCoJ. C3L5 F. C'
The Australian Government's basic position is that all
worthy claims for compensation should be treated
Sympathatically on their Perits.
I will be discussing this issue with Prime Minister
N&amp; maliu tomorrow.
Ladies and gentlemen, even now, over 11,000 Australians
live and work in Papua New Guinea, helping to contribute,
like many before them, to Papua New Guinea's development.
Many Papua New Guineans, including Several ministers in
the present Cabinet, have received part of their education
and training in Australia.
This people-to-people contact underpinis an expanding
economic partnership. Two-way trade in 1991 reached a
record $ 1.7 billion, or more than 1.2 billion kina. This.
was a 48 per cent incroase over the preceding year. Our
trade is now roughly in balance.
Investment is another im~ portant dimenuion of the economic
partnership. Australian investment in Papua New Guinea
now exceeds $ 1.5 billion. A further $ 3 billion in
investment is in prospect over the next 5 years.
Continued economic growth in Papua New Guinea will bring a
further expansion of two-way trade as the demand for
imports to underpin productive investment accelerates.
T believe there is a need to look again at the framework
of our bilateral economic relationship.
Although partially revised in 1991, the Papua New Guinea-
Australia Trade and Commercial Relations Agreement of 1977
has become increasingly limited and anachronistic. We
need to examine wider, more reciprocal arrangements which
would more accurately raflect the changing nature of our
economic relationship and the economic realities of our
region. Thre n ore. Eressin? groblem for Papua New Quinea
GIORLI~ ULE~ ihU LII U alJilii a
it so well, Prime Minister, without security, economic
development cannot proceed, and without development,
security cannot be guaranteed.
Austral. ia remains committed tv security and defence cooperation
with Papua New Guinea. The Agreed Statement on
Security Co-operation signed last year by Prime Minister
Hawke underscores that commitment.
out more work needa to be done Le ensure this cooperation
is fully effective. In particular. Papua New Guinea needs
to develop an integrated and comprehensive approach to
security force reform and rosource allocation.
The nature of Austraulia's development assistance to Papua
Now Guinea is also evolving. 
ut16 c*. iqr C4 1 tic * K00i. F * CIF
F, . i's FEiOFFICE
Our two Covarnments are agreed that by the year 2000, all
Australian aid currently worth around $ 300 Million a
year will be jointly programmed to meet specific needs.
Our aid program~ will assist Papua New Guinea develop
effective and long-lasting solutions to its problems. it
is designed to help you strengthen the institutions upon
which your country's future depends.
Ultimately, however, the solutions will have to be your
Own.
A self-reliant Papua New Guinea will be better placed to
realise its aspirations and potential as a nation.
We in Australia are confident that the people of Papua New
Guinea have the will and the capabilities to meet the
challenges before you. Those challenges will demand
adaptability, patience, careful planning and
determination. But your country has already demonstrated
all those qualities.
Augtraliant, to an unprecedented degree, have begun to see
their interests and their future as lying in the region.
Papua N~ ew Guineans are doing the same.
Without abandoning your l. inks to the South Pacific, you
have become an observer at ASEAN meetings. You have
consolidated a close relationship with our mutual
neighbour, Indonesia. Your economic ties with Asia are
becoming closer.
You are well placed to act as a successful bridge between
ASEAN and the South Pacific Forum.
I am convinced that neither of us need fear the effects of
greater engagement with the region around us.
The snore we are able to open up our economies, and our
minds, to the outside world, the 1better and more rewarding
will be the quality of our own enduring links. 


Today marks the 77th anniversary of the most famous battle in Australia's history.
And in New Zealand's history.
On this day through all those years we have repeated the words "Lest we forget".
And we have not forgotten.
The message has always been - remember their bravery and sacrifice, their willingness to lay down their lives for their country, and for their friends.
Gallipoli and the history of the Australian nation are indissoluble. It is inscribed in legend.&nbsp;
The legend was cemented in the terrible battles in Europe and the Middle East between 1915 and 1918.
It was sustained between the wars when the monuments were built and the rituals of the nation born at Gallipoli were defined.
The spirit of Anzac became the canon of Australian life: the ideals to which we aspired, the values by which we lived.&nbsp;
The legend was re-visited in 1939 when Australian troops again left for the Middle East, again fought heroically, again with New Zealanders&nbsp; - and again, some might say, too often against the odds.
Sixty thousand young Australians died in the First World War; 30,000 in the Second.
The great majority of them lie buried on the other side of the world.&nbsp; In France and Belgium, Libya, Syria, Turkey, Greece, Crete.
They also lie in Singapore and Malaysia, Burma, Borneo and other countries of this region, including of course, Papua New Guinea.
Countless others died prematurely as a result of war, or had their lives and the lives of their families scarred by war.
War has shaped Australia's history in the twentieth century like nothing else.&nbsp; Shaped and twisted it.
At times it has stifled it.
We will continue to hold the memory of those who served and died as inextinguishable and sacred.
We will continue to remind ourselves - "Lest We Forget".
Legends bind nations together. They define us to ourselves.
But they should not stifle us.&nbsp; They should not constrain our growth, or restrict us when we have to change.
Anzac is a commemoration of the most universal human values.
But it does not confer on us a duty to see that the world stands still.
The Australians who went to two World Wars, or to Korea, Malaya, Vietnam, went to secure a place in the world for their country and its ideals.
The world moves on. Our country must move with it.
Today I think we should remember that.
Today we would do well to remember the two great dramas which were played out fifty years ago.
We all should know the story better than we do.
We should remember not only the battles which were fought here in Papua New Guinea, or in Malaya, or at El Alamein, Tobruk, or Greece and Crete: or those who suffered and died in prison camps in Singapore, Burma and elsewhere in the world.
We should remember all those, but we should also remember the battle fought out in Canberra and London and Washington - for in large part it was that battle which made success here in Papua New Guinea possible.
In that battle John Curtin defied those people Australia had never before defied.
He insisted to his counterparts in London and Washington - his friends, our friends - that Australian troops then serving in the Middle East should return home and defend Australia.
Shortly after, he defied them again.&nbsp; And he defied those in Australia who criticised him for his defiance - those who said it was a great blunder to defy the British and Americans.
He defied them, and insisted that the returning troops not be diverted to Burma, but come home and fight the Battle for Australia.
John Curtin was right.
Just as he was right when he declared that in the hour of crisis, after the fall of Singapore, Australia looked to the United States - free, he said "of any pangs as to our traditional links of kinship with the United Kingdom."
"We know that Australia can go and Britain still hold on", he said. "We are therefore determined that Australia shall not go.."
In doing this he took the Anzac legend to mean that Australia came first - that whatever the claims of Empire on the loyalty of those who died in the Great War, the pre-eminent claim had been Australia's.
The Australians who served here in Papua New Guinea fought and died, not in the defence of the old world, but the new world.&nbsp; Their world.
They died in defence of Australia and the civilisation and values which had grown up there.
That is why it might be said that, for Australians, the battles in Papua New Guinea were the most important ever fought.
They were fought in the most terrible circumstances. One correspondent wrote:&nbsp; "Surely no war was ever fought under worse conditions than these. Surely no war has ever demanded more of a man in fortitude."
They were fought by young men with no experience of jungle warfare. By the very young men of the militia with no experience of war at all.
They were fought by airmen of outstanding courage, skill and dedication.
They were fought against a seasoned, skilful and fanatical enemy.
At Milne Bay the Australians inflicted on the Japanese their first defeat on land.&nbsp;
Sir William Slim, who was then commanding the 14th Army in Burma, wrote:&nbsp; "It was Australian soldiers who first broke the spell of invincibility of the Japanese army: those of us who were in Burma have cause to remember."
On the Kokoda Trail it was again the young and inexperienced militia men - this time of the 39th and 53rd battalions - later reinforced with soldiers of the 7th Division, who fought gallantly - and eventually won.
When it seemed that Papua New Guinea would fall, when it seemed it would be another Singapore, another Rabaul, these troops gallantly held out and finally drove the enemy back to the sea.
These were the heroic days of Australia's history.
It would be wrong to let this day pass without paying tribute to the people of other countries whose bravery and selflessness helped win the day - including the British and other Commonwealth servicemen and women who fought in the war against Japan.
While Australians fought the enemy here in Papua New Guinea, the United States forces held them out at sea and on Guadalcanal.&nbsp;
What they did then created the enduring bond between Australia and the United States.
Today we must also pay tribute to the servicemen of Papua&nbsp; New Guinea who fought and died under Australian command.
And, perhaps above all, we should honour and express our profound admiration for the Papua New Guinean carriers whose stalwart support was crucial to the final victory.
The support they gave to Australian soldiers, the terrible conditions and dangers they endured with the soldiers, the illness, injury and death many of them suffered, constitutes one of the great humane gestures of the War - perhaps the great humane gesture of our history.
It has never been forgotten, and never will be forgotten. It is the best possible reminder that these battles were fought, not for the glory of war, but for humanity.
And it, too, created an enduring bond - between Papua New Guinea and Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, these days there is a relatively new memorial to the Anzac legend in Australia.
Sitting on the hill near the new Parliament House, it is a modest monument inscribed with these words: "Look around you - these are the things they believed in."
In the end they believed in Australia - in the democracy they had built, in the life they had made there, and the future they believed their country held.
Not all generations are called on to risk and sacrifice their lives for their beliefs - but all generations need to believe.
On this Anzac Day it seems appropriate to remind ourselves of our responsibility to renew that faith and loyalty.
There can be no better way, surely, to honour those who so gallantly fought and died here.



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESENTATION OF AUSTRALIA PRIZE, GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, MONDAY, 27 APRIL 1992
It gives me great pleasure to host this second presentation
of the Australia Prize.
The Australia Prize honours outstanding achievement in
science and technLology.
It honours the intelligent, commercial application of
science to develop the technology essential to create wealth
and human welfare.
It celebrates Australia's place in the world as an advanced
and enlightened nation.
We Australians are inclined to underestimate our
achievements in science and technology or, rather, we do
not know enough about them.
We learnt at school that innovation and invention were
essential to our success in conquering the land and the
great distances which separate us from the rest of the
world. So we came away knowing about the MacArthurs' development of
Merino sheep, Farrer' s experiments with wheat, MacKay's
Harvester, Mort's development of refrigeration, the stump
jump plough and myxomatosis.
There was a certain romance to these developments by virtue
of their being part of the rural pioneering legend of
Australia. They were presented to us as principal reasons for our
success in building a good society here.
Our successes in industrial technology have not attracted
the same attention.
Nor have our efforts in the field in which tonight's awards
are made physical sciences related to mining or processing 6441 
Nor have our efforts in the field in which tonight's awards
are made physical sciences related to mining or processing
of mineral resources.
It is safe to say that very few Australians are aware of the
Isasmelt process for base metals which Mt Isa Mines and the
CSIRO developed.
It's doubtful if many know about CRA's technology for the
rapid sorting of diamonds, or the " Jameson cell" flotation
process for the separation of minerals.
These technologies are not well known, and the effort and
ingenuity that went into them are not widely acknowledged.
Yet these sorts of successes in research and development are
as vital to our future as any of the legendary ploughs and
wheat breeds were.
So in presenting the Australia Prize tonight we hope that,
over and above reward and acknowledgment for the winners, we
are signalling recognition for all the workers in this field
past and present.
You will be aware that last week I was in Indonesia.
I went there to consolidate our relationship and pave the
way for a great expansion of our economic relationship.
The opportunities are enormous we are talking about a
rapidly developing, resource rich country of 180 million
people.
We have much of the technology, the processes and the
experience Indonesia and the wider South-east Asian region
needs.
The application of our skills in these countries has more
than a commercial significance, of course. Very often it
means that people there are healthier and better fed and
housed, that they have better lives and more
opportunities. Tonight I can say to the winners of the Australia Prize, and
all those others engaged in the field the work you do is
at the very heart of our future in the region and in the
world. And, of course, what we do there will determine, to a very
large extent, the sort of the society we can build here.
In a real sense our solutions to the problem of
unemployment, our ability to sustain our way of life and our
standard of living, depend on our success in Asia and
Pacific and our success there depends largely on our
scientific and technological skills and the selling of them.
6442 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Australia Prize is an
international award and this year it demonstrates that our
science and technology are among the best in the world.
The four winners in this year's field have put Australia in
a position of world leadership in developing and making
commercial on-line instrumentation in the coal industry.
The work of tonight's winners is a contemporary example of
the impressive record of Australians in mining and mineral
processing technologies.
For in fact much of the innovation in the mining industry
worldwide is the result of the work of Australian
scientists, technologists and engineers.
It is important that this aspect of ' Australian development
be more generally known, to provide perspective gn the
benefits available from science an * d technology and to
establish an environment that nutures intellectual
achievement. We need to build on our past achievements. In particular,
we must improve our commercial acumen.
We must sharpen our ability to develop Australian ideas and
adapt the ideas of others to gain competitive advantage.
The importance of the Australian Prize is that it places
Australian science in this international context.
Globalisation of technology is not just a concept, but an
important part of Australia's new outward looking culture.
Science and technology can be of great benefit to Australia.
They hold the key to solving many economic, social, medical
and environmental problems.
The Government has recognised this, and is committed to
maintaining a vigorous science and technology system.
Our initiatives in stimulating industrial R&amp; D, strengthening
the public sector research base and enhancing linkages
between researchers and research users, are directed to
providing the strong and vital innovative capacity that is
needed for sustained economic growth.
It is a mark of this commitment that Government support for
science and innovation has grown by 29 per cent in real
terms since 1982-83.
The Australia Prize is a small but important part of this
support, and the work of tonight's winners a tribute to the
national science effort.
I would like to record the Government's gratitude to the
Australian Prize a Committee. 6443 
4
This panel of distinguished Australians has again brought
wide knowledge and experience to bear on a challenging task.
Our Master of Ceremonies, Sir Rupert Myers, has chaired the
Committee for the last two years.
Ladies and gentlemen, tonight we honour Australian
endeavour. We congratulate the winners individually and
collectively for their outstanding achievements.
They are achievements of which Australian should be proud.
It is equally true that we should be grateful and I hope,
inspired.
6444
zr; e r; u~ i~ ce~ b~ 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN' S TV FOUNDATION " LIFT-OFF"
PARLIAMENT HOUSE WEDNESDAY, 29 APRIL 1992
1 am delighted to be asked to launch what is a marvellous
venture in every regard.
Lift-Off is the product of a great initiative: from the
Australian Children's Television Foundation under the inspired
leadership of Patricia Edgar..
Patricia Edgar has made an unequaled contribution to
children's television and children'q education in this country
and I take this opportunity to congratulate and thank her.
In all she has done, of course, she has also made a great
contribution to Australia.
There are many others I should mention.
The late Robert Holmes a Court made a vital initial
investment. Janet Holmes a Court has played a major role. So
has Don Edgar odf the National Outreach Committee.
Yet, in a sense, it would be wrong to stress the contribution
of any individuals for the outstanding feature of this
enterprise is its cooperative nature.
The ABC, the Film Finance Corporation, Penguin Books, Octopus
Publishing, Text Media; various education Ministries and other
educational bodies; teachers from right across the curriculum
and curricula des'. gners, experts in children's education and
child psychology; writers, directors and technicians; actors,
musicians, mimics, puppet-makers and puppeteers.
There is an exLraordinary boldness and breadth to the
conception, and plainly great skill in the execution.
if the children who watch Lift-Off, and read the Lift-Off
spin-offCs, develop the same skills of communication,
cooperation and execution as producers have displayed, we will
really be able to say that this country is pretty clever.
Among other things, the project suggests to me what we are
collecLively capable of I think, almost as much as the
program itself, we are celebrating that today. 
ILL 2
Lift-off also suggests what television is capable of which
is to say much more than we and our children are generally
given. I think most of us feel that, despite some illustrious
exceptions, television has never really lived up to its great
promise as a medium of human growth and enlightenment.
Our children, particularly, deserve much more than they are
given in the way of intellectual stimulation.
So, quite frankly, do we adults both as consumers of adult
entertainment, and as parents.
Parents in the contemporary environment need whatever help
they can get with the task of parenting.'
This is an extraordinarily complex, largely artificial,
rapidly changing world.
The information we anO our children are required to absorb is
infinitely greater, more complex, and, In many senses, more
elusive and ephemeral than it was a generation ago or half a
generation 890.
The need for new channels of learning, over and above parents
and schools, seems to me to be greater than it has ever been
before. The need to develop the capacities for learning and creativity
and the ability to enjoy them has never been greater.
Television is one obvious answer. But it has been for forty
years. The truth is, television, which first presented itself as such
a marvellous new learning medium, has always been an
infuriating mixture of cause and cure.
Lift-Off is most definitely in the Category of cure.
I am also excited by it for this reason: it is a two way
window on the world.
it means that we will go to the world as well as having the
world come to us.
We are good at these sorts of things.
Perhaps not enough Australians know it but we are good at
education. We export it.
We are good at making films and television; good at
entertainment; good at the arts. We export all those things
too. P 114 N 0 U U 0 UZ 
3
We are also good at looking after those who need looking
after. Not perfect by a long shot, but better than most.
No Australians are more deserving of our attention meaning
the investment of money, energy and expertise than our
children. That is why Lift-Off is a truly great Australian venture. I
congratulate all those who have been associated with it, and
on behalf of all Australians, wish themi all the success the
project deserves.
Thank you. 



TEL: 4. May. 92 11: U9 NO. UU4 r '-Ul/
REMARKS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
BATTLE OF THE CORAL SEA COMMIEMORATION, TOWN HALL, SYDNEY,
2 MAY 1992
This week we celebrate the Battle of the Coral Sea the
first battle of the Pacific War in which the enem~ y suffered
a strategic setback, the first to check the tide of his
advance, the first to give us respite.
Because it restrained Japanese military expansion in our
region, and helped make possible further victories in Papua
New Guinea, the Solomon Islands and at Midway, the Battle of
the Coral Sea was a turning point in the War and in our
history. Because it saw Americans and Australians joined in common
purpose, defending not only Australia and the region but the
ideals we share, it was a turning point in our relationship.
The Battle of the Coral Sea was the first test of our
alliance. The bravery and sacrifice of our sailors and
airmen gave it the strength to last.
Fifty years later that bond endures, the friendship is as
strong as ever.
We owe a great deal to the American, Australian and allied
servicemen who fought in the Battle Of the Coral Sea.
In particular we owe much to the United States, then and
still, the greatest liberal democracy in the world.
The might of the US Navy and the courage of American and
Australian fighting men won the day. Australians have never
forgotten, never ceased to express their gratitude.
But in this coming week it should not be so much the might
of arms we celebrate, as the might of an idea.
I mean the idea of freedom. The idea of democracy.
That, I think, is what the Battle of the Coral Sea should
mean to us now. 
TEL: 4. May. 92 11: 09 NO. 004 P. 02/ 0
2
if we are properly to honour those who fought and died, we*
must stay true to those liberal democratic principles which
they defended, true to the ideals of justice and fairness,
true to their faith in what they had built at home and what
they aspired to build for their children.
True to the humane principles at the root of our
democracies. In welcoming you back to our country, Secretary Cheney, you
may be sure that we Australians have rnot forgotten either
the debt we owe, or the principles which were so bravely
defended. You and Dr Cheney, all those Americans on board the ships of
the US fleet, and all those who are visiting Australia to
join in these great celebrations, may be assured of a very
warm welcome.
We have looked forward to your coming. We look forward to
your stay, and trust that it will be a very happy one.
Thank you 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING MP
CORAL SEA RECEPTION, GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
4 MAY 1992
It is my great privilege tonight to host this reception in
honour of those American and Australian servicemen and
women whose courage and sacrifice fifty years ago did so
much to keep us free.
The Battle of the Coral Sea was the first major check to
Japanese miiay expansion in our region. It forced a
seemingly invincible enemy to rethink and reconstruct
their plans for domination of the area.
Plans which, after the battles of New Guinea, the Solomon
Islands and Midway they were forced to abandon altogether.
in stemming the tide of Japanese aggression, the Battle of
the Coral Sea had great consequences for the war.
It also had great consequences for the peace: for it
forged a bond between Australia and the United States
which will endure for as long as the cause of democracy
endures with us.
The bond has its most obvious manifestation in the
alliance between our countries.
The war in the Pacific was the foundation of that
alliance. But its resilience derives from more then our experience
of World War II.
It derives principally from our long friendship.
Americans have been coming here for 200 years.
They came to trade in the earliest days of European
settlement. In 1840 the united States Exploring Expedition
came in the course of their remarkable scientific survey
of the Pacific. 
in 1908 the Great White Fleet came and received a
stupendous welcome.
Austra liens have always recognised something of themselves
in Americans as well they might.
We are both countries of the New World as one great
Australian patriot of a much less complex age exclaimed
Christopher Columbus and James Cook were the saviours of
mankind. These days we don't imagine ourselves, or even the two
explorers, in such exalted terms.
But we do remainz countries whose strength has been the
strength of those who not only imagined a better life, but
who had the courage to seek it.
And who sought it and made it in the New World, in our
countries. We both derive our strength from individual effort and
initiative.
We derive it therefore by enshrining those values which
encourage and protect the rights and opportunities of
individuals I mean tolerance, freedom and justice.
Our strength, and the strength of our alliance, is derived
from our shared liberal, democratic and humane values.
These remain, I believe, our common aspirations: they
are, I have no doubt, our areatast aspirations.
It follows that It is our common duty, our duty to the
heroes of the Coral Sea, to see that those values are not
eroded. Nor can we say that we have fulfilled our duty, if we fail
to create in this generation faith and hope of the kind
which inspired those men and women of 1942 to risk
everything for the cause of their countries.
That is why it is not enough on this fiftieth anniversary
of the battles which decided our future, to merely pay
homage to the past we will most truly honour the Coral
Sea heroes when we find the ways to guarantee the future
of the next generation as they guaranteed ours.
if we are to r. eiuain countries of hope and faith, it seems
to me that we must be countries of renewal. We must be
prepared to move on.
While taking care to preserve those great democratic
values and traditions on which our way of life is built,
and for which so ma~ ny fought and died, we must change. 
3
That is why Australia seeks a renewed sense of national
purpose. It is also why the Australian government now directs so
much of its attention to its economic transformation and
its trade and political focus to the Asia-Pacific region.
For us, it is the direction of the future: a rapidly
changing reality which Australians are now accommodating.
For the same reason Australia would like to see the United
States reaffirm its role in the region.
We would like to see a US institutional and investment
presence to match the trade and strategic one.
We think it would be in the Uinited States' interests, and
very much in the interests of the region, if the world's
greatest liberal democracy were integrated with Asia and
the Pacific to a degree at least equivalent to that
obtaining with Europe.
A greater US presence in the Pacific can on ly help the
region fulfill the promise of its name as an ocean of
peace and stability.
We would like to see the friendship so manifest fifty
years ago renewed and regenerated in this year of
cornmemioration and in the years to come.
I take this opportunity to welcome Secretary Cheney and Dr
Cheney to Canberra.
And to welcome all of you particularly, of course, those
veterans to whom we are all so indebted and in whose
honour tonight's reception is held. 



EMBARGO: 8.00pm, 8 May 1992
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
PRIME MINISTER'S OLYMPIC DINNER
NATIONAL TENNIS CENTRE, MELBOURNE
FRIDAY, 8 MAY 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
It is my pleasure to be here tonight, to welcome all of you,
and to have the opportunity to briefly speak on behalf of a
great cause.
We have a love affair of long standing with the Olympic
Games. Perhaps a little conceitedly, we tend to see our Olympians
as a measure of ourselves.
It is therefore only just that as a nation we make a
collective contribution. It is not too much to ask that we
pay for the privilege of basking in the glory.
I think it's of some significance that the idea of the
modern Olympics was born in the 1890s, the decade in which
it might also be said that the idea of Australia was born.
The history of our nation and the history of the Olympics
have run remarkably parallel courses.
The 1890s saw the birth of the Commonwealth of Australia.
More than that, it was the period when Australian men and
women writers and artists, politicians, visionaries of all
kinds, ordinary Australians talked about what sort of
society they might build under the Southern Cross.
They celebrated what was here. The virtues of the great
outdoors. The light and the space of Australia and the
distinctly Australian way of life which evolved from that. 
They celebrated the pioneering virtues of mental and
physical endurance. And the great virtue of freedom.
They celebrated a distinctly Australian way of life.
They used words like " mateship", " solidarity", and a " fair
go for all" to describe what they believed were the
essential principles of life and what, therefore, were the
essential principles of a good society..
The ethos in Australia was different to that which evolved
in another pioneering society, the United States we
tempered their rugged individualism with a much stronger
belief in social equality. In the fair go.
The principles which evolved in this country in those years
sat very happily with the creed of the modern Olympics.
Australians, still in the pioneering phase of their history,
still in competition with nature, young and determined to
prove themselves against the world, relished the idea of
Olympic competition.
But there are other elements in the idea of the Olympics
which I think also appealed.
I mean the idea that the important thing is not to win but
to take part. That it's not the triumph but the struggle.
That it's not to have conquered but to have fought well.
Above all, the goal is to quote the Olympic Charter to
contribute to building a peaceful and better world by
educating youth through sport practised without
discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which
requires mutual understanding with a spirit of friendship,
solidarity and fair-play.
If you substitute the word " mateship" for the word
" friendship", you have some very familiar Australian values
there at the end.
Mateship, solidarity, fair-play.
It seems to me that the idea of Olympic competition as it
was originally conceived, and as the Charter still insists,
has much in common with our own traditional aspirations as a
nation. And perhaps that has something to do with the fact that
Australia is one of the very few countries in the world to
have participated in every Olympic Games since their
foundation in 1896.
It has something to do, perhaps, with all of us being here
tonight. From the very beginning, we have been highly successful
participants. 
Australians have always been famously good at sport.
Here in Melbourne in 1956 we did so well I suspect we
thought that there was none better in the world, and never
would be.
It has not been so easy since of course.
Other countries, in particular those in what used to be
called the Eastern Bloc, overwhelmed us until the awful
day came when we went to an Olympic Games and came back
without a medal.
Our collective misery after this might have produced a panic
reaction. We might have lost sight of the main game.
But twelve years later I think we can say with some pride
our response has been the right one to my mind the very
best one.
We responded with vigour and determination and, dare I say
it, money.
In 1980 the team which went to Moscow received a Federal
Government grant of $ 800,000.
The teams for Barcelona and Albertville received a Federal
grant of $ 10 million.
Before the govbernment came to office the sports budget was
$ 6 million.
In 1983 we increased that to $ 36 million.
Last year it was $ 68.4 million.
Let me say at once never, I believe, has Commonwealth
money been better spent.
Among many other things it enabled the completion of the
Australian Institute of Sport, which is now pretty well
universally considered to be the best of its kind in the
world. The money we have spent has enabled us to produce a whole
new generation of young Australians to dedicate themselves
to becoming world class athletes.
And many of them have become world class athletes and that
includes sports we never excelled before.
I think we can take the greatest pleasure from the fact that
we have broadened the base of sport in Australia. 
More Australians many more Australians play many more
sports than they ever did before.
There was a paradox about sporting performance in the past
those golden years when Betty Cuthbert was winning gold
medals on the track and Dawn Fraser swept all before her in
the pool, the years when our athletes turned in consistently
spectacular performances were years when most Australians
were spectacularly unfit.
Spending on sport has played a major part in seeing our
national health levels, particularly among children,
immeasurably improved.
As I said, we have broadened the base.
We have done this through a large and strategic
encouragement of sport of f the Commonwealth budget, which
has made sport and sporting facilities much more generally
available to Australians.
The establishment of the Australian Sports Commission has
been a boon.
At the same time Aussie Sports adapted traditional sports in
ways which allow everyone to take part.
These steps have not only broadened the sports base, but
improved the quality of our society.
They represent further progress towards the land of the fair
go towards both the Olympic ideal and the Australian
ideal.
Such achievements don't thrill us in the way that Betty
Cuthbert and Dawn Fraser did in Melbourne, or the sight of a
Keiran Perkins or a Tim Forsyth winning in Barcelona will.
But as a country we should be proud of these acheivements in
the last decade. They are very much in the tradition of the
Olympics. I was impressed by a speech Shane Innes formerly Shane
Gould gave at the Prime Minister's Women and Sports Awards
in March.
She spoke about the terrific pressure sports people were
under, especially because of the philosophy that says " if
you don't win, you lose."
True as that might be in politics, it is not true in the
Olympics. At least it should not be: though we all know that too often
too many countries, too many athletes, have taken that as
their motto. 
I think we can take great pride in the fact that it has
never been ours.
Every athlete wants to win every Australian wants to.
But the real aim is participation: it is to strive to do
your best.
In the Olympics it is very simple if your best on the day
is the best in the world, and only if it is, you win.
And your country will be proud-of you.
If it's not enough to win, you've achieved what few others
will ever achieve you've competed with the very best.
And your country this country will be proud of you.
I think we should work to keep those principles in
Australian sport.
They will serve our country very well. Our youth very well.
I think they're the key to a good society.
They will serve both the Olympic spirit very well, and the
spirit of Australia.
I am also one of those who believe that they will see their
benefits on the victory dais in Barcelona.
I thank you all for coming. For your contribution to what
is a great national cause.
And most of all I congratulate those members of the
Australian Olympic team whose hard work has earned them the
privilege of meeting and competing with the best athletes
from 170 nations of the world.
I wish you all the success and the fun you deserve. 



PRI M'E'MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.00 PM SATURDAY 16 MAY 1992
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
TO THE 35TH BIENNIAL CONFERENCE OF
THE ZIONIST FEDERATION OF AUSTRALIA
GRAND HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE 16 MAY 1992
AUSTRALIA. ISRAEL AND THE MIDDJLE. EAST
Thank you for inviting me to the 35th Biennial Conference of
the Zionist Federation of Australia.
I am very pleased to be here.
The fact that, as Acting Prime Minister, I spoke at your
last conference in 1990 can only be read as proof of the
constancy of both of us.
In those two years extraordinary events have occurred,
extraordinary changes have taken place.
So it is important that some things are constant.
It is important that we talk together and understand each
other. The Zionist Federation of Australia and the Australian
Government have enjoyed a long and mutually productive
relationship, and I havd no doubt that we will continue to
do so.
You can be sure that the Australian Government values the
Federation's opinion just as you can be sure of our belief
in the Federation's cause, Israel.
This is a commitment of long standing. It is as old as the
state of Israel, and it is as strong now as it was in the
beginning. -AIAW 
2
We are also well aware that very often issues of concern to
the Jewish community properly concern the Government on a
broader front.
We are conscious of the role the Zionist Federation plays in
keeping policy issues before the Government and the public
and we admire you for it.
The Jewish community, of course, has long been in the
forefront of Australian public life.
In business, academia, science, arts and letters, politics
and the law, the Jewish contribution to this place has been
remarkable. The Jewish connection goes back to the First Fleet. It is
present throughout the last two hundred years.
Shortlists of the greatest Australians of this century
always number among them two Jews John Monash and Isaac
Isaacs and others could easily be added.
Jewish Australians have played such a leading role in
shaping this country in a sense it is not appropriate to
distinguish them from other Australians.
Beyond their individual contributions, there is a broader
cultural influence I might even say, a civilising
influence. By that I mean not just the obvious contributions of Jewish
Australians to the life of the mind in Australia, or their
enrichment of Australian culture by the traditions they
brought with them.
I also mean the lesson in tolerance which, by their presence
here and their tragic history elsewhere, Jewish Australians
have taught Anglo and Celtic Australians.
As an outpost of British civilisation on the other side of
the world, Australia was always prey to xenophobia and
intolerance. Jewish Australians and intending Jewish settlers sometimes
felt that before the War.
During the War, when many of them were shamefully interned
as enemy aliens, they felt it even more strongly.
Australia was then a narrow, insular society.
It is therefore one of the more amazing features of our
recent history that we have become a nation which rightly
prides itself on the diversity of its cultures and the
tolerance of its outlook. 
I might say in parenthesis that, of all the lessons to be
learned from this transformation, none is more important
than the capacity of Australians to embrace change.
We are not as conservative as we sometimes think.
We have achieved more in nation-building than we sometimes
think. The Jewish community has played no small part in this in
widening our horizons and keeping our minds open.
They have been great settlers. Great Australians.
Their success underlines the wisdom of committing this
country to the principle of tolerance, and actively
supporting cultural and religious diversity.
I might say that I am very much of the view that, in
pursuing these multicultural policies, we should in no way
be compromising the principle of loyalty to Australia.
Both the vitality and the cohesion of this society
substantially depend on the right of all to express their
cultural heritage and to receive equal treatment, regardless
of race, culture or religion.
But its essential strength must derive from an overriding
loyalty to Australia, its interests and its liberal
democratic values.
In the end it is only this which will guarantee tolerance.
Our strongest weapon against discrimination and racial or
cultural vilification is the idea of Australia itself.
While recognising that a great deal remains to be done to
combat all the forms of exclusion which confront Australians
of non-English speaking backgrounds, and that Aboriginal
Australians still contend with discrimination, we can say
that we have made great progress.
Last year's Report of the National Inquiry into Racist
Violence showed that Australia's experience of racist
violence, intimidation and harassment is well below the
levels of most other countries.
But we must be vigilant, and we must actively promote the
cause here and abroad.
Domestically we are now examining possible terms of
legislation to proscribe acts of racial vilification.
Australia was the first country whose Parliament passed a
motion in support of rescinding the infamous United Nations
Resolution 3379_ which equated Zionism with racism. 
And Australia was a co-sponsor of the UN action which led to
the recission of the Resolution.
The overwhelming vote in the General Assembly to overturn
3379 sent a clear signal that the UN will not be used as a
vehicle for propaganda, or for the promulgation of doctrines
which are racist or unjust.
Our support for the UN action sent a signal that Australia
will express publicly its abhorrence of racism in all its
forms, and will actively support international action to
focus attention on the unacceptablity of racist doctrines.
The UN decision was particularly timely, in view of some
worrying political developments in Europe, where right-wing
groups with anti-Semitic platforms appear to be growing in
influence. I think it was also evidence that there is a new
determination in the international community to take a more
balanced approach to the problems of the Middle East.
Above all, recission of Resolution 3379 was a positive step
towards removing the obstacles to peace in the region.
Partly to mark the overthrow of the Resolution, we were
visited this year by Mr Simcha Dinitz, the Executive
Chairman of the World Zi-onist Federation and the man
responsible for organising the emigration of over 400,000
Jews from the former Soviet Union.
Mr Dinitz explained to me the importance of continuing
migration to Israel, bringing as it does highly trained
people to contribute to the development of Israeli society.
Naturally we found common ground on this we too depend on
migration to stimulate economic growth and add vitality to
society. Mr Dinitz and I also had the opportunity to frankly exchange
views on current developments in the Middle East peace
process. Ladies and gentlemen, it is important that the Australian
Government continue this valuable dialogue with the Zionist
movement. It is important for the specific reason that Israel is a
great cause.
It is important for the general reason that we recognise, as
a principle of tolerance, the right of ethnic groups to take
a close interest in the affairs of their cultural homelands.
We expect of all Australians an unequivocal loyalty to
Australia, but we do not expect the bonds of culture to be
cut, or old sympathies to disappear. 
We know that for Jewish Australians those bonds are very
strong. Israel is a cherished place, a natural focus of attention.
The Australian Government takes the view that these
sentiments are natural and, in any case, inescapable and
irreversible. We expect from Jewish Australians some active lobbying on
foreign policy issues, particularly now as Israel faces a
fluid international outlook and is reinvigorated by a
massive influx of Jews from the former Soviet Union.
We are attentive to your representations.
But of course we have to decide Australian policy on the
basis of a wider view of Australian interests.
As you are all aware, the Australian Labor Party has been
consistent in its commitment to Israel.
This dates from strong links between the Australian Jewish
community and Labor Party in office through the 1940s.
Like many others, my party saw the establishment of Israel
in moral terms. As international redress of the shameful
horror of the Holocaust.
The Chifley Government and Dr Evatt, as Chairman of the UN
Committee on Palestine, gave important political support to
Israel at the time of its creation at the United Nations.
Since Israel's achievement of independence and modern
statehood in 1948, Australia has been proud to support its
fundamental right to security, territorial integrity and its
freedom to pursue its national development in peace.
Let me assure you, in unequivocal terms that Australia
remains, as we have been over the past 44 years, wholly
committed to Israel's independence and territorial
integrity. In commenting on contemporary Australian policy towards the
Middle East, I should say at the outset that our approach is
tempered by realism.
Australia is not a major player in Middle Eastern affairs.
We do have significant trading interests in a number of
Middle Eastern countries.
The region lies across some of our principal communication
routes. Like other responsible countries, we are concerned at the
implications for global security of conflict in the region. 
But we do not have any illusions about our influence in the
region, or any pretensions to assume anything other than our
traditional support of international stability and efforts
to find a just and lasting peace.
Australia's policy towards the Israel-Arab dispute is a
balanced one which takes account of political realities in
the region.
As a non-participant, our broad policy objective is to
encourage all parties to recognise that long-term peace and
stability in the region can only be achieved through
negotiated settlement.
This must be based on mutual respect of the national
interests and aspirations of both Israelis and Arabs.
As we see it, Israel's independence and security are
ultimately dependent on its being able to find a stable
accommodation, a modus vivendi, with its Arab neighbours.
Australia is not only committed to Israel's security, but
also recognises the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination.
This allows, logically, for the possibility of their own
independent state if they so choose.
The Australian Government seeks to encourage, wherever and
whenever possible, dialogue which offers hope to all those,
Israelis and Arabs alike, who have a genuine desire to live
in peace.
Over the years, Australia has been willing to play its part
in a number of peacekeeping operations in the Middle East.
We have also been consistent in raising concerns about human
rights violations throughout the region.
During the two years since I spoke to you at your last
conference, there have been momentous changes in
international relations.
The end of the Cold War has provided an opportunity to
restructure international security arrangements, to define a
new approach towards collective security.
This was demonstrated forcefully by the international
community's response to Iraq's aggression against Kuwait.
For the first time, the United Nations functioned
effectively in enforcing international law, as it was
originally intended to do nearly half a century ago.
The unprecedented international consensus and cooperation in
responding to Iraq's invasion were only possible in the new
international climate created by the dissipation of the
superpower rivalry between East and West. 
For its part, Australia recognised the wider international
ramifications of Saddam Hussein's criminal actions.
I was part of the Australian Government's decision to make a
substantial commitment to the multinational naval force in
the Gulf.
During the Gulf War, Australians were horrified at the
indiscriminate targeting of Israel's civilian population by
Saddam Hussein.
The Australian Government expressed at the time its
condemnation of the brutality of the Scud missile attacks on
Israel, and of the crude attempt by Iraq to undermine
international efforts to expel it from Kuwait.
We were impressed most of all, however, by Israel's
restraint in not becoming involved in the conflict, despite
direct attacks on its territory and people.
The aftermath of the Gulf War has provided a rare
opportunity to start on the long road towards peace in the
Middle East.
The new environment of international rapprochement has
encouraged Israel and its Arab neighbours to take a fresh
look at the issues dividing them.
The Australian Government's sincere hope is that the Middle
East peace talks which began in Madrid last October will
enable the parties to the dispute to take full advantage of
this historic opportunity, and negotiate a truly just and
lasting peace.
We recognise that progress on substantial issues is not
likely to be rapid.
But the process itself of dialogue and negotiation should,
incrementally, improve the political and security climate
between Israelis and Arabs.
This, the world still hopes, will gradually build mutual
respect between Israel and its neighbours, without which no
permanent trust can ever be established.
It is only upon such trust that a lasting peace can be
built. We have been disappointed that much of the peace discussions
so far have been taken up with procedural wrangling, and
that violence has continued, especially in Lebanon and the
Occupied Territories, while the peace talks have been
underway. The Australian Government has consistently called on all
parties to exercise restraint, to give the negotiations a
chance. 
One encouraging aspect of the peace process so far has been
a degree of moderation on the part of the Palestinian
negotiators. We have also observed that the Palestinian Liberation
Organisation has played a more positive role in encouraging
the peace process over the past six months.
In recognition of this development, the Australian
Government recently announced that we would restore our
policy on official contact with the PLO to what it had been
before the Gulf War.
In response to the PLO's support for Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait, restrictions were imposed in January 1991 which
barred Australian Ministers and officials from initiating
contact with the PLO. Those restrictions have now been
lifted. The restoration to our earlier policy on contact with the
PLO is consistent with our long-established aim of
encouraging the forces of moderation rather than extremism
within the PLO.
I am aware that this issue is one of considerable
sensitivity to your Federation, and one you will no doubt
want to continue discussing with us.
Let me assure you that the Government's recent decision is
neither an endorsement of the PLO, nor an absolution of the
organisation's past actions.
Nor has there been any change in the government's basic
policy towards the PLO.
We do not accept the PLO's claim to be the sole
representative of the Palestinian people, but we do accept
that the organisation represents the view of a significant
proportion of them.
Accuracy of the record also requires me to mention another
issue on which our views may differ.
Along with many other countries including the United States,
Australia has long expressed its opposition to Israel's
continued settlement activity in the Occupied Territories.
As friends of Israel, we have to say that we regard such
activity as an obstacle to peace.
I discussed this question at some length with Mr Dinitz
during our meeting in Canberra last March. He acknowledged
there is a range of opinion on settlement policy in Israeli
political circles. 
9
As an outside party, Australia respects the complexity and
sensitivity of the various questions involved in the Middle
East peace talks.
We simply urge all parties to exercise the courage and
resourcefulness necessary to make the most of the current
relatively favourable international environment.
The Australian Government has taken a strong interest in the
plight of Syria's Jewish population.
Australia has been making direct representations to Syria
for several years on discrimination against Jews.
It is pleasing to note recent reports that the Syrian
Government has lifted restrictions on travel abroad by
Syrian Jews, and on the disposition of property by the
Jewish community there.
The Government will, of course, be monitoring the situation
closely to see whether in practice whole Jewish families are
able to leave Syria.
I should add here that the Syrian Government's decision
represents a significant confidence-building measure in the
context of the Middle East peace process.
It is exactly the kind of step Australia has been urging on
all parties to the process to follow in order to promote a
spirit of moderation and flexibility in the current
negotiations.
One of the subjects your Federation has actively pursued
with the Australian Government is the Arab economic boycott
of Israel.
Australia has consistently opposed the boycott, and has
repeatedly urged Arab governments to dismantle it as a
gesture of goodwill.
The boycott, apart from being morally untenable, is a
barrier to progress in the Middle East peace process.
Earlier this year, the Government reminded Australian
Chambers of Commerce that they do not have, and should not
claim to have, any official authorisation for issuing
certificates which effectively comply with the Arab boycott.
We are not persuaded that legislation against the boycott is
appropriate, but the Government is keeping that possibility
under active review.
As I noted earlier, Australia and Israel are nations built
largely on immigration.
We each grapple in our own way with a constantly evolving
process of reconciliation among different cultural, social
and political groupings within our societies. 
It is characteristic of immigrant nations, that we draw
strength from our diversity, from our need to be conscious
always of new perspectives and new ways to achieve our
national priorities.
We draw strength from exercising tolerance.
Nations such as ours are uniquely placed to be receptive to
change, to embrace it and profit from it.
This is why I feel it appropriate to speak to you about the
need now for Israel to make the most of international
change, and to persevere in dialogue and negotiation with
its Arab neighbours.
Equally, Australia urges Israel's Arab neighbours to come to
terms with Israel and recognise its right to exist as an
independent state.
My comments have been offered in the spirit of frank and
vigorous dialogue which characterises the Australian
Government's close relations with your Federation.
We have a long relationship, and a productive one.
You can be sure the Government sets a very high value on it.
Thank you once again for having me. I wish you well with the
conference. 



8 0 1 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING MP
RECEPTION TO COMMEMORATE THE 25TH ANNIVERSARiY OF THE
REFERENDUM, 27 KAY 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
We are here to commemorate a highly significant event in
Australia's history.
In 1967 the Commonwealth Government asked the Australian
people to give it the power to legislate for Aboriginals
and Torres StraitIslanders,. and the Austral 1an peopl-e--
reso-uEdfingly answered " Yes".
Australians do not readily give assent to _ referendum
proposals. Of forty two questions which have been put to referendum
since Federation, only 8 have been passed.'
In 1967, asked if Aborigines should at last be counted in
the census, if they should be counted equally with all
other Australians, and if the Australian Government
should have responsibility for legislation relating to
their affairs, more than 90 per cent of Australians
answered " Yes".
It was en unprecedented result and one wh4ich will
probably never be bettered.
It is a result well worth commemorating today.
But, as with many commemorations, our celebrations are
tinged with regret.
The truth Is we have not succeeded in meeting the
challenge which the triumphant referendum result required
us to meet.
The inequality, the injustice and the racism remain.
The memory and the consequences of injustices done in the
past continue. 
2
We cannot erase these facts.-nor should we seek to.
We should remember them. All Australians should know'the
facts of conquest, of dispossession, of the brutal
treatment and equally inhuman neglect, and they should
recognise the attitudes and motives which inspired them.
As I said, we cannot erase the past but it is our long
overdue duty to erase the attitudes which informed it.
If we wish to lay claim to being truly 8 decent,
civilised advanced nation, the arrogance, intolerance,
ignorance and complacency which for so long characterised
the attitudes and policies of White Australia has to go,
Today I think we white Australians should consider how
much it will do for our own self-esteem if we can
eradicate the prejudice and injustice.
We have made some progress in the last twenty years.
Young Australians are better informed than anly previous
generation about the extraordinary pre-European history
and culture of their country.
Through the education system, but equally through the
achievements of Aboriginal artists, writers and
musicians, we have learned to value the culture and
history of Aboriginal Australia as never before.
We now know much more about what happened on the pastoral
frontier, on the missions and reserves, and in the towns
and cities of Australia.
We know about the crimes committed in the name of white
supremacy, enlightenment and progress, including perhaps
the most shameful of all the removal of Aboriginal
children from their families.
But I think we are also learning to recognise the
contributions Aboriginal Australians have made to this
country and to the contemporary Australian identity.
The Aboriginal story, including the heroes of their
resistance to the European invasion, has become very much
a part of the Australian story as Europeans understand
it. in the past the profound Aboriginal knowledge of this
land was essential to the survival of European
Australians on the frontier.
Today through their art, music and writing, they deepen
our understanding of the Australian environment and point
the way toward a proper relationship with it.
They deepen our understanding of what it is to be
Australian. tj 14W VV_ I Q4.1 
3
Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders have served this
nation in peace and war,
In sport and other fields they number among our legends.
In the 1990s there can be no excuse for failing to
recognise either our debts or our duties to Aboriginals
and Torres Strait Islanders.
In this decade all Australians should come to recognise
that there is no true loyalty or affection for this
country which does not include them.
in all this, it becomes very clear that those people who
fought for more than a decade to see the 1967 Referendum
proposed arnd passed were doing all Australians a great
service.
Some of those people from the Federal Council for the
Advancement of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders
are with us tonight and I think we should acknowledge
their achievement.
The passing of the Referendum was the prerequisite of
change. It was also a necessary tool of conservation and
protection. It was the mandate-to act in Aboriginal interests given
the Commonwealth in 1967 which just last week made it
possible to protect sacred sites near Alice Springs.
It is appropriate tonight that we acknowledge the many
positive achievements since 1967.
In addition to that broader awareness of Aboriginal
history and culture, there are concrete indications of
change for the better.
Last year we established the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation. Its creation, by unanimous vote of the parliament, is
itself evidence of the feeling in Australia that this
must be the decade of change.
I have great faith in the Council I think it offers us
our best ever chance.
The ground for its success has been better prepared than
at any time in the past.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders are~ increasingly
participating in the mainstream of sociezy. 
4
There are more graduates. In 1979 just 8 per cant
completed secondary school in 1991 that figure was
thirty per cent.
Perhaps the most outstanding achievement is the extent to
which Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders have been
given power to decide programs and policy directions.
Having an Aboriginal head of a statutory authority in
1967 was unthinkable beside me tonight are Um such
people. Having an organisation like ATSIC, all of whose leaders
and decision makers must be by law Aborigines or Torres
Strait Islanders, was unthinkable.
Having Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders in
positions of real power was unthinkable.
Today they have such positions it is unthinkable that
they should not.
There is another development which is I think the most
heartening of all.
It Is that more and more Australians are identifying
themselves as Aboriginal.
There is a growing pride in being an Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander, in being descended from the first
Australians I-holieve that is a good sign for all of
US. it suggests the pride we will all need to have in
ourselves if we are going to overcome those inequities
and attitudes which shame us.
I believe that this year can be a turning point, as 1967
was. We can change attitudes through education, through all
manner of interventions and support, through our own best
efforts. But we will not change them satisfactorily and for all
time until we begin to bridge the great gulf in living
conditions. In pursuing our goals we should adopt as our guiding
philosophy the achievement of real and measurable
results; on establishing the building blocks of change,
those concrete improvements in living conditions which in
the end will be the surest guarantee against prejudice
and discrimination.
In 1992 you can be sure that the Australian Government
does not regard these issues in the way they have s0
often been regarded as marginal. 
They are central. They are central to the notions of
democratic justice and human progress which are at the
heart of our traditions.
They are central to our identity and self-esteem.
They are central to our reputation in the world.
They are central to the debate about what kind of society
we want.
It is the issues which are central now. It is the people
the Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders who must
be central in the future. Central, I mean, to Australian
society, the Australian nation.
And I firmly believe that if we pursue our goals with the
same determination which brought about the Referendum
twenty five years ago we will do that.
Thank you. 



&amp; OBTRALIA~'
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP
BREAKFAST FOR SYDNEY OLYMPICS, SYDNEY, 29 MAY 1992
Premier Greiner and Mrs Greiner, Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the invitation to speak to you this
morning. A couple of weeks ago ! addressed a huge number of people
gathered at the Meicourne Tennis Centre to raise money
for theAustralian X-' ympic Team bound for Barcelona.
If their support tcr th~ e cause is any measure, Sydney's
-bJi. for the Olympics. in the year 2000 will ride a huge
wave. I have to say in passing that it was a great pity that
Melbourne's quite superb _ bid for the 96 Olympics was
Ariusucessful the people associated w ith that effort and
the people of Melbourne deserved much better.
But I have no doubt that all those who put their energy
into that effort will now put their energy into Sydney.
Just as Melbourne's was, this is a nat~ ional. bid an
Australian bid.
It requires a national effort.
In many ways Melbourne's bid provided a solid foundation
for the Sydney bid.
Many of the strengths of the argument for Melbourne can
be translated to Sydney.
Their bid made the point that it would be only the second
time in the history of the modern Olympics that the Games
have been held in the Southern Hemisphere.
The point was made so well by Melbourne it need not be
emphasised by the Sydney Committee.
Sydney can concentrate on the other compelling reasons
why the Games should come south. 7 2 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF YOUTH TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT FORUM
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, JUNE 2 1992
Thank you for the opportunity to open this forum. I am
very grateful to the organisers for giving me the chance
to speak.
The issues of education and employment for our yon
people are issues of national concern. 2n
The cliches, of course, are easy but they are no less
true for that.
Young people are the nation's future. Our success as a
nation depends upon their skills and resources and the
degree of their commitment to this society.
At one level, providing employment, education and
training for our young people is a real test of our
ability to create an efficient modern economy.
But we won't do that without a social ethic. Our
economic success is inseparable from our social successwe
will succeed best in Australia if we raise the level
of our care for each other.
To a very considerable extent our success depends on the
degree to which our young people believe in this country.
It is perhaps another cliche to say they they won't
believe in it if we don't.
And it is hard to think of a truer measure of our belief
than the investment we make in them.
By any reasonable standards we have a duty to train and
educate them, to prepare them for the future, to give
them every possible chance.
We have a duty as a community and a nation.
If these are cliches, they are no less true for that.
But we won't get anywhere by simply uttering them. 
Understandably, with an issue which goes to the very
heart of communities, we often end up with more heat than
light.
We need heat but we need more light.
What we need from this conference, and in the press in
discussions about unemployment and youth around the
country are rea itic and effective ideas and
strategies. When I became Prime Minister I gave a commitment to speed
economic recovery and do everything we realistically
could to reduce unemployment.
The measures in One Nation were the first step to doing
this.
We introduced a $ 100 million package to boost new
employment and training opportunities, save existing jobs
and strengthen the economy. The package will provide
assistance for nearly 40,000 young people.
Young people will also benefit from the substantial
increases in funding for labour market programs and for
TAFE places. WVe provided an extra SlOOD iioT~ n in the
November Economic Statement and a further $ 40 million in
One Nation for an additional 50,000 places in TAFE.
In the first ten months of 1991-92, almost 75,000 young
people have been involved in vocational education and
training placements.
But clearly this is not enough. We need to work on long
term solutions.
In tackling the next stages, we need to be clear about
the impact that the fundamental restructuring of the
labour market has had on opportunities For yo'ung people.
Major changes to industry structure and new technology
are substantially changing the type of jobs available.
In manufacturing, the old production line approach which
produced a large number of the same standard item and
which employed a large number of unskilled labourers is
fast disappearing.
It is being replaced with new, computer-based design and
production techniques which place a high premium on both
highly skilled and multi-skilled staff at all levels of
the design, production and marketingprocesses.
Similarly, in key service industries such as retail,
hospitality and tourism, the quality of our skills will
influence the standard of our service and hence our
ultimate success. 
These changes are common to all industrialised nations.
They cannot be turned back.
The challenge is to develop the means by which young
people can gain the skills and experience they need.
The challenge is made more critical by the fact that
young people with little education and training are most
disadvantaged in the labour market.
There is one unmistakable fact about the modern labour
market: those who do not complete school or a postschool
qualification are twice as likely to be
unemployed, and are unemployed for much longer.
I can tell you. that the Goverrnent has accepted the
challenge. And I have to say that we're not at all interested in
John Howard's non-solution of dead-end jobs for young
people, jobs which don't involve any training.
As Ross Gittins wrote if we can't do better than that
there won't be much hope for the rest of us.
" An economy in which there is a great demand for
unskilled workers", he said, " is an economy at the
bottom of the pile in the international division of
labour; one with a low standard of living, producing low
value, labour-intensive goods and watching the nations
with cleverer, better-equipped workers pass it by."
The plain fact is that a competitive economy needs a
highly skilled workforce. And surely we can muster the
will and the resources necessary to create one.
We have already made substantial progress.
There has never been a group of school leavers in
Australia with higher levels of formal education than the
group now entering the labour market. In the last decade
the proportion of young people completing secondary
schooling has doubled from 35% in 1981 to 70% in 1991.
Our higher education system compares well with the OECD
average. In 1992 around 500,000 Australians are
participating in higher education, an increase of over
120,000 students since 1987 or the equivalent of 12 new
universities. By 1994, we will have increased the total number of.
Commonwealth-funded university places by 50% since 1983.
Over the 1992-1994 triennium, the Government plans to
spend a total of $ 13 billion on higher education. 
We can see these changes reflected in the education and
labour market profile of young people. In the mid 1960s
nearly six in ten 15-19 year olds had a full-time job; by
the early 1990s, this stood at less than one in three.
Less than one in three were full-time students in the mid
1960s; now six in ten are.
In April 1992, 117,000 of our 1.3 million teenagers were
seeking full-time jobs. One in ten young people is
unemployed which is actually 32,000 less than the
number seeking jobs in April 1983 in the last recession.
Our goal is not simply to keep young people busy and off
the streets. In conjunction with business and industry
we must develop education and training systems which
ensure that young people receive skills that meet their
needs and the economy' s needs.
Successful economies are characterised by high education
standards; a strong emphasis on vocational preparation
for young people; and close links between education
institutions and employers.
Plainly, in Australia the weak link is vocational
education and training. It is the sector which most
clearly falls short of the standards of our main
competitors such as Germany and Japan and the emerging
tigers like Singapore and South Korea.
Australia must begin to value vocational skills as highly
as academic skills, and expect excellence from both.
This is why we are moving as quickly as we can to reform
and expand entry-level training arrangements and the TAFE
system.
The most striking feature of Australia's vocational
preparation system is that it is small. On one measure,
only around one in five places occupied by a 16 or 17
year old is in vocational preparation. The OECD average
is one in two, and in Germany it is eight in ten.
In Australia, apprenticeship is the largest form of
vocational preparation, accounting for 60% of
participation. But there are weaknesses with the
apprenticeship system.
The occupational and industry coverage is too narrow.
There is little vocational preparation for the service
sector which provides two thirds of employment for 15-19
year olds.
Young women, whose employment is concentrated in the
service sector, are greatly under-represented in
vocational preparation. 
And there is a tendency for programs to rigidly separate
general education from vocational training.
The Carmichael Report proposes major initiatives to
significantly increase the flexibility and quality of
vocational training, as well as the number of work-based
training places available to Australia's young people.
Broadly speaking, in my view these are not options, but
imperatives. And we need to move on them now.
Expanding the industry and occupational coverage of
structured training arrangements will provide greater
training opportunities for all young people. We must
work with industry, unions and training providers to see
that it happens as quickly as possible.
So far, there has been strong in-principle support for
the thrust of Carmichael's proposals from the ACTU and
peak employer groups including the BCA, CAI and the MTIA.
There is also general support from the States, and the
Minister, Kim Beazley, will be commencing detailed
discussions with his State counterparts this week.
The Commonwealth Government is committed to reforming
entry-level training. I will be giving this a high
personal priority over the next months.
To accelerate the process, I will convene a series of
meetings of peak business organisations, employers and
the ACTU to advance the development and implementation of
the pilot projects which will test the new approach.
For the reforms to entry-level training to be successful,
they must be backed up by a greatly expanded and improved
vocational education and training system.
I am convinced that the best way to achieve a truly
national system of vocational education and training is
for the Commonwealth Government to assume a key role.
In One Nation I proposed that the Commonwealth enter into
a partnership with the States, with the Commonwealth
assuming full responsibility for the funding of the
system, while the States retained responsibility for its
administration, management and planning at a local level.
To date we have been unable to reach agreement on this
proposal. One option, which has many attractions, is for the
Commonwealth to go further and assume full
responsibility, not only for the funding, but also for
the administration of TAFE.
It would ensure an efficient and effective national
vocational and educational training system. 
It would allow a closer integration of TAFE and
higher education policy.
It would enable the Commonwealth to pursue its
fundamental objectives of raising the system' s
quality and diversity, and achieving across
Australia a better match of training and the needs
of young people, industry and the labour market.
It is a step we are prepared to take.
I recognise that we could not achieve such a system
overnight. In the meantime, it is critical that the pressing demand
for more places in TAFE be addressed. I would therefore
propose for the 1993-1995 triennium that the States
maintain their current effort on TAFE and, where
necessary, lift their effort from their own resources to
reach an agreed national standard of provision.
For its part, the Commonwealth would commit additional
funding for the growth and improvement of the vocational
education and training system.
As part of the arrangements for the triennium, we would
seek an inter-governmental agreement at Heads of
Government level to raise the quality and responsiveness
of the mainstream TAFE system.
In order to steer the system towards national objectives,
the Commonwealth would use part of its growth funding to
purchase courses directly from institutions and industry
to encourage an active involvement by the private sector.
Whatever happens, we must settle matters as soon as
possible. The Government is determined that Australia will have a
world class vocational education and training system and
we will not be deflected from that objective.
The Commonwealth will therefore support the development
of a network of high profile institutions, catering for
the advanced technical training needs of specific
industry sectors.
In this way the Commonwealth would also be in a position
over time to build institutes of vocational education in
connection with industry, as well as maintain our
recurrent effort for the existing TAFE system.
I have spoken today about the far-reaching reforms of the
education and training systems for young people. But
more can be done to help those young people who are
unemployed now. 
I In addition to the initiatives I have already mentioned,
the Government is considering some measures in the Budget
context. I am not convinced that more of the same is needed. This
is why I was keen to address you today. One of the aims
of this forum is to hear ideas from different sectors of
society. I trust you will take my presence here as an
indication that I want to hear the views of young people
and others who are grappling with the issues.
There is no one answer.
I know from some initial discussions with business and
industry that there are a lot of good ideas around many
of them are already being put into practice.
Business is saying that it has a role to play in
addressing youth unemployment: that it is not the
Government's sole responsibility.
We need, I believe, a national effort to find solutions.
In some cases, business is linking up with community
organisations for example, by developing training and
work experience programs for homeless kids.
They are working in partnership with Government for
example by employing young people through the
Government's Jobstart program.
In many other cases they are going it alone and employing
unemployed kids above their normal requirements.
In addition to considering our own initiatives on youth
unemployment, I see a role for Government in
consolidating and promoting the good ideas of others.
I think we can encourage other businesses to consider
what role they can play.
I will be holding a national meeting of business people
and others who are taking a lead in this area with a view
to developing a national response to youth unemployment.
A national initiative.
I believe we can learn from each other. I believe we
have to.
This forum today will make a considerable contribution to
the debate. Thank you again for inviting me.
I wish you well in your discussions and I will be
interested in your conclusions. 



TEL: 3uri ji i: 111C4
SPEECH DY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KCEATING MP,
PRIME MINISTER' S NSW BRANCH ALP STATE CONFERENCE
SYDNEY TOWN HALL
SATURDAY, 6 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
In this next year, if we are bold, if we are astute, arnd
if we are united, we can retain government.
If we retain governmnent, we can do many of the things
which, in the last one hundred years, the men and women
of Labor have dreamed of doing.
Which Australians have dreamed of doing.
We can come out of the recession stronger and more
independent more truly one nation.
We can make the Australian community strong and cohesive.
We can inspire a sense of common national purpose.
We can ingrain more deeply in our society that
characteristic of all good societies the degree to
which we care for our fellow Australians.
We can make it the model of individual opportunity and
social security which it should be -and which in the
eyes of the world it was, in the first decade of this
century. We can re-kindle an Australian democratic spirit.
We can set those goals.
And so long as I am Prime Minister they will be pursued.
We will go for them.
And we will achieve them. 
TEL: u c C) 4 F. C
2
We'll do it by building on our strengths, and I mean much
more than our economic strengths.
I mean our care for this place and our fellow
Australian. I mean our traditions, our strong social f abric, our
democratic spirit.
I mean our willingness to embrace change.
I mean harnessing the energy and aspirations of all
Australians by extending opportunity and encouraging in
all Australians an intelligent belief in the nation and
its national values.
We will do best if we do all these things.
Our economic strengths, of course, will continue to be
crucial. And we can say that, for all the problems along the way,
and even despite the recession, we hAve laid the basis of
a stronger economy.
A manifestly more competitive and robust economy and a
much more internationally integrated economy.
That is one reason we can do it economically speaking,
we have given ourselves a chance in the world, and thus
given the next generation of Australians a chance.
We have great strengths and should not forget them: we
are rich in resources, we have things the world wants to
buy, in our'unequalled natural environment we have things
which they want to see; we are making great strides in
manufacturing and services.
We shouldn't forget how dramatic the changes have been
manufacturing and services now earn more export revenue
then raw materials and agriculture. it was unthinkable
ten years ago.
We have more than doubled our secondary school retention
rates. We have created the equivalent of twelve
universities. We have quadrupled our child care.
We have developed levels of social security with few
parallels in the world.
Under Labor we won't lose them we will build on them.
We have learnt things we had never heard of in the 1970s.
Like how to run a tourist industry from the ground up. 
TEL: Ju. 2 10 : 10 No 004 F 0'
3
Like how to work to a cooperative ethic rather than an
adversarial one.
We are a nation capable of change.
Remember we have gone in the space of a generation from
being a country notorious for Insularity and xenophobia
to a country which earns the admiration of the region and
the world for the tolerance and openness manifest in
* ultioulturalism.
Similarly we have learned come economic truths:
we've learned that we must be less dependent on
commodities. we've learned about the historic opportunity that
exists for us, the historic necessity of our
economic integration with Asia and the Pacific.
we've learned terms we had never heard of in the
1970s: like value-adding and downstream processingterms
which describe economic imperatives. Things
we must do.
We are in 1992 what we most certainly were not in 1982-
one of the more economically literate countries of the
world. These things our economic and social base, our capacity
for change, or willingness to change -give me great
confidence in our future.
Our opponents are weak.
The Coalition is a coalition in name only. It papers
over large cracks in some very old and mouldy plaster.
Admittedly there's some new plaster there these days but
most of it's as flaky as the old stuff.
Fightback. is a sterile document informed by a
reactionary ideology whose principle characteristic is a
loathing of ordinary people.
It was built on the discredited and generally repugnant
philosophy of the New R~ ight.
Fightback is a throwback to the late seventies. it's an
anachronism in the nineties. Like the dodo or the
Hindenburg. It won't survive.
They stuck an exclamation mark on the end of it in an
attempt to give it life but if you take it away it
turns up its toes.
Our opponents have no heart. Their Australia would have
no soul. 
TEL: ~~ 6. Jun .2 i. 0l: F.
4
These days in Parliament they sit in their desks, like
schoolchildren, with bunting beside them to prove that
they are Australian.
Because they think that you can win in politics by
resisting history rather than making it, because they
think that the people of Australia have no more spirit or
faith than they have, they send me letters saying what an
abomination I am because I think we should not have the
flag of another country on ours.
They gather In Town Halls to sing God Save the Queen, and
tell each other that Australia must not change, must not
grow towards its separate destiny.
They spin tales about the idle pleasures of the past
the Menzoid Golden Age, when the country dozed, and the
best minds left along with the minerals and wool, and the
world largely passed us by.
They always want to go back. While the people of
Australia, with hope in their hearts, march bravely
towards the future, John Howard gallops about urging them
to retreat to the rear.
Back to the fifties, he shouts. Back to the dead end
jobs. Back to the massive inefficiencies. Back to the
quarries. Back to the sheep's back. Back to Britain.
John Howard leads the national reverse thrust.
But the rest, including his Leader, have engaged the same
gear. Back they go.
They are regressive by nature.
Anid nothing is so regressive as Fightback.
Fightback, as Ralph Willis put it, is socially regressive
and economically perverse.
Fightback is not a policy. it is an excuse for a tax.
A tax that we will re-ignite Australian inflation.
just as we get inflation out of the system the Tories
want to put something in the region of 6 percentage
points back into it.
out the vandalism doesn't stop there.
After a decade of unprecedented peace and cooperation in
industrial relations they want to back to the jungle.
And in a society with one of the most sophisticated and
effective social security systems in the world, the 
-TEL: I '* ur n~ 110 Nc i C'' 1J4 P 1DS
Tories want to introduce measures characteristic of
societies in decay.
they will push Medicare towards the American system
which offers care to only 80 per cent of the
population end at 50 per cent greater cost. They'll
cut the rebate from 85% 75t and they'll abolish
bulk billing except for those on benefits.
the unemployed are to be knocked off benefits after
nine months.
the waiting for sickness and unemployment benefits
will be increased from one week to three.
the job placement services of the CES will be
contracted out. Effectively CES will be abolished.
they ' 1l throw 40,000 people off supporting parents'
benefit by cutting off the pension when the youngest
child reaches 12, not sixcteen.
they'll make migrants wait two years before they can
claim benefits of any kind.
Everyone will be a winner under Fightback, the propaganda
says. if you want to send your kids, or yourself, to
university It will cost you an estimated $ 24,000 for
an arts degree up to $ 150,000 for medicine.
families with Income levels about $ 7000 under the
present limits will lose the Family Allowance.
That's 100,000 families.
they'll cut $ 10 million from legal aid. The
cumulative effect of funding cuts and the GST will
mean more than fourteen thousand cases will not be
funded by legal aid. Those cases of course will
involve the most vulnerable In the community.
Fightback compounds injustice.
they'll cut overseas aid by nearly 16 per cent in
real terms, making Australia number 14 of the OECD's
18 donor countries. Emergency refugee programs will
be slashed by more than half.
they will abolish the Youth Bureau and the Youth
Access Centres which provide information and advice
to more than 200,000 young people each year, and
which a recent evaluation shows are successful in
delivering employment, education and training.
despite the findings of the Royal Commission on
Black Deaths in Custody that a substantial increase
in funding was necessary, and despite the feelings
of all decent Australians that this must be the 
TE6 Juri .92 1C: 1C No .004 F . C
6
decade when we end the national disgrace, the Tories
will cut $ 90 million from outlays on Aboriginal
programs.
Yet they say, everyone's a winner under Fightback.
Under Labor, working women have made significant steps
towards achieving parity with men. We have legislated to
protect women against discrimination in the workplace,
and our affirmative action policies are encouraging
employers to promote women to a wider range of Jobs.
Under our equal pay strategy the gap between men's and
women's earnings has narrowed to from 33 per cent to 17
per cent.
Our National Agenda for Women reaches out to women of all
ages and vocations, including women in the home.
We are committed to constantly evaluating our overall
policies to ensure fair and equitable treatment of women.
There is still a lot to do, but we are proud of our
record and you will see us build upon it.
But the struggle to improve the status of women in
Australia would end with Fightback.
the Affirmative Action Agency, the Equal Pay Unit
and the Work and Family Unit will be abolished.
the Human Rights and Equal opportunity Commission
which includes the Sex Discrimination Commissioner
will have its expenditure cut by an unspecified
amount. the public sector will be cut back, privatised,
abolished, contracted out or " rationalised" in the
areas where women work in service delivery areas
like nursing and caring. And in clerical, cleaning
and catering services.
Dut everyone, they insist, is a winner under Fightback.
Fightback will unpick the social fabric. It expresses
that sentiment of selfishness that loathing of the
unfortunate and vulnerable which characterised the
regimes of Reagan and Thatcher.
In Australia it was resisted in the market-driven years
of the eighties. We held it of f.
It would be tragic if now It were to take hold In the
form of a Hewson governments
it is repugnant to Labor. And we will fight it to
extinction. 
TEL 7
The Treasury analysis of Fightback under which everyone
is supposedly a winner shows that 70 per cent of wage
and salary earning households will be worse off under a
Howson government.
It shows that 60 per cent of farm and self-employed
person households will be worse off.
I haven't yet mentioned the consumption Tax. The jewel In
the crown of Fightback.
Treasury estimates that food would rise by 8.9 per cent.
Clothing by 11.2 per cent.
Electricity by 10.7 per cent
Health services by 22.6 per cent
Newspapers and magazines 10.5 per cent.
Urban public transport 6.6 per cent
Post and telephone 8.1 per cent.
A Ferrari will cost $ 15,000 legs.
Everyone's a winner, Dr Hewson reckons, under Fightback.
Like smell business. Consider the remarks from Mr
Cedric Stanford, a leading British authority on
value added taxes. He did a detailed study of the
costs to business and found
The compliance costs of the small firm were 260
times those of the largest firms. Where small firms
are competing in the some market with large firms",
he found, " they are being put under a state-created
disadvantage."
Indeed, he found that " compliance costs.. became a factor
in helping to push small firms out of particular
markets". Or take the comments of a New Zealander, Mr John Marine,
in the January issue of Australian Small Business and
investing. He gave Australian small business people an
explicit warning based on experience about, the GST.
your personal stress level will rise sharply.
Sunday at the beach will be a thing of the past.
You should consider how you will cope when you lose
one day a week to OST, whether your business will
survive and what you are going to do about it."
To small business GST stands for a Great Shrinking of
Time but what Is time to a man in a Ferrar17 TELj: u6n .92 11-t: i F''. YJ 
TEL: Ln; r~ I cn1 o'.: 4 4 F
Everyone, Dr Hewson says, Is a winner with Fightback.
But not if you happen to be at the vulnerable end of the
labour market.
Perhaps the most insidious and potentially the most
devastating aspect of Dr Hewsonus program is his
Industrial Relations policy.
Nothing reflects so well the right wing ideology at the
Core of Fightback. Nothing is so perfect an expression
of their contempt for the weak.
Industrial relations policy is the policy which most
generally defines the relationships between one
Australian and another.
We have seen In the last ten years that relationship
reach a new level of intelligent cooperation.
In Burnie we are seeing the Tories'I idea of how
Australians should relate to each other.
Their industrial relations policy is a policy of social
intimidation. There is only one thing to be gained from the dispute in
Burnie it has exposed the philosophy of John Howson
and John Howard, and it has given Australians a glimpse
of what life would be like under a conservative
government. The gains which flowed from the development of an ethos
of cooperative workplace reform, the spirit which has
seen disputation fall by 60 per cent in a decade, the
increase in productivity experienced by companies where
agreements have been negotiated with unions and
management, the inflation gains brought about by the
Accor all these gains will be killed stone dead.
The Opposition plans an assault not just on the unions
and the principles of unionism they plan an assault on
the principle of the Umpire, of social and industrial
justice.
They want to drive Australian workers on to contracts
where they will then be exposed to what John Howard is
calling a " floor wage"
The " floor wage", John Howard says will be somewhere
between the dole and the existing minimum award.
Now they introduced an Employment Contracts Act in New
Zealand last year it is the same Idea.
It's Hewson and Howard's safety net. Australian workers
especially the most vulnerable, including women,
migrants, the unskilled these workers should know that 
TEL: U Tr
9
the " floor wage" in New Zealand has been set at AS175.0
a week, or A$ 9153.00 per annum.
For employees under 20 years of age there is na minimum.
There are many questions which should be put to Mr Howard
and Dr Hewson about their industrial relations policy and
over the next six months we will be putting them.
For instance: How will you prevent workers being forced out of the
protection of the award stream by an employer who
wants to put the employee on a contract?
How will scrupulous employers compete with the
unfair advantage that is offered by Dr Rawson to
uinscrupulous employers?
With no more National Wage Cases, how will workers
in weak bargaining positions ever get a wage rise?
If industrial disputes are to be dealt with under
common law instead of the Industrial Relations
Commission, how will ordinary workers have the time
and the resources to take their employers to court?
How long will it take the courts to hear the cases?
N ow will the Hewson and Howard model of industrial
relations protect living standards?
How will It make everyone a winner?
We should ask these questions. All Australians should
ask them and I believe they should ask themselves if
this policy is the hallmark of a civilised society?
Does it express our values and goals? Is it a social
advance to drive the weak down?
Is Burni our industrial and social model for Australia?
For John Hewson and John Howard It is.
As John Howard said himself, on 23 May, the right being
exercised by APPM " is basic to the new industrial
relations system the Liberal and National Parties will
bring to Australia after the next election"
I say, like hell they will.
I said Fightback will unpick the social fabric. It will.
The Tories you know are very big on values and traditions
they're big on holding on to what is there. Like the
Union Jack and their interpretation of our history. 
ILL-L
They get very cranky if we say they don' t have a mortgage
on our history any more than they have a mortgage on our
future.
The truth is that their blueprint for the future
Constitute$ the most savage attack on our traditions we
have ever seen.
Xt attacks the tradition of fairness anid equity.
It attacks the tradition of progress towards civilized
social goals.
It attacks the tradition of care for the underprivileged
and vulnerable for protecting the weak against the
strong. These traditions are built in to our society -they shape
the way we think, the way we go about our lives.
In large part they derive from the last decade of the
last century from the rise of the Labor movement and
the emergence of a new national spirit.
But they were values shared by liberals by non Labor
Australians. They were widalm shared.
They are not shared by today's anti-Labor forces.
Don't let them tell you that this government is hostile
to tradition, or that it's re-writing the past.
It's the future we're concerned with and we're building
it on the best of Australian traditions.
We are determined to equip Australia for the next
century. To do that we have to make bold policy decisions. We
have to be willing to meet the challenges head on.
As I said at the beginning, we are building on solid
foundations laid down in the last decade of Labor
government. And as I said, we are also building on the foundations of
our best traditions our best sympathies.
our social goals are equitable ones. Our aim is fairness
as well as strength.
The strength will not only come from economic policy, it
will not only be measured by economic success.
Our national spirit, the degree to which we identify as
Australians and declare our first loyalty to Australia
wherever in the world we have come from; the degree of
care for each other as Australians; the degree to which 
TEL: IC t. -1U I I V J I I L'
we are prepared to take a national view and pursue
national goals all these will give us strength.
And in the coming years we will measure our success by
how truly we can say that we are One Nation.
The Tories don't understand this. WJe will have to teach
them. We'll teach them by the sorts of bold Initiatives we took
this week by our example.
Revolutioniuing the airline industry is a major Labor
breakthrough it has profound implications for the
tourist Industry, and therefore profound long term
Implications for our economy and employment.
Introducing Pay-TV on the basis that we have, getting
optimal outcomes from the new and available technologies,
was a milestone in the transfer of information technology
to Australians.
The decision we made this week will be the key to what
Australians will be viewing in their homes, businesses
and schools, and how they will be commuunicating with each
other over the next quarter century.
we also gave the ABC an historic opportunity to break
from its national free-to-air charter into the almost
limitless realm of sophisticated information transfer.
Getting TAFE into the high quality, high status shape
that it should be will be a profound reform, with
profound benefits to our economy and society for
generations to come.
Extending occupational superannuation to all is a
fundamental reform, an imperative if we are to achieve
our goals of better incomes for the retired aged and
greater national savings.
Infrastructure spending on rail, road, airports, ports,
electricity is essential, not only to recovery and to
employment in the short term, but to the long term health
of the economy. It's essential to our keeping up with the
world. Moving, as we have this week, to develop strategies for
youth training and employment in conjunction with our
TAFE reforms and our existing labour market programs, is
essential if our young people are to have the
opportunities they deserve.
Our goal is to involve business, unions and the wider
community in creating a national response a national
effort. 
TE L: . u3rn .92 1C 11.1 No0 . C' 4 F 1I
12
These initiatives must be taken if we want young
Australians to believe in this country and it is no
exaggeration to say that, without that belief, we will
never be the nation that we can and should be.
We are doing the things Labor governments must do.
The Tories never do them. They'll never understand.
What you will hear from them are the sounds of scare
campaigns. And smear campaigns.
They will call urn traitors for wanting unequivocal
symbols of our nationhood just as they so often called
u~ s traitors during the Cold War.
They'll grub around looking for dirt like they have been
doing for the past few weeks just as they have so of ten
done in the past.
They'll rush outside and shout " anarchy" and " mayhem" and
accuse US of not having respect and they will go around
the homes of elderly Australians with bizarre, vicious
and entirely inappropriate propaganda they knocked of f
from the Republican Party of the United States.
Propaganda which was fomented in the prejudice sheeted
homes to black America and in the gun culture of that
country. Propaganda whose use here constitutes a dramatic lapse In
standards of political behaviour, and, I believe, a
serious misjudgement. of Australian values.
Yet this is just a variation on the things that they have
always done.
But they will fail.
They will go on being what they are spoilers.
And we will go on being what we are builders.
And we will win. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME HINISTERr THE, R( ON P J KEATING, XP
TO THE INSTITUTE OF COMPWIE DZIECTORS r MELBOURNE,
OUNZ 1992
Z KO PROOF ONLY
Well thank you very much Brian ( Loton), ladies and
gentlemen. it is a pleasure to speak to the institute
again, I have now had a happy association with It over
nearly ten years and I used to assiduously atteand your
funotions at Lenader, I think is the name of the place, when
I was Treasurer, and I always found miembers at the Institute
to be interested and enquiring and open to argument, and
when you are in public life that Is the only audience that
you basically warm to. So I appreciated, first of all you
asking mes and for coming in much numbers.
I thought I would, today, talk to you about Australia In the
broad, about the economy, about our-society adstart with
making a few refierence to Victoria. You don't need to be
an economic analyst to know--that Victoria has been in a
severe state of recession, of down-turn and on the
unemployment figures we saw last week, Victoria and South
Australia are the two states where unemployment is
continuing to rise. This is not so around the rest of the
country. tn the graphic illustrations of employment, in the
statisticians release lost weak, we saw New South Wales with
the rise of unemployment, and then it coming of f, the same
also In Western Australia, in Queeneland plateauing but in a
much lower level than In any of the other states. And one
could reasonably assume that it, Queensland will feel the
recovery again earlier and more strongly than some other
places. And so the pattern In that in New South Wales,
Queensland and Western Australia we are seeing a recovery
more evident than we are seeing in Victoria and South
Australia and we are seeing a deoline in unemployment arnd a
pick-up in employment growth in those three states, but not
so here and not so in South Australia. 
Now, what is the reason for that? Well it is very hard to
say and I know many people have sought to ponder that
question, but I think the answer is that we are seeing
structural change and cyclical decline, we are seeing a
decline in the Victorian employment base coming from the
cycle, and we are seeing a structure shift as the whole
economy changes from what It was, and that was en economy
where which was largely protected and where w6 hadn't the
kind of Sophisticated Industries which we are now starting
to soo emerging.
I think there are a number of other reasons why Victoria is
languishing. I shall just go through them. I think the
first is, the 1980s notion that you could build employment
off public sector spending, which In the end of course is
unsustainable, secondly the debt hangover, which you may
say, well it hangs over other states, I think I would bay it
hangs over here moru particularly and even some of the
businesses which may be known to headquarter themselves
elsewhere, but financed out of Victoria, the problem of
Stat, Banks, the problem of State Banks In the Institution
of banking these days, end seeking to find themselves a
place by being bankers, if not of last resort, near last
resort, and the problems which has come from that; and the
cyclical movement away from mfanufacturing, as I mentioned
earlier; and the labour hoarding which wa6 promoted by
lower labour costs in the 1900s. 1 think the combination of
l@ ovur ' hoarding from low labour cost* in the 1960a and also
public sector spending In Victoria ink the 1980s, had
unemployment here in victoria, to its lowest levels in the
Commonwealth in 1988-89. Levels that many of us thought
were unsustainable and that I think because of the fact that
Victoria was primed, pumped primed and then supported by a
very ambitious financial sector, that the decline in the
economy which hbucU ome from the recession, plus the
structural shift, meant that the Correction in Victoria has
been more pronounced and more profound than it has been in
other states.
well I suppose the question Is where do we go from here.
Well I think the first piace we go from here ise the recovery
In general. And we are seeing the recovery, in the three
quarters to March we have had Just upon two per cent of nonfarm
GOP growth. Now the budget has a forecast of 2.7 per
cent, which would mean we would need .7 In the June quarter
we may get It, we may not. flvt the economy is clearly
growing again. And I notice today that the business Council
of Au~ tralia or yesterday made a release which didn't rate
that well in the newspapers, but It said; the Business
Council considers that the economy is recovering, employment
opportunitias well improved as a recovery becomes more
broadly booed, this will only happen If the Government
continues to lock-in low inflation and pursues microeuonomio
reforms. The Business Council seem a consistent
pattern of signals for recovery and economic activity over
the next six months In its survey of member companies. And
it goes on, signs of recovery and economic activity over the
next six months are indicated in the 6urvey. in particular, 
the majority of respondents expect Increases in Volume of
sales, exports and revenues, there hag been a signif icant
increase In the number of responbdents Intending to Increase
stocks and nearly half of the Manufacturing respondents have
upgraded pilans for capital expenditure. I think we should
believe, reasonably, that a rooovery of substance to coming
through. go that is the first thing about where do we go f rom here.
As that general recovery comes through it is going to pick
up, in part, Victorian commerce and Victorian activity the
same as It is the rest of the economy.
2 think secondly, we have got to push the restructuring on
but get the volumes up. The now efficiencies which are
coming in to industry, because the downside of those new
efficiencies iS higher unemployment, the upside Is of
course, greatly enhanced productivity. That from those new
efficiencies we should be seeking to build volume and
employing people in businesses with a greater volume base,
albeit businesses which are more efficient* And Instead of
seeking, as some people do in the debate, entrenched
inefficiencies, In the belief that volumes will be held
constant, but where in reality volumes will be slated to
die. Now perhaps an example of that is in the motor
Industry in this State. We are seeing the Ford Capri
exported to the United States, work for people at the Ford
Plant that would not exist In the old motor Industry. We
are socin? the Toyota motor company establish a $ 400 million
stae-f-e-rt plant, in part to export that vehicle, that
Is the Toyota Camry. And we are seeing now engine
praduotion, for export we would not have seen some years
ago. in other words, the plants may not be employing the
number of people they were employing in the 19809 but they
now have an economic future, both at home and abroad that
they would not have had, We are still producing In the last
12 to 15 months or even in the highest times, a year or so
ago, two years ago the same number of motor vehicles we
produced In 1973, because there is simply buyer resistance
to price, people won't pay the price to turn their car
over. So if we are seeking to maintain an industry, built
on a high-cost, low-efficiency basis of production and hope
that by some, if you like, staging of that, come pause in
the structural shift, that that will maintain employment in
the State of Victoria, don' t think that is true. So the
new efficiencies have got to be pressed on with, but we have
got turn it into bigger volume$, And that simply meant
focussing again on exports as well as tha domestic market.
The third thing I think about where we go from here; Is
defitiliq the role for Government In making markets work.
And I put that in contradistinction to the 1980s Victorian
view, which was for the Government to be a market itself,
because It Is no stcret to any of you, that I argued over
this point in the 1980s. There is a role for Governments in
making markets work, we have seen it in the One flation
eatement, which Brian referred to In his introduCtory
remarks. In estab. lishing a new national rail highway, which 
can Only be done by Government, trying to make the transport
market, or the transportation market Work, LA~ a better
interface between the ports and rail. Or separating power
generation from distribution, tojproduce a true market for
electricity. This is the thing abut the role of Governmrent
and the DCA retor&amp; to it yesterday in its release talking
about micro-oonomic reform, that Is keeping the changes
coming through, again in contradistinction to the New
Zealand approach, now adopted by my political opponents,
where you basically turn the œ lam-thrower on the Industry,
we have some sort of gigantic national funeral pyre, " n
from the ashes emerges some phoenix even though we know that
market force@ alone won't change the rail system, because no
private Interest will Invest In it, or the ports or the
power generation, etcetera.
So I think those things: press on with the recovery; press
on the with structural change In the efficiencis; get the
volumes up; get the Governmient in there to break the lo-g-
Jame in the market to get the efficiencies moving; anid try
and keep the economy together and the community together in
a sort of commitment to the change In general.
Now we have heard a lot said about comparative advantage,
and there is a lot of literature published In recent years
about it. But It seems to me we have a number of
comparative advantages In this country. There are at least
five that one can think of: there is resources and food;
there is space; there Is a trained workforce; a high
quality Government R&amp; D base, if not a private ML bse; and
proximlity to the Asia-Pacific: they are all things which we
hove. Of these we all know about resources and agriculture, we
have all been brought up on those industries, that is
knowing about them. We know about a trained workforce, but
we are only just learning the value of It, how to use it,
and how to build it. Because In the post we have put too
low a premium on that training and our trained workforce is
in a stote of decline. It Is now changing, rapidly. This
is good for us. In 1983, only three children in ten
com~ pleted secondary school, this year that is nearly eight
in ten and we have now created In since the iniddle-1980a
120,000 univerbity places, or the equivalent of twelve
cnpuses to take 40 per cant, just on 40 per cent of that
stream of kids out in to universities. we are just a jot
behind the United States In university places, as a
proportion of the schooling, those finishing compulsory
education and way ahead of most OECD countries. But we have
been poor at the next stratum of our educational system,
which is training and vocational education. Where we have
got ki~ ds cascading out of school into the milk-bars, railway
stations, shopping mall plazas, instead of In to a properly
structured vocational education end training system.
we have always though of trade, I think trade and vocational
training as something not really going on beyond
apprentIceships or riudiimentary skills. The notion that 
adding value and sophisticated manufacturing or
sophisticated services, required Sophisticated skills and
that you couldn't develop one without the other, Is really a
late development in our national thinking, but a development
we nkow have to press on with. And It is not the answer to
go back to dead-end jobs, as John Howard would have us do,
but to leave that behind and continue with a ski lls based
workcforce, an education system that takes kids beyond that
sort of unskilled area we had In the 1960a and 1950s, In to
skills jobs which we have shown they have been able to got
when the economy Is growing.
Go : think we have to take the view that It there In any
resources boom in the future, It is not the resources boom
that Malcolm Fraser and John Howard had in mind, of digging
up) enother mound of minerals, or growing another paddock
full of wheat, but a boom in intellectual resources, which
we have at our hand, but have been, to date not fully
prepared to utilige. And that is of course using the skills
of our children.
Now the legacy of the lost year. of opportunities Of the
1970s was a nation unable to pay for its imports, and a
nation with disappearing dead-end jobs. And so we have seen
a rise in structural unam.. 2oye-t, which has been cis most
apparent in this state as it has been in any other state.
The lament should not be to go back to It and try and hang
on to it, but again to press ahead with the skills based
Change of new efficiencies in industries and to get the
volumes going.
Now I wanit to put this % heme to you because I have got now a
very aggressive opponent and there was a time when I was
very genteel at these sort of meetings, and If it is just
after an election I think you are entitled to a couple of
years of a very haughty diet of thoughts, but with in
proximity of a poll I think some political factors ought to
be brought to mind. But I want to put them in this
important eo~ ial and economic context. I don't believe that
we can produce the kind of country we are now in the course
of developing; that to one with an external orientation,
where a premiiumi is going on skills and research and
development, in product innovation, in exports, in import
competiLloa, exploiting the proximity of the Asia-Pacific, I
don't believe that you can develop that sort of country from
the stale mineral, agricultural reliant, low training, low
levels of participation education base from the 1970s we
have come from, without getting basically national
commitments to these things. So what I am maying to you is
I don't think you can run the place without some sort of
consensus approach. Now whether you want to call it
consensus or consultation or co-operation or tripartite
commitment, uall it who% you like if we want to take
ourselves from the industrial museum, the Coalition were
happy to leave us In tor the better part of a couple of
decades, an~ d take us to being what we should have always
mainained our~ zlves as; a sophiaticateO economy, where the
premi~ um wos on higher value products and services ani more 
interesting jobs, then I believe you have got to have
basically Agreements about those things. Now as you know,
People have said well you have had that With the Accord
process, with a conasensus model developed f rom the 1983
Economic Summit, and the answer to we have. The claim then
made is, It is these processes which have slowed structural
change, economic change. my claim is a counter-claim, that
the change we have been through Is quite profound, " n quite
rapid and could only have been dons In this context. In
other words, the consensus model, the co-operative model hats
allowed change that we would not have had, but I bslieve
change which he@ come more quickly. And that our opponents
view, which is now the sort of New Zealand view or the
Thatcher view, that you basically expose the place to markest
forces and the devil will take the hind-moot, that there
Isn't a job for Government moving to the creations markets,
that there isn't of the Government lifting the participation
market rates in echools, that there Isn't a job for
Government remodelling the training of the skills-based
system of the country, that there Isn't a job for Government
with management pulling that together In to a competitive
whole, I think without that kind of approach we won't be
abla to do it.
Now we have seen It under the Accord, with national income
determination, with the share of national income going to
profits and the share going to wages, with the wage
flexibility we have developed In recent years and are still
now developing, with the anti-inflation consensus, where for
the first time in our miodern history, we have had the
workforce of Australia committed to anti-inflation, low
inflation objectives, the consensus to open the economy up,
to take down the board of protection, to out a competitive
exchange rate mechanism, to live with all the adjustment.
pressures which were implicit in that shift, to a floating
exchange rate and a policy position of positive
discrimination In favour of employment which we saw In the
1980s, when we were doing three times the OECD average in
emiployment growth, is I think the kind of model Australia
needs, and one in which It will prosper.
we are now at the position where inflation, we have beaten
the 20 year legacy of high infladiin, Wi -ooksd at the last
quarter zero Inflation end 1.7 per cent for the year. At
the Premiers' Conference last Friday, when we looked at the
nominal payments to the States and calculated the real level
of payments, the deflator we used, the Inflation forecast of
the CPI for the coming year, was 1.7 per cent. I mean it is
eons since Australia had that position and the maintenance
of those low inflation rates and the attendant inflation
rates that come with it, bill rates of 6 1/ 2 per cent, which
we haven't seen ina a couple of decades, can power on the
next phase of Australia's development. Paul Volker broke
the back of American inflation in 1980, and gave America a
decade of prosperity as a result. But American fiscal
policy and ierican public policy in micro-economic change
did not accompany that kind of shif t, and they have run in
to bottle-necks in their society. That Is the nistekG we 
II:;
7
are trying to avoid. But I believe, we will emerge from
this recession to recovery with inflation at a sasinably
low level, with basically a structural budget surplus, even
though It is In cyclical deficit, but returning to surplus
by the middle 19908, with now large changes at the
enterprise level with enterprise bargaining, a willingness
on the part of the organised workforce to change work
practices, and on the part of management, management
practices, and a focus again not on the easy resort to
inflationary profits, but the generation of income, gives . us
a unique opportunity to soore from this shift the recession,
and to take Australia through the 1990a on a sustainable,
reasonably high growth, low inflationary path.
Now, what I put to you is our opponents put all that at
risk. what they are saying, let's have an APPM approach to
industrial relations,
Where an employee an Individual person and a company will
have to agree themselves to opt back into the Industrial
relations system to maintain the benefits of awards
protection. So es federal awards excpire so to does our
holiday pay, working conditions, rates of pay and the rest
and there signed up under common law contracts for
industrial relations purpoases. That will produce industrial
relations mayhem and the anti Inflation consensus we now
have will go out the window as surely as it comes in and s0
therefore I believe this sort of confrontation approach that
ts the simple motion that market forces will fix the place
when we know a lot of the problems are inaccessible like the
rail system, the interface with ports the
telecommunications, electricity, roads in all of these areas
where basically market forcea haven't operated and can't
properly operate without governments being involved or in
training or in changing the nature of TAFE, lifting the
status of our vocational education system, looking at
training wages as we are now doing to employ more young
people than we've employed in recent times. All of these
things can only come by a process of involving employers,
unions, State Government's and Federal Government's because
the State 0overnmuents run most of the instrumentalities the
Federal Government has got macro-economic management, Of
It's essence It is consultationery as we saw last Friday at
the Premiers ConfereefC In trying to got TAFE back on the
table again to look at the national approach. it has to be
a discussion and if we rely on market forces market forces
won't do it because there is not a market working so I think
that 5nlashing the coneensus or smashing a cooperative basis
of working together to confrontationist and a product of
political primatives who don't know how to make the society
tick, that don't know where all the bits of power are and
how to strand it together into a common thread which can
work for Austrelia and its future. So what I think about Dr
H! owson is he is offering no eocial consensus, he is offering
you 8 funeral pyre, he doesn't understand keeping the
society together, he says there to no role for government
and the social consensus In things like the right to
effcrdable education not the right to pay what your parents 
can pay for a university piece not the right to go and put
twelve thousand on the table to buy a place In the
university but the right to a university education If you
are smart enough and ommitted enough. The right of access
to medical treatment, a universal right to health protection
a right too often in this country denie4 to the poor who
couldn't afford to worry about their health, Income support
for families of particular low Income families the families
in people in low skilled jobs with children; naturally
income support for the unem~ ployed not tipping them offœ after
nine months and sending them down to St Vincent de Paul
Society or the Brotherhood of St Lawrence or somebody else.
Provision for the aged as the population &amp; ase providing for
them in nursing homes, hostels se-oommodation home and
community care for support at hoaie a decent standard of
living in retirement by national savings put away to produce
a retirement income. These are all the things that can
deliver a more cohesive society a more responsive workforce
and with It a commitment a low inflation enhanced
productivity wage flexibility enterprise bargaining and
basically Autralia coming together in a very cooperative
way. So the Coalition doesn't haye the sophisticated view
and on top of that it wants to add 6 7 percentage points
to the price system from the goods and services tax which
will lift the Inflation rats accordingly. which will not bs
discounted for wages which In large part will go Into
onigoing inflation and then straight away into interest
rates. Because we all know if the Inflationary floor under
Interest rates rises the nominal Interest rate rises and we
are back to those sort of double digit interest rates which
for eo long have retarded our investment and economic
growth. So I conclude on this point and I am happy to take questions
on these points. That basically we thinkc there is role
for goverulit but it Is not the role of the government
being Market. The role for government is to do the things
I mentioned; re-build a national rail network, build the
arterial roads, to establish a decent market for electricity
to exploit that huge comparative advantage of a coal seam
right the way down the east coast of Australia, to give
Australia a decent tourist Industry, to have a rational
airline policy, to develop a vocation and education system
or In even the things which are government In the tax systea
the providers we did In the One Nation statement. Private
provision for public development bonds, accelerated
depreciation for investment in this country, pool
development funds. All of these things I think augur for a
role, an interested sophisticated role for governmnent in
society and rejecting the view that if business people want
to deal with goveriviients want to create a better society,
went to do something good and sensible that basically in
some way they are offending some sort of tenent of economics
of sort of Adam Smith Economics or so john Hewson put it
when the busineas community spoke to us in the One Nation
consultation's he said they were bludgera looking for a
handout not that they were people intereuted In Australia
looking for better national outcomes but bludgers looking 
9
( Or a handout. He said he was appled that business was
asking for things, what I say to you Is what business has
asked for in the last decade Is a rational set of policies
the right to a Sensible discussion with Labor the goverrnent
to take notice of the separations of these two principal
groups in the economy and In doing eo while doing so
building a social framework which people in this country
believe will look after them regardless of their eoonomie
circumstances. Now that's the sort of model I think will
pull AUStralia through and while Victoria has languished in
this recession those who want to take us back to those
stultifying days of the early 8os or late 708 of* inefficient
Industries of companies that can never hope to compete and
Just watch even the dead end jobs disappear will be doing
Australia a great disservice and the people that ought to be
listened to are the ones that want to keep a structural
change going who are not frightened by the consequences of
some of the structural change and will keep driving on until
we end up with a society which Is re-modelled wearing some
of the adjustment costs on the way through but coming out
the other side Into a low inflation competitive culture
which will stand Australia Ina good steed, provide decent
levels of employment, higher level of income and more
Interesting jobs. it's basically out there but It Is not
out there If we faltere It is not out there if we doubt it
and it is not out there It we are not sure of our place In
Asia, we are not sure Who we are and what we are and if we
go and exploit the neighbourhood we live Ina and go out there
as a proud competitive people not selling a second hand bill
of goods but something now and Innovative and clever then
there Is a placa for us.
Than~ k you for listening, I will be happy to take questions. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P 0 KEATING, HP
ADDRESS TO THE ' NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION -YOUR BUSINESS IN
THE ' 908 SEMINAR', BANKSTOWN* 17 JUNE 1992
R OK PROOF COPY
can I say I amn very pleased to be invited to speak to you
about the subjects which flEET specialises in. And can I
again firstly congratulate DEEtT on holding this discussion
meeting and I'm particularly pleased to be talking to you in
Bankstown. It's always good to come back to the old town
and to be talking about issues which are relevant to people
and the way they live and how they'll work and what they'll
do in the future.
We are going through a very large Industrial transition and
the fact that a meeting like this is taking place is itself
a revelation because many years ago the whole notion of
training was simply trade training, apprentices,
apprenticeships and what have you and the comprehension of
many areas of business, the importance of education and
training was, not so many years ago, comparatively low.
In the early 19809 we had three children in ten completing
secondary school and one of the things that the government
wanted to do and has done over the period is to increase the
participation rate of kids in school.
That is now nearly eight in ten, three in ten in the early
19809 to nearly eight in ten now, is one of the basic things
one had to do to improve the skills base of Australia. And
if we are to be indeed a clever country or a capable
country, a clever and capable country, then education and
training are of course, the keystones of such capability.
All this comes from the great roll back of protection under
which Australia existed in most of the postwar years, and
began with the removal of exchange controls in 1983, with
the float of the Australian dollar and then more latterly
general changes to the external orientation of Australia
reductions in border protections, reduction in tariffs,
opening Australia up to competition and getting the focus
onto productivity, lower costs, lower inflation, import
competition, exports and a better current account
performance and with it more jobs, more interesting jobs and
better paid jobs. 
We came through the 19809 with a growth strategy built
around those particular ideals. And we had a lot of
success. We had a lot of growth in the 1980s and we had a
lot of employment growth. We started of f with a work force
of six million and we ended up with a work force of 7.8
million which is nearly 30 per cent larger. We've lost now
in the recession unfortunately, 300,000 of those jobs but we
still held 1.5 million which means the workforce today is
about 25 per cent larger than it was in 1983, built around
the objectives of growth and lower costs and growth
efficiencies. Now we have come a long way, and I think Australia has
crossed the rubicon where now the country does look to be
Competitive. The whole notion of competitiveness is not
something which is just a lip servicie -thing but-omething
people mean. As well as that we've crossed a rubicon whore
we are now interested in exports and imports competition in
a way we were never interested before. One can see in this
period of recession we're emerging from now that the growth
which does obtain in the economy, a large part of it in
coming from the export markets or net exports, import
competition and exports. So it's holding up production and
employment. Whereas if we had a focus simply upon domestic
demand that wouldn't be the case.
I think now a lot of industrial companies who are now
exporting will continue to export when domestic demand picks
up. That is they won't say well look, the export market was
handy when were in a bit of a squeeze and we've got an
exportable surplus and is there someone to take it yes
there is, good, we'll let them have it, but now that
domestic demand Is up we won't bother any more.
I think many companies are now finding a great success with
exports, they're finding markets and they're finding them in
the Asia-Pacific, they're finding them close to Australia,
they're finding them in the area of the world economy which
is growing the fastest and the Strongest which is the Asia-
Pacific. This discovery if you like, by Australian
companies of these markets to our north and north Asia as
well, has I think, produced a cultural change which is going
to stand us in good stead.
The other great cultural change is the purging of
inflationary sentiment from the Australian economy. This
was the thing, of course, we could never seem to be able to
do. For nearly twenty years we had high inflation and
despite persistent attempts by all sorts of governments it
could never be conquered. It has been conquered now by
commitment on the part of organised labour and the
government and more latterly the deflationary influence of
the recession which has pulled inflation down, but the
important thing is it's stripping the culture, it's purging
the culture of Australia that people could do unproductive 
things, do speculative things and try to seek from thoue
speculative things real increments to wealth and employment.
I think we have crossed a very important rubicon. And I
don't know whether some of you might have noticed Weutpaa
taking a $ 2.6 billion hit on its accounts a couple of weeks
ago. In doing so it was basically saying, I think in a very
mature decision, look we won't moon around waiting for
inflation to pick property prices up, we won't do as we've
normally done, sat back and waited for a bit of inflation to
correct yesterday's decisions, we're now in a low
inflationary environment, let's basically reoognise it,
let's cut the ' 808 adrift and let's take our medicine on the
chin and go on and build our business. That was a pretty
hard thing for them to do, they've got to approach the
market again, they've got to get stock which dilutes the
rest of the stock in the business, to make the key decision
that they were not going to mess around with inflation any
longer.
That means that that institution and many others are now
going to look at productive investment. And the culture of
Australia is shifting away from speculation and passive
investment, mooning around waiting for inflation to reappear
so that those with assets can end up being more wealthy than
those without them and to transfer from the poor to the
wealthy by way of inflation. That culture is dying and the
culture that has come in its place is one of productivity,
of production where our focus is on adding value, employing
people and looking at businesses which produce goods and
services. Now that's a mighty change for a country which was taught to
believe that it was a lucky country, that it could do
unsmart things, that it could lock itself up behind a tariff
wall, that it could only educate three children in ten
beyond secondary school, that it could speculate its head
of f with double digit inflation rates, that the wealthy
could grow wealthier and the poor could go poorer, so that
young people would start with very big mortgages around
their necks paying for inflated values in property and that
the elderly would have their savings ripped to bits by
inflation. This was the sort of culture that this
government inherited in 1983. As you know by then, the
current account deficit in 1980 was already 6 per cent of
GDP. Already twelve years ago we could not pay for our
imports to the tune of 6 per cent of GDP a year. Now GDP
this year is $ 400 billion, 6 per cent is about $ 24 billion,
so we were $ 24 billion shy of balancing our trade accounts
twelve years ago.
Those who look for the resources boom twelve years ago, the
so called ' 80. resources boom, it was not a boom in reality,
it didn't answer the questions, and the real resources we
should have had burning were the intellectual abilities of 
our people and of our children. They were the resources We
didn't worry about while we believed digging up another
mound of rocks and growing another paddock full of wheat was
all that was needed to be done so that the People in the
lucky country could go on in their torpor, in their mental
fog, not facing the real world outside and understanding the
simple fact that the post-war trade in goods and' services
had passed Australia by. That the policies of the Country
Party and Coalition governments preaching free enterprise on
the one hand and dolloping out dollops of tariff protection
and bounties end subsidies on the other, while seeking to
have an efficient primary export sector, wasn just a
dichotomy of policy that was bound to fail.
So in the change we've gone through, these important
psychological shifts, and as we had to move down aggregate
wages and rechange the level, that is restore the levels of
national income going to wages and profits and the ' 80s as a
result of the mad-wage mayhem of 1979 and 1980, the wage
share in CDP warn too high and the profit share in GDP was
too low and therefore profits fell and investment fell with
it, and when investment fell employment fell.
In the first seven years between 1983 and 1990 we had five
times as much employment growth as the last seven years of
the Fraser government five fold, because we got back to
rates of economic growth which could take people up out of
the workforce. That change of focus-, to going back to
fundamentals and being competitive, to letting the exchange
rate find its right level, living with the inflationary
consequences coming from it, then buying down wages so that
that inflationary surge was taken out of wages and then
through five Accords with the ACTU, build ourselves an
inflation rate down to two or three per cent, is a great
national achievement. It means that after the great shift
in aggregate wages we had to get around the wage
flexibility. Because between 1983 and about 1988-89 we did
succeed in getting aggregate wage flexibility, we did
succeed in lifting the profit share and we lifted investment
with it.
The problem about aggregate wage flexibility is that one
builds pressures within groupings of employees for what they
think is salary justice which can't be provided by a system
of-rigid aggregate adjustment. So we then started looking
in Accords Marks V and VI for flexibility, productivity
based flexibility which started with a 4 per cent case under
Accord Mark V where 4 per cent was paid on productivity
adjustments, not that everybody took the productivity
adjustment opportunity up, and then in Accord Mark VI which
the ACTU concluded with the government just at the beginning
of the 1990 election, we moved then to the first time into
enterprise bargaining. And while we were doing that, moved
into a system of fewer unions, larger unions and more of an 
industry union structure which could more accommodate the
shifts In fortunes of particular industry.
Now many of you know that enterprise bargaining has had a
pretty hard road to hoe, the Abtiiioziuionl told us
in the first instance we were not mature enough to handle
it, that if they weren't checking everybody's industrial
agreement then it wasn't worth having, and as everyone of
you running a business knows, if you're going to increase
the productivity of your business by changing the way in
which you operate it and the way in which your employees
operate within it, that can't be done through a central
bench in Melbourne, 0 it can only be done at the enterprise
level. That's why it was Incompatible to have the
Industrial Relations Commission vetting enterprise
agreements-and because the government and the ACTU took the
view they shouldn't be vetting them, they thought we were
perhaps not mature enough to have them.
As it is, the ACTU stood the Commission up and the result
was that in the reconsidering of these things, enterprise
bargaining is now a possibility and the great productivity
opportunities are there. I've never known a time when
unions have been more prepared to find wage increases from
genuine improvements in productivity an in these last few
years and particularly now.
But what went hand in hand with enterprise bargaining was
award restructuring. The problem we have with the award
system, the whole problem that we've had with the labour
market in Australia generally was that we inherited the
British craft union structure of industrial orgenisation.
There was no General Macarthur here, sweeping the system out
and building a new system and there was no General George
Marshall. So after the war we were left with what we began
with a system built on the craft structure and within the
Craft structure we had this very rigid awards system. So if
you got yourself to a place as a tradesman or a particular
worker and you secured a spot in that particular scale of
classification that was your spot for life. The only
negotiations that ever matter to you were whether you got a
national wage adjustment and if you worked a bit of
overtime. The notion of moving out of that rigid system and
retraining themselves into a multi-skilled position was
something which of course, was alien to the craft based
Oystem.
So to create a better market for labour, what the government
has sought to do is to move away from the rigidities of that
craft union structure to one where we're looking at. We're
looking at either enterprise agreements between employees,
unions and employers or we're looking at much more of an
industry based model. And in an industry based model one
can take account of different levels of prosperity and
different requirements 
and imperatives for change. The employees of an industry
can respond accordingly.
So award restructuring is producing fewer but larger
categories of multi-skilled persons and the opportunity of
training and moving through those categories is now an
opportunity available to people where they can, if they
wish, do more things and do them productively, more
efficiently, earn more money and actually produce lower
coats for business.
So there has been a great change from a multiplicity of
unions down to 8 smaller number of larger unions, much more
industry based, and an enterprise arrangement between unions
and companies f or enterprise agreements about the way in
which they function and beyond that award restructuring to a
system which takes much more account of productivity in the
business and of course, in the economy in general.
This ha. always been the argument we've had with the
Coalition. What John Howard tried to do in 1980 was pretend
there was no craft structure so if you turned your back on
it you deregulated it. Well of course, he turned his back
on it and wages went to 16 per cent that year and the
inflation % ate went to 12. You can't deregulate, you could
never turn your back on that system, you had to change it
and that's what we've sought to do. Change the way in which
it works and get down to a much more flexible labour market.
So that national wage cases will now look after basically
the low paid who are not in positions where obvious
improvements in productivity are available, where their
bargaining power is weak, but most other people will secure
wage increases through enterprise bargaining and lifting
their skills and improving the opportunities within
businesses. So much of that opportunity resides with managers. Whenever
you see a well managed business you'll see generally a cost
conscious, competitive business. Whenever you see good
managemnent you'll mostly see good labour relations. I've
never known an opportunity as now for the manager with a
sharp eye and a keen sense of relations with employees to
produce lower costs and make a business run more
productively and more efficiently. So enterprise bargaining
creates opportunities but it also creates greater challenges
because it will sort the wheat from the chaff as far as
managers are concerned and it will also do the same in terms
of employees and their willingness to make a business tick.
in the end it focuses on the ability of the business to
prosper and that focus is what's important in getting those
productivity agreements and improvements.
The training which is part and parcel of award restructuring
is taking place in the economy now, there is a much greater
emphasis on training and the government is now seeking to 
improve that emphasis further.
Again, and let Me just say a few words about in the f irst
instance, about tertiary levels. We've added since the
middle 198s 120,000 places for universities. That in the
equivalent of twelve universities of an average campus size
of 10,000. That means that about 40 per cent of school
leavers, 3S-40 par cent find places in universities. That's
very high up the OECD average scale. We're just behind the
United States and the Unites States are miles ahead of
anybody else. So the growth path now, the trajectory for
university places will naturally find its own level now that
we've lifted the level so dramatically in the 19509. We've
got that retention rate from three kids in ten to nearly
eight in ten end about 35-40 per cent of them finding places
in university.
The next challenge is to improve vocational education and
it's more the pity that we've never had really a national
system of vocational education. Some of the TAFE systems
around the Commonwealth are more efficient than others, some
better reflect the requirements of the labour market, some
understand better award restructuring and what all that
means and making the country more clever and capable, some
are more client driven than provider driven. But one thing
we do know is as a system they are not fulfilling adequately
their national charter.
So at the Premiers Conference lost week I sought again, to
try to bring together prospects of the development of a
national system of TAFE, a national vocational and
educational system. I think with a bit of good will and a
bit of elbow grease in the right places we can do that, we
can build a national vocational educational system.
Not only is that important for education, cleverness, being
capable and all the other things that I've talked about the
country today, but it will be important to get that system
working and to provide people that come through it with
diplomas which have status in the community, which the TAFE
system to this point has not ever really enjoyed and we can
get to a system which is much more similar to the European
vocational education systems, where a status of a diploma
coming out of one of these institutions m~ eans more to
employers. If you look at countries like Germany and
companies like Mercedes Benz, Semens or BMW, the people who
run those companies are basically people with diplomas from
their TAFE system and not from their universities.
That's the sort of TAFE system I think Australia should
have. That will mean that 60 per cent of kids cascading out
of secondary school are cascading into some form of training
and it will mean that the sort of unskilled or low skilled
jobs that most of us grew up with as kids are disappearing 
these people will be taken up into more trained, more highly
paid more interesting jobs. We did a lot of that in the
19808, it's stopped for the moment with the recession anid
with unemployment but as it resumes what we'll find Is that
job opportunities will not be dead-end jobs but they'll be
live-end jobs. Jobs which have training and skills about
them anid which will provide more interesting jobs and better
pay and conditions. So it In important therefore that the
TAFE system fulfils its role and plays its role ini getting
that focus back on education.
Australia has about it many comparative advantages, but the
more I go through Asia and other parts of the world the more
I'm convinced that one of those is education and that you
can't build a clever country or a capable country without
it, you certainly couldn't do It with three kids in ten
completing secondary school, you can't do It with a TAFE
system that isn&amp;' t working properly, you can't Go it without
that kind of national focus that I'm talking about.
I think we do have a great chance not only to do it for
ourselves but also to provide a service. That is, sell
education services to the rest of the world and particularly
to our near North, but more particularly to build our
industrial base upon that sort of a skills base a truly
clever and competent country. That means of course, a focus
on research and development as well which must go hand in
hand with training. And that's why the Commonwealth's
contribution to research and development in this country is
important so that we start to make up f or the fact the
private sector of Australia Isn't spending a lot on research
and development and hasn't traditionally. The Commonwealth
in a number of ways will be doing that.
Can I also say in TAPE one of the things we want to do is
build specialist training institutes and we want to do more
things with business. One of the great hang-ups in
Australian education is that everybody interested in it
wants to have a new building. The f irst thing they want Is
a big mausoleum to make themselves feel important with,
where in fact the place is strewn with schools, some of
which are unoccupied as the demography changes and where we
ought to be focussing on people rather than bricks and
build ing institutions.
One of the things I think we should do is in certain sectors
of industry, where industry can play a much bigger role in
training, the government and national TAFE training
institutions get together and develop courses which are
designed on a client-driven basis, in particular sectors of
industry. And where industries predominate in certain
suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne, in those pieces one could
see a specialised thing. Up at Bankstown TAFE for instance
there's an arrangement with Kaznbrook, the appliance
manufacturer, and the Benkstown TAPE to do special things 
there. In the northern suburbs of Melbournhe, recently I
visited an automotive TAFE college which specialises in
automotive&amp;. I visited, in the course of the sme period,
two tyre factories in Melbourne which are now doing very
competent things in technology but Can't find enough trained
people. There is no reason why a TAFE Institute and the
companies concerned couldn't put together a training
regiment, courses for that industry and in areas of advanced
manufacturing technology which are not being catered for
often in technical and further education. I think there In
also a case for specialist Institutes that focus on those
advanced manufacturing technique.
So I'd like to think that wee're not just building a national
Institute of TAFE which has common denominator features
about it, but we're also reserving the right to clever
things but not necessarily In the building of business as so
much focus as often been in the past. So TAFE is important.
The other thing which I think is important also and we are
talking about two things here, we're talking about the
training of young people and we're talking about the
retraining of older people, but youth unemployment is a
problem and it's got to be dealt with. It's a problem that
needs to be kept in perspective nevertheless. I notice some
headlines the other day saying that 46 per cent of young
people are unemployed. That's a distortion of, in fact, the
position. Seven or eight out of ten young people are in
education or in training. Two or three out of ten young
people in the 15-19 year age group are actually in the
workforce looking for work and about a third of those people
are actually out of work, that's one in ten. So seven to
eight in ten 15-19 year olds are in education and training,
two to three in ten are actually in the workforce and one in
ten is actually unemployed, that's 10 per cent of the age
cohort 15-19 not 46 per cent. in fact there are 40,000
fewer young people 15-19 unemployed today then there was in
the 1982-83 recession.
With that said It is still a problem and we have to deal
with it and we're going to try and deal with it by looking
at the whole question of entry level* training wages which
was addressed by the Carmichael Report, Laurie Carmichael
who you've known and read about in the Australian Vocational
Certificate Training system. We're looking at a new
vocational certificate training system with work-based
training places in industry, where we've got the opportunity
of taking many more young people up and at the same time
giving themt training opportunities.
So I think it is a very exciting prospect and one I'm
focussing on now. And we're hoping to have a meeting with
national employers and other people from various
institutions in the next little while to see if we can focus
on some of those problems and to see if we can do something 
about streaming kids into work and training opportunities
under that Australian Vocational Certificate Training
system.
That will help deal with that one in ten young person who
doesn't have a job and to give them work experience and to
give them training. So I think It is of course, obviously
terribly important to us.
Like many things you can't change everything over night. We
started on higher participation rats back in the 1980s, we
started lifting the places in tertiary institutions, we
changed the way in which the tertiary system functions,
we're now focussing on TATE and while all that's been on
we've gone off aggregate wage movements to a more flexible
labour market, to award restructuring to change the basis of
the craft system to enterprise bargaining to lift
ef ficiencies out of companies and give managers a chance of
managing instead of being caught in simply a wage structure
which drops out of an Arbitration Commission decision which
takes no account of the capacity of business to produce, to
make profits or to run. So the opportunity there for
improvements in efficiency is quite profound.
Now, let me just say a couple of things about our opponents
while I'm at it. They have got two policies, one is to put
a 15 per cent goods end services tax on everything. This
will put 6 to 7 percentage points into. inflation and take
the inflation rate from 1.7 per cent, where it now is, to
around about 7 or 8 per cent. And with it the bill rates,
now at 6. 5 per cent, will have the same 5 to 7 percentage
points added to them and they will be going back to 13 or 14
and then you will have all the add ons after that.
They have no policy of wage discounts. They don't want to
talk to the unions. They have no mechanism whatsoever of
securing a wage discount for a consumption tax. A
consumption tax is simply a device which will explode the
national inflation rate and put us back where we were two
decades ago with high levels of Inflation.
And the reason I dropped the proposal in the middle 1980s is
that I couldn't guarantee the wage discounts then, I didn't
have the right to blow the national inflation rate to pieces
anymore than John Howson has that right today. it won't remake
Australia, it is just another tax. And another tax
which will very heavily impede business, and I don't know
whether many of you have read experiences from Britain or
New Zealand, or any other countries with a goods and
services tax, but the great burden of the goods and services
tax in terms of compliance cost falls on small business.
And it is the small business sector which will carry the
great burden of this and the result is that most people Will
spend the better part of one day per week accounting for the
system and seeing that there is a responsibility beyond them 
to account it and to remit to the tax offtice the proceeds
all in the name of the ideological shift of taxing
expenditure Instead of Income.
Secondly, the other policy in the policy we saw at APPM, but
two weeks ago. That is, that employees shouild not have a
right to group together and be represented by a union in
dealing with their company, or employee, that they should
only have a right to deal with them individually. And of
course once that happens and you have common law contracts,
all the things which Australian workers have built up for
themselves over the period, their annual leave, sick leave
and other rates of pay and terms of conditions of employment
will be swept away as each individual person will deal with
their employer.
Well of course organised labour in Australia would fight
that one to the bitter end. And as the f ight went on, the
national inflation rate would go up beyond that of a goods
and services tax, and the sort of mayhem and picket lines
and police pushing and shoving that we saw down In Tasmania
two weeks ago would be the order of the day. We are now in
a period of industrial peace which has been unprecedented.
We have now got average weekly earnings for the year to
March at 3.1 per cent, the inflation rate is at 1.7 per cent
and industrial disputation in. I think, is probably at an
all time low.
To jeopardise that system and go back to' the sort of
industrial confrontation chaos is about the last thing
Australia needs, but that Is all, I'm afraid, Dr Hewson has
to offer. Two very sterile ideas. Belt everything with a
per cent consumption tax and try and to push people of f
federal awards or state awards and let them into
commonwealth contracts where they can only do It
individually with their employer.
It is not much of a solution, it Is not going to do anything
about training. In fact they will add S50 million onto the
Fightback proposals for TAFE. Well big deal, big deal. The
kind of responsibility that TAFE is going to have in the
system and the labour market programs like iobskill and
Jobstart, will all be chopped to pieces as Dr Hewson trys to
cut $ 10 billion out of outlays to pay his tax cuts.
With us, there will be focus there on training and retraining,
on labour market programs, upon award
restructuring, upon productivity based enterprise bargaining
by agreement, about working to a national consensus with the
Government, the employers end employees working together for
a low cost, low Inflation, high productivity country. That
is where we are going now.
Now we have paid a price for some of that in the recession,
but the benefits are going to be quite profound as we go 
12
into the ' 90s with a low Inflation culture and with a high
productivity culture and being truly competitive for the
first time in probably, on a long term basis, in the postwar
years. That is the importance of having a consensus basis
to national policy and that is the importance of having a
focus on educational training so that when we start selling
those products we are not at the bottom of the international
division of labour, doing dead-end jobs at dead-end prices,
but further up the international division of labour doing
clever things, clever prices, with clever people.
Thank you very much. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
TO THE HONG KONG AUSTRALIA BUSINESS ASSOCIATION
SYDNEY, 18 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm pleased to have the opportunity to address the Hong
Kong Australia Business Association.
As this country increasingly looks toward Asia for its
future we will need organisations like this one.
We'll need you to promote business.
We'll need you to establish the networks of
communication, trade and investment essential to our
integration with the region.
We will also need you to promote the id~ a of Australia
engaged in Asia.
And it's not jiz= a in Asia that we need to promote it.
We need to promote the idea he=: because Australians,
by and large, have yet to fully grasp the dimensions of
our opportunity in Asia, or the imperatives which
accompany that opportunity.
We simply haet seize the time in Asia and, quite
simply, we can.
But it is one of the lessons of the success of the Asian
Tiqers indeed it is a lesson to be learned from
successful countries around the world that there has to
be a conscious, concerted, national effort.
The nation has to know what the goals are, what the
rewards will be, and what is required.
Your example will help in that educationnl process. 
And I hope you will take every opportunity to
proselytise. Asia is where our future substantially lies, but we won'It
secure the future without effort.
We can't assume that our presence on the margins of the
most rapidly growing economies of the world is an
historical accident to replace that other one, called the
British Empire Asia will not serve as a substitute for
the imperial security blanket.
It is not like a reef of gold or a mountain of iron ore
which needs only to be mined. It's not just a matter of
sending in a railway line and some earth-moving
equipment.
We won'It wake up one morning and f ind ourselves riding on
Asia's back as we used to ride on the sheep's.
It will require, as I said, a conscious national ef fort.
We will have to adjust our thinking and increase the rate
of our work.
We'll have to think of ways into these markets, which
means being clever as perhaps never before, bold as never
before, tenacious as never before.
At this stage we are not doing badly.
If our economy is not yet so international and open as
Hong Kong's, it is much more so than it was a decade ago.
We have radically opened it up in the 1980s.
If we are not yet as competitive and dynamic as the
Tigers, the floating of the dollar, reduced protection,
wide ranging micro-economic reforms, the transformation
of our industrial relations system and a responsible
fiscal policy have given us a chance to play in the same
league. We now export more than twice the volume of goods we did
at the beginning of the eighties.
And the composition of those goods has shifted markedly
to manufactures and services.
It can also be said that if our economic imperatives are
still imperfectly or inadequately understood, they are
much better understood than they used to be.
I think perhaps the economic education of Australia has
been one of the more remarkable developments of the last
decade. 
In 1992 Australians know that we cannot prosper by a
policy of exporting commodities and maintaining
inefficient industries for a small domestic market behind
a tariff wall.
They know the realities including, in principle, the
reality of Asia.
What they need, I think, is the confidence and your
association can be an important supplier of that.
These have been hard times revolutions of the kind we
have been going through are bound to be.
But the reward will be contributing to and sharing in the
prosperity of Asia where in the last year the Newly
Industrialising Economies grew by 7.1 per cent, compared
with the OECD average of 1.1%
The reward is nothing less than the maintenance of our
standard of living and our way of life.
The reward is the future of Australia.
And there are reasons for confidence.
Already nearly 55% of our exports go to the Asian region.
We are in a position of considerable strength.
Our GNP is equal to the combined GNP of all the ASEAN
countries. We have a skilled, well educated and flexible work force.
We have a high degree of political and economic
stability. We have things which the region wants like raw
materials, but also technologies and manufactures, skills
and services, and space.
Our trade with Hong Kong is a good measure of how well we
are doing.
Our bilateral trade with Hong Kong has grown three-fold
in the past decade and Kong Kong is now our seventh
largest export market.
Hong Kong has become an important investor here.
Last year it was our second largest source of migrants.
As the centre of the " Greater China" growth triangle,
Hong Kong now offers Austral-an buis-i ies-a new frontier
of opportunity.
There have been significant recent changes in the region. 
4
As wages have increased in Hong Kong and Taiwan,
manufacturing has shifted to the coastal provinces of
China especially the Guangdong and Fujian provinces.
I'm sure you are familiar with most of the facts and
figures, but they are worth recording in an Australian
context. They speak eloquently of the challenge which we
face. Up to three million workers in Guandong province are
employed in factories owned by Hong Kong manufacturers.
With the aid of Taiwan's and Hong Kong's capital,
technology, management and marketing skills, Guangdong
has built a dynamic economy with real GNP growing by
12.40 per year from 1980.
Hong Kong, of course, is a gateway to China, its 1.1
billion people, and its increasingly vibrant private
sector.
China is now Australia's ninth largest export market.
Hong Kong's growing role as a financial and services
capital for China represents major opportunities for us.
Again, there are reasons for confidence:
in the example, for instance, of AOTC which has been
granted one of the licenses to operate a second
generation mobile telephone network in Hong Kong.
-Or in the new airport and port development there,
where Leighton Industry is tendering.
Ladies and gentlemen-
What is presently happening in Hong Kong and China is
happening in other parts of Asia, and the opportunities
for Australia are replicated throughout the region.
Intra-regional foreign investment has rapidly increased.
The NIEs are now important foreign investors in their own
right. Intra-regional foreign trade has expanded.
Major developments are underway or being planned to
improve the infrastructures.
Economic growth in Asia is increasingly being driven by
demand within the region itself.
That is why, as everyone here knows, we mnust become a
part of it. 
There is no doubt that this dynamic progress in Asia will
continue into the next decade.
But there a= a uncertainties.
The greatest of them continues to be the risk of a
breakdown in the Uruguay roundj of the GATT.
A breakdown in the Uruguay Round has the potential to
create regional trading blocs in North America and
Europe. We face the prospect of revisiting a world with
a fortress mentality. I
Hong Kong and the other Asian economies have shown the
benefits of a free trade policy.
We in Australia share their beliefs, and we have a common
interest in voicing these beliefs in international
forums. It is not only because of enlightened self-interest, but
also because we share a common conviction that
unrestricted bilateral trade is the best way to foster
economic development in the developing countries.
The APEC process is one forum where we can pursue these
goals. We should remember what the reality of APEC is:
over the past twenty years the share, of our total
exports to APEC countries rose from 54 per cent to
73 per cent.
in the same period the EC's share fell from 21 per
cent to 12 per cent which, as from last year, is
less than the volume of our trade with the ASEAN
countries alone.
in fact our trade with ASEAN is now greater than our
trade with the United States.
APEC has become the major regional economic and trade
forum and it will became an increasingly important
instrument for promoting regional trade liberalisation.
That is why I have proposed a process for periodic APEC
Heads of Government meetings.
Ladies and gentlemen
As part of the continuing process of internationalising
the Australian economy an essential undertaking if we
are to succeed in Asia in the One Nation statement I
announced that we would issue more foreign bank licenses,
and allow foreign banks to operate as branches for
wholesale banking and acquire smaller banks. 
By these measures we intend to more closely integrate
Australia with the Asia Pacific economies by taking on an
increasingly substantial role as a regional financial
centre. In One Nation I also announced that we would allow the
taxable income derived from pure off-shore banking
transactions by an authorised off-shore banking unit in
Australia to be taxed at the reduced rate of 10 per cent.
The Government realises that if it wants to facilitate
the development of the industry in Australia it must
broadly match the concessions in other major centres.
Our concession will be generous. For example, it will
apply to the profits from trading with non-residents in a
large range of financial instruments ( including foreign
currency) and to the fee income received from credit
support activities.
We intend to introduce the legislation next week. I
think you will see then that the Government has provided
tax measures conducive to the development of a viable
off-shore banking centre, while taking measures necessary
to protect the domestic revenue base.
These initiatives, I believe, recognise the unique
character of off-shore banking as a highly specialised
activity distinct from the core business of the banking
sector. They number among the fundamentals we have to get right.
They demonstrate our commitment to the long term.
Hong Kong, of course, has been enormously successful in
establishing itself as an off-shore banking centre.
Our stable economic and political system, our location in
the right time zone, our skills, our increasingly close
links with the region, and our competitive taxation
arrangements mean that we have the potential to make a
success of the same business.
I think it is appropriate also to note that the
Government will continue to support the high degree of
autonomy promised in Sino-British Joint Declaration for
this autonomy is the key to maintaining stability,
prosperity and human rights in Hong Kong after 1997.
Australia and Hong Kong have initialled an agreement
which will protect Australian investments in Hong Kong
until at least 2007.
China will formally approve this agreement before it is
signed. Ladies and gentlemen 
The Government recognises the important role played by
small and medium sized businesses, and we have
implemented a number of reforms and programs designed to
address the structural impediments which face them.
Our aim is to promote the creation and growth of
competitive enterprises by removing regulatory and other
impediments and providing appropriate assistance at
critical stages.
The reforms, which address priority issues such as
taxation, export development, access to finance, and
business skills and enterprise development will help
small business to take advantage of new opportunities as
the economy recovers.
We have recently taken a number of other steps to promote
our economic integration with the region.
The National Trade Strategy which the Government launched
last November established an integrated and consistent
framework in which to pursue trade and investment in East
Asia. Austrade's overseas resources have been re-allocated to
reflect the high priority we place on supporting
Australian business in the region.
In One Nation we announced a further increase in their
funding. In February the Government issued a follow-up to the
Garnaut Report which seeks to anticipate future
developments in South-east Asia and so prepare us to take
advantage of the opportunities they present.
We are undertaking in consultation with the private
sector and state governments a major study of trade and
investment in Asia.
It also serves our economic purposes that an increasing
number of Australian students are studying Asian
languages at secondary and tertiary level.
There are now 34 centres or institutes of Asian studies
at Australian universities, and there is a growing number
of educational exchange programs between Australian and
Asian universities.
Our schools are changing the curriculum to reflect
changes in the community, the evolving requirements of
government and business, and the ground-swell of interest
in the societies of the region. 
8
All these things bear testament to our commitmentthough
they do not, as a few critics have suggested,
reflect any willingness on our part to compromise our
social and political values.
As I said in a speech in Sydney early in April, and as I
re-iterated while in Indonesia, our traditions of
democracy, our notions of social justice and personal
liberty are not negotiable.
Indeed, the more confident we are of what we stand for,
the better we will do in Asia and, I believe, the rest
of the world.
To be ambivalent about identity will only weaken us.
Part of that identity these days comprises our nondiscriminatory
immigration policy and the principles of
cultural tolerance enshrined in multicultural social
policies. This of course is a significant change: not so long ago
we were known in the world for discrimination and
intolerance, particularly towards Asia.
The change we have made, which now sees us known in Asia
for our openness, seems to me a proof of our ability to
make the other necessary adjustments.
Because the nation's future quite literally depends on
it, few things press so urgently on the Australian
Government as the need to create the right environment
for Australian trade and investment in Asia.
But the Government's capacities stop short of meeting the
ultimate challenge.
That responsibility falls to business itself.
Australian business ii making considerable progress, and
it's really not for me to tell those who are making it
what else they might do.
But it does seem to me that our cultural diversity equips
us extraordinarily well, and we can probably turn it to
greater account than we are presently doing.
our Asian migrant community, through small business
networks, is making considerable progress in opening up
new avenues of trade and consolidating commercial links
with all parts of the Asia-Pacific.
Personal familiarity with the linguistic, cultural,
religious, geographic and national differences of these
markets constitutes a genuine advantage for the
Australian economy. 
It follows that Australian firms might do well to draw
upon the wealth of language and cultural skills in their
own workforces not just in Asia, of course, but in
Europe and the Middle East.
I think it will become very clear in the next few years
that there is a greater reward to be reaped from our
immigration and multicultural policies than we have
hitherto imagined.
And I think it will be all the greater if we recognise
and ensure that nothing in those policies compromises
our identity or our loyalty to this place.
As we become more Asian in our economic and geopolitical
orientation we will do well to become more undividedly
Australian in our thinking and in the image we project
abroad. That, I believe, will herald not a more parochial
Australia but a more sophisticated one a more confident
and a more successful one.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate the Hong Kong
Australia Business Association for the initiative they
have shown and for the vanguard role they are playing in
Asia, not only on behalf of their members, but on behalf
of Australia.
And I thank them for inviting me here today. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF WASTE MINIMISATION AND RECYCLING STRATEGY, DARLING
HARBOUR, SYDNEY 22 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
The Government's Waste Minimisation and Recycling Strategy is
more than it seems.
This environment strategy is also an industrial strategy, and
a social strategy.
In this way it goes to the heart of some of the key questions
facing Australia today.
For instance, it is concerned with industrial modernity and
efficiency. It will play a part In determining how
significant our role will be in the modern world.
Increasingly this can be said of all good environment
policies: they are not regressive, as the critics used to like
to say, and as some of the more uncouth ones still do.
Strategies like this one do not advocate a more primitive way
of life, but a more sophisticated one.
They do not deny development, but they say it should be
intelligent. They look forward not back indeed, in the long term, they
can put us ahead of the international competition and keep us
there. We are encouraging a more efficient use of resources which
means less demand on our primary materials, and just as
importantly, more emphasis on the productive or creative
process. Firms which engage in successful waste minimisation schemes
have focussed on best practice. They are more likely to be
more efficient in other areas, and more likely to recognise
opportunities to create new ways of doing things and new
products. 
2
They are more open to change, and much more able to compete
with the best firms internationally and domestically.
A commitment to waste minimisation and recycling commits
government and industry to technology in ways we have not been
committed before.
By way of example, in recent years Australia has become a
world leader in-waste. water treatment and recycling for paper
packaging. There have been some outstanding technological advances in the
recycling of other materials: in paper for instance.
The collection and recycling of waste paper has meant that:
-the pulp resource base of the country has been increased,
which has helped us to replace imports.
-jobs have been generated, particularly in the labour
intensive practice of recycling.
-exports have been generated, both through greater
production and in the development of expertise in recycling
technology. Or take the classic example of slag from Australia's
steelworks. There is hardly a more a striking symbol of industrial waste
than a slag-heap.
But slag is now recognised as potentially high quality cement
or aggregate, and new processes are now being put in place to
exploit what was once the stuff of universal monuments to the
ugly side of industry.
Ladies and gentlemen
This strategy is another policy o
imagination. It will help put Au
realm of the creative.
Imagination in the area of waste
can mean new industries, new expo
Waste minimisation and recycling
environment with competitive, eff,
and a culture of creativity and a
This particular strategy, then, i
compliments, our progress towards
development in Australia.
It does not stand alone, even on
deals with. There is a breadth t'
matters. f imagination, f= r
stralian industry in the
minimisation and recycling
rt markets and new jobs.
combines protection of the
icient, expanding industries
daptat ion.
s a key development in, and
ecologically sustainable
the particular issues it
o government actions on these 
Our comprehensive Land Care program, involving $ 320 million
over the decade of Land Care, is helping to make agriculture
and farming sustainable and is reducing waste and pollution of
water and air.
In regard to protection of the ozone layer we have been ahead
of the pack in eliminating CFC's. Ozone depletion is a
particularly insidious result of waste generation. And our
strong and ongoing policies on the greenhouse effect will also
lead to a reduction of waste production and pollution.
This waste minimisation and recycling strategy also goes to
the heart of questions of annial PquIy.
Environmental costs, after all, tend to be borne unequally
across the community.
The better of f can generally make sure they don't suffer from
waste disposal problems. Poorer people often don't have the
means to move away.
A national strategy like this one positively discriminates in
favour of those who, since the beginnings of
industrialisation, have borne an unequal share of a national
burden. It is a classic reform in the interests of the nation and in
the interests of all Australians a classic L-ahnr reform.
Though conceived in advance of the February One Nation
statement, it projects both the same broad national goals and
the same means of pursuing them.
As I said, it is a strategy for the universal benefit of
Australians. It also seeks to In-111ad all Australians.
We want, and indeed the strategy depends upon, the active
participation of industry and the community.
It depends on partnerships between business and local, State
and Territory governments.
It sets out ways in which the bodies responsible for creating
household, industrial and commercial wastes can minimise them,
and recycle them when they are unavoidably generated.
It follows that every Australian is responsible for seeing
that the strategy succeeds. The most important partnership of
all is between Australians and their country.
If we all participate in recycling schemes, if we all seek out
goods made from recycled materials, if we all take a care to
minimise the amount of waste we produce, we will all share in
the success. 
We are seeking to change attitudes.
If we change attitudes we can not only improve the environment
and the economy and the quality of our lives, I think we can
help create a regimen of care for each other and the land we
live in.
That, I think, is a majnr objective and ghmid~ a be a major
objective of all government policies.
Of course, in launching this strategy today, we should also
recognise that what we do for the environment here we do for
the environment globally.
Those wastes we call greenhouse gases, for instance, present a
challenge to the whole world. We share the world's
responsibility to limit them.
As a developed country we also have a responsibility to put
ourselves at the leading edge of environmental problemsolving.
As the developing countries industrialise the scale of the
problem is bound to grow finding solutions, we can be sure,
is a growth industry.
Ladies and gentlemen we are accustomed to hear of the
balance in nature, or the ecological balance, the delicate
arrangement in nature which assures its continuation.
An equally crucial arrangement, and the one we urgently have
to find, is the integration between the environment and what
we make of it.
The integration of our respect for an environment unspoiled,
our spiritual and physical need for such an environment, and
our need for economic development.
We do nPPA one as much as the other.
We need economic development for our survival as a nation, for
the maintenance of our standard of living and, with that, our
values and institutions.
We also need it, I believe, because it is in our nature to
create and invent.
But in the debate about achieving the right balance, in
searching for the inevitable and necessary compromises which
will enable us to grow without degrading the world we live in
ultimately we come down on the side of the world.
I mean not just that we come down on the side of ecological
imperatives, like breathing clean air, or reducing greenhouse
gas emissions. 
I mean that we should come down of the side of conservation
rather than degradation, care rather than neglect, beauty
rather than ugliness.
This strategy I think is notable for making those choices.
And I think it is consistently the case in good environmental
policy that it advances the level of our sophistication when
we decide about these balances.
When for instance, on balance, we decide against mines in
Kakadu; or drilling on the Barrier Reef; or accepting a crude
and environment-degrading pulp mill at Wesley Vale, when more
intelligent applications of technology would make a better
one. So I welcome environmental debate in this country I think it
advances our level of civilisation.
We have been notoriously destructive of the natural
environment out of ignorance, carelessness and greed.
Nor have we cared as much as we should for the aesthetics of
the environments we have built.
In a remarkably short time we have gone from being a country
where space seemed limitless, and the environment incomparably
beautiful and clean, to one in which landfill sites are
becoming scarce and pollution of all kinds threatens the
quality of many urban, rural and natural environments.
It's good for us now to think carefully about how we can not
only make amends, but lead the world in strategies for the
future. What we have tended to take for granted in the past we must
now take as responsibilities.
And again, I think it will do us no harm to be thinking about
the future and about the solutions the future will require.
It will be good for us to think about the way we should be
developing our cities, for instance.
And it's good for us to be thinking along the national lines
which environment policy demands.
And as we go about finding national solutions I think we
should take a great deal of heart from our recent
achievements. Look back on the last ten years and you will see that we have
done remarkably well in achieving that balance between
development and the ecology ecologically sustainable
development that I spoke of earlier.
For we have increased our levels of production GDP has grown
by more than a third. 
And we have increased our manufacturing our exports of
manufacturing and services now outstrip mining and
agriculture.
But we've also doubled the size of the protected wilderness
area in Tasmania; trebled the size of Kakadu National Park and
protected it by banning mining; protected the Wet Tropic area
of Queensland; saved the Northern New South Wales rainforests;
extended the Marine Park of the Great Barrier Reef region from
14 per cent to 98 per cent.
We've been international leaders in legislation to protect the
ozone layer and led a world campaign to prevent mining in
Antarctica. We've developed a comprehensive energy conservation program
and a ten year program to protect endangered species.
In the area of the environment, as in much of our social
legislation, we are ahead of the world, and we should be proud
of it, and encouraged by it.
We certainly shouldn't be tempted. to wind back our commitment
either because they are too hard, or as some would have us
believe, because in these difficult economic times we can't
afford them.
The truth is we can't afford not to protect our environment,
or to let future generations pay for our neglect and
expediency, or to miss the opportunities which environmental
imperatives offer to us industrially.
In 1992 nearly a tonne of solid waste will be produced per
person in Australia.
This particularly ugly and potentially depressing fact has one
thing going for it we know it can be changed.
This strategy shows the Government has the will to change it.
By many of its recent actions industry is showing it has the
will to change it. By their responses the people of Australia
also give every indication that they have the will.
We will change it.
Within the next few years that tonne of waste will be much
reduced, and we'll develop both better technologies and better
ways of living on this continent in doing it.
Perhaps within a decade or less the tonne of waste will have
become a tonne of confidence in ourselves, and a tonne of
faith in the nation.
Let me conclude by congratulating the people who by dint of
good ideas and conscientious effort have come up with this
plan for Australia. 
7
Ros Kelly, of course, deserves much of the credit and much of
the congratulations particularly for the extensive
discussions with industry which she held in 1990, and which
went a long way toward establishing a common understanding in
government and industry.
I congratulate alU those who have been involved, and urge all
Australians to take up the challenge.
This is a major step towards a better Australia.
And it is with great pleasure and pride that I now declare it
launched. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF LIFE BE IN IT PROGRAM " ACTIVATE"
MELBOURNE, 23 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very glad to be here today to launch this Life Be In
It program called " Activate".
Life Be In It is an Australian phenomenon. I doubt if
many who were there when the organisation was founded in
1975 imagined it would still be going strong today.
Alex Stitt who drew the original Norm and continues to
draw him and who is here today, might know the answer
to that.
It has lasted because it is a great idea, and a selfsustaining
one. It includes people, it works on the idea
of partnership with the community and for this reason
it has been able to consistently come up with more ideas
along the way.
This idea " Activate" is surely one of the best, and
the Government is delighted to be a part of it.
Dr Ian Bennett has explained the details of the program,
but I do want to say this:
This program draws its strength from the strength of
Australia itself.
It draws on the energy, ideas and skills the force if
you like of strategic partnerships between government,
industry and the community itself.
That is the beauty of the idea. That's what will see
this program succeed. And that's why I hope and believe
that the same principle will be brought to other programs
for the unemployed in coming months. 
It will most certainly be brought to next month's
national meeting on youth employment and training in
Canberra. Recovery from the recession, the problem of long term
unemployment, the need to re-structure our industry and
seize the opportunities which await us in the world all
these things critically depend on forming these national
partnerships, in substance and in spirit.
In the 1980s we unleashed an enormous amount of economic
energy, not all of it well focussed.
This must be the decade when we re-direct that energy
toward productive investment in competitive industries.
We will do that the incentives are there.
Ultimately this is what will solve the problem of
unemployment this and our determination to train
Australians for the jobs of the future.
Because there is nothing more important to most
Australians than the right to a job.
It is the principal means by which our self-esteem is
built. It is the way we advance ourselves. It is the
way we advance Australia.
For those who have nothing to sell but their labour, it
is the only means of security.
The right to work has always been central to our idea of
what constitutes a fair go.
That is why the Government is making such an effort to
secure jobs for the long term by transforming TAFE into
an education system of status and quality.
It is why " Activate", which is funded under our Jobskills
program, has our unqualified support it provides both
work and training, which means that the people who emerge
from it will have valuable, transferable skills and
that means they will have a future in the modern world.
These are the essentials of any useful response to the
problem of unemployment industries with a future,
training the future.
As I said, we can do those things. We can do what is
necessary to encourage productive investment. We can
renovate our vocational training system.
It will take time and it will not be without difficulty,
but we can do it.
But, even as we do these things, I believe we must do one
thing more. 
3
We have to restore faith in Australia.
I think we have to invest the nation with the same degree
of hope and meaning it had for my generation and the ones
before it.
The generation before mine lived in much harder times
than these, and they had, on the face of it much less
reason for hope.
But they did believe in this country. They believed it
had a destiny to fulfil.
That faith played no small part in seeing them through.
And in seeing Australia through.
I'm not sure that this country has quite that meaning for
Australians today.
I don't think for a moment that we will re-kindle faith
and hope by looking backwards, or by standing still.
We won't do it either by paying old obeisances or talking
about the good old days of dead end jobs.
Nor will we do it, incidentally, by cutting into the
advanced and comprehensive social programs we have built
and maintained over a century, and which are today the
hallmark of Australian civilisation.
I think we will best restore that faith and confidence
in fact we will only restore it by confronting the
future.
Confronting the future means finding solutions now.
Solutions like this one which do what we in the
Government have been trying to do since we began the
national program called One Nation.
Get the directions right. Address the imperatives.
Consolidate our strengths. And as we develop ideas and
get them working, keep building that regimen of care for
each other and the nation, which is always the best
measure of a successful society.
I believe we have to make a truly national effort, and
that is truly what we have been doing these past six
months. The national meeting we will hold on 22 July will be a
major step along that path.
That meeting, I believe, will deliver new hope and
opportunities to Australians, particularly young
Australians. 
We can do much to solve our problems if we have the will
to do it.
In Australia we have much in our favour. Among all our
human and material resources there is one as valuable as
any other that is our belief in fairness, in the " fair
go", of individual opportunity tempered only by social
justice this is an ethic as old as the nation itself.
We should call on that belief now and in the future.
It will serve us well.
It has served Life Be In It well in this program.
I want to congratulate everyone associated with
" Activate" and thank them, and wish them success.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
COMM( ONWEALTH RESPONSE TO THE ROYAL COMMISSION INTO
ABORIGINAL DEATHS IN CUSTODY, 24 JUNE 1992
Mr Speaker
I seek leave to make a Parliamentary Statement on the
Commonwealth's response to the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Mr Speaker
On 26 February, I presented the One Nation Statement. In
it, I announced measures to help close the gaps which for
so long have separated Australians.
I said then that all our efforts should go towards
uniting the country. I also said we should combine a
more efficient economy with a fairer and more equitable
society. 27 May was the 25th Anniversary of the 1967 referendum to
give the Commonwealth the power to legislate for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
On that occasion I said that, as a nation, we have not
yet succeeded in meeting the challenge set by the
triumphant referendum result.
Today, there is no more central issue to our national
identity and self-esteem than the injustices brought home
to us all by the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths
in Custody.
There is nothing more central to our reputation in the
world. Or to the kind of democratic, just society to which we
aspire. Mr Speaker 
2
The needs are clear.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have about
half the average yearly income of other Australians.
Participation by Aboriginal young people in post-school
education is around a fifth of the rate for
non-Aboriginal young people.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in all age
groups have mortality rates almost three times higher
than for the overall population.
The custody rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people is 29 times that of the general community.
These few statistics give some idea of what the Royal
Commission called " the disadvantaged and unequal
position" of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
in all aspects of Australian society.
The Commonwealth sees the Report of the Royal Commission
into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody as a national
opportunity for genuine change in the lives of
Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
On behalf of the Government, I would like to say again
how much we appreciate the work of the Royal
Commissioners and their staff.
Their work documented a tragic waste of life.
The Royal Commission investigated the deaths of ninetynine
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in
custody. But at least thirty more Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people have died in custody since the Royal
Commission finished its investigations.
I know that nothing can remove the grief, anger and loss
felt by the families, relatives and friends of those who
died. But it is fundamentally important that the Royal
Commission found the real killer.
The responsibility lies in large measure with entrenched,
institutionalised racism and discrimination.
Those who died were victims of over two centuries of
dispossession, prejudice and neglect.
We cannot evade these harsh truths. Nor should we.
But we can work to change them. 
On 31 March this year Robert Tickner, the Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, tabled
responses by the Commonwealth and all mainland State and
Territory Governments to the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.
This kind of cooperation is a truly national achievement,
crossing boundaries of jurisdiction and politics.
Its importance cannot be minimised.
In our response to the Royal Commission, the Commonwealth
supported all but one of the Royal Commission's
recommendations.
We allocated $ 150 million over five years for law and
justice initiatives and to assist Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people in their own efforts to overcome
alcohol and substance abuse.
Today I am proud to announce the second stage of the
Commonwealth's response a concerted attack on the
economic and social disadvantage which is reflected
nowhere more starkly than in the numbers of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people in custody.
And a renewal of our commitment to empower Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders.
These measures entail an additional $ 250 million over
five years, taking the total Commonwealth expenditure in
response to the Royal Commission, over five years, to
$ 400 million.
In difficult times, this level of funds is not easy to
find. But the need must be faced.
Mr Speaker
The Royal Commission's report described the efforts,
initiatives and dedication of Aboriginal people and
communities and organisations across Australia to protect
their culture, restore self-esteem and achieve real
equality. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are taking
control of their lives and communities.
They are demonstrating the will for renewal and for selfdetermination.
Today the Government reaffirms its support for these
Australians. The concepts " self-determination" and " renewal" are
increasingly a reality. 
The structures are there to ensure both their effect and
their survival.
Elected Commissioners of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Commission now make national decisions in
Aboriginal Affairs.
Sixty elected Regional Councils now make decisions on
priorities, needs and funding for their areas.
The knowledge and expertise of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander organisations are now vital. in developing
and delivering important Commonwealth programs and
services. Mr Speaker
From the beginning, the ATSIC Commissioners had a major
role in shaping the responses by Governments to the Royal
Commission. I would like to express the Commonwealth's gratitude to
the Chairperson of ATSIC, Miss Lois O'Donoghue, and to
the Commissioners for their dedication.
I would particularly like to thank the Commissioners and
Regional Councils of ATSIC for their efforts over many
months of consultations and negotiations to ensure the
best possible responses by Governments to the Royal
Commission. The ATSIC Commissioners were closely involved in
developing the measures I am announcing today and
endorsed this package of measures before it was
considered by Cabinet.
I would also like to recognise the energy and dedication
of the Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Affairs, Mr Robert Tickner.
His contribution has been extraordinarily valuable and
central in responding to the Royal Commission.
The initiatives I announce today constitute a renewed
attack on economic and social disadvantages among
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
These are initiatives with a difference in that they
are firmly based on the notions of empowerment and selfdetermination.
No real change is possible without the energy and will of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
Imposed solutions will not work.
This has been the fundamental flaw in many previous,
well-intentioned policies. 
We are focusing on the future on economic development
and on Aboriginal young people.
We are working for increased income in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities and organisations,
thus reducing dependence.
We have balanced this strong emphasis on economic
development with equally strong initiatives in social and
cultural self-determination.
These initiatives will mean more jobs, enterprise
opportunities and more training for Aboriginal people.
They will raise community and individual incomes.
They will improve community living standards.
They will increase community self-reliance.
They will address the needs so clearly set out in the
Royal Commission's report.
Mr Speaker, I turn now to the detailed economic
development aspects of this package.
million over five years will be provided for a land
acquisition and development program.
It will provide the capital resources and training for
better use and sustainable development of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander land.
$ 6.6 million over the next three years will be directed
to an Aboriginal Rural Resources program to encourage
enterprise, particularly in managing pastoral properties.
A Community Economic Initiative Scheme, costing $ 23.3
million over five years, will foster local enterprises.
The Australian National Parks and Wildlife contract
employment program for managing natural and cultural
resources will be expanded at a cost of $ 10.6 million
over five years.
ATSIC will develop long-term Aboriginal industry
strategies in the pastoral, arts and tourism industries.
million over five years will be provided for these
strategies, to draw together and build on existing
initiatives.
The Community Development Employment Program will be
expanded at a cost of $ 43.9 million over five years. 
This will ensure an increased emphasis on incomegeneration
and will enable CDEP to better meet the needs
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and young
people.
A Young Peoples' Employment Program will be established,
at a cost of $ 21.9 million, to provide work placements
largely within Aboriginal organisations and linked to
TAFE training.
The total cost of these economic development initiatives
is $ 181.1 million over five years.
They will make a difference because they ARE different.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people will shape
and control them.
Mr Speaker, I now turn to the youth aspects of the
package. A Young Peoples' Development Program will be
established, at a cost of $ 23 million over five years, to
encourage planned community action to meet the specific
needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young
people.
We will set up an Aboriginal Youth Sport and Recreation
Development Program at a cost of $ 9 million over five
years. This initiative will provide Aboriginal sports
development officers to work in communities.
million over five years will be provided for 200
additional Aboriginal Education Workers from 1993.
million will be provided for 600 more pre-school
places for Aboriginal children from 1994.
We will also work for better Aboriginal access to preschools.
These measures respond directly to the strong views of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people that their
children are their future.
All Australians can understand and share this view.
Mr Speaker
We will also provide $ 6.9 million over five years for
measures to improve cooperation between the Commonwealth,
States and Territories and to assist them to monitor
initiatives arising from the Royal Commission.
We have already announced that ATSIC will monitor
progress by Governments in implementing the Royal
Commission' s recommendations. 
These processes will be public and will continue our
commitment to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
participation. The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission will
also report annually on the human rights situation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in
Australia. The Commonwealth Government cannot, alone, eliminate the
disadvantage of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people.
Aboriginal affairs is the concern of all Australians and
their Governments.
For real change, Commonwealth, State, Territory and Local
Governments must work together with Aboriginal
communities and organisations.
We are making progress. On May 11, Heads of Government
endorsed a framework for intergovernmental cooperation in
Aboriginal affairs.
The Commonwealth is working with State, Territory and
Local Governments to put this cooperative framework into
action. We will develop, with the States and Territories, a
National Aboriginal Policy Statement and negotiate joint
responsibility agreements in specific areas.
These arrangements will take some time to put in place.
However, our discussions with the States, Territories and
Local Government on the response to the Royal Commission
have emphasised the need for real cooperative planning
and delivery.
Among the measures I have announced today, the Rural
Resources, Australian National Parks and Wildlife
Contract Employment, Sport and Recreation and education
initiatives all involve funding or delivery through the
States and Territories.
Local Government is also actively involved in the
intergovernmental cooperative framework now accepted by
Heads of Government.
It would confer a great advantage on our efforts if local
government were to actively participate in our
initiatives. We will continue to encourage practical cooperation
between Local Government and Aboriginal communities and
organisations particularly the sixty ATSIC Regional
Councils across Australia. 
8
Mr Speaker
Last year, by Act of Parliament supported by all
political parties, we established the Council for
Aboriginal Reconciliation.
In itself, this is evidence of the desire for justice
among Australians.
I have great faith in the Council and its Chairperson,
former Royal Commissioner, Mr Patrick Dodson.
I think the Council offers Australia its greatest chance
of learning that there is no true loyalty or affection
for this country that does not include respect for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
Mr Speaker
These issues are central to our nation and its future.
They are also urgent.
As a nation, we face the challenge of the consequences of
dispossession, conquest, brutal treatment and equally
inhuman neglect of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people the first Australians.
As I have said more than once in recent months, in this
last decade of the 20th century there is no greater goal
for Australians than the delivery of long overdue justice
to Aboriginal people.
The Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
reminded us of that.
This year should be the turning point: the year when as a
people we decide that if we are to be truly one nation,
true to our traditions and ideals, then by the year 2000
justice wil have been delivered, and the shame removed. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN BOOK PUBLISHERS AWARDS, SYDNEY 26 JUNE
Ladies and gentlemen.
It's a pleasure to be here tonight on one of the big
occasions in the Australian literary year.
And to be here with an Englishman of such courage and
grace that he is prepared to share the stage with a
notorious Pombasher.
I assure you, John, that I am not.
It is only my enemies who say that I am my enemies, the
British tabloids, and a certain type of intractable
colonial which I'm sure you'd never come across in the
Australian publishing industry.
I'm pleased to be here because I want to congratulate the
industry for holding this first international book fair
in Australia.
It's a very welcome development.
Similar events are held around the world; in fact the
international reputation of some cities is to a
significant degree built on book fairs.
There are book fairs in Frankfurt and Bologna. A US book
fair, and Pacifica in Canada.
They are held in Asian countries.
Until now they not have been held here.
Yet, per capita, Australians read as many if not more
books than any of these places. They buy at least as
many. They depend on books as much. 
We are an important market for English language
publishing and, increasingly, for books in other
languages and in translation and it's a vigorous
competitive market.
We gholid celebrate books and their authors.
And their publishers.
And we should do what we can to focus the attention of
Australians on an industry which is a vital supplier of
their cultural needs.
If the word cultural is off-putting, let's say education,
information, communication, entertainment, ideas,
politics, history, stories the skeleton, heart and mind
of a community if you like.
And an essential underpinning and partner of film and
television and many other industries.
And still probably the best measure of who we are, what
we are about, and how well we are doing on the scale of
civilisation. There we have a few reasons why I am pleased to be
associated with the Australian Book Fair and with these
awards. There is another one books offer us a window on to the
world. Just as they do much to define us to ourselves, they can
define us to the rest of the world.
And quite frankly, I think we could do with a bit of redefining.
Visitors like John Mortimer could be forgiven for
wondering why we are so pre-occupied with questions of
identity.
Not only visitors my political opponents describe it as
a distraction, or an obsession, depending on their mood.
But it seems to me a fundamental concern.
In the 1990s we need to be confident in ways that we have
never been, independent in ways that we've never been.
Why? Because all the old supports that gave us both
confidence and a vicarious identity have been pulled
away. The old imperial supports contrived to make the matter of
our independence a secondary concern: for long periods of
our history political expediency made it an illegitimate
concern. 
The same reflex governs the conservative knee Jerk today.
As my opponents are inclined to believe only certified
historians, or RSL Presidents, on such matters, let me
quote one W. J. Hudson, the pre-eminent historian of
Australian foreign policy.
In an article published this year he writes:
When independence from Britain came piecemeal in the
twentieth century diplomatic independence 1923,
executive independence in 1926 and legislative
independence in 1931 it came unsought by
Australia. The independence campaign was waged by
Canada, South Africa and the Irish Free State, and
Australia unsuccessfully opposed them. Australia
became independent not by her choice, not when she
wanted it, not as a result of her own efforts and
not because Australians sought freedom to fulfil
their own alternative visions. From the Australian
point of view, Britain abdicated and Australia was
thrust into an independence which she did not want
and which, lest a potential aggressor might think he
had only Australia to face and not the might of the
British empire, she pretended had not happened.
Some Australians some influential Australians still
pretend. Some symbolic vestiges and some attitudes
suggest that thenat~ ion is still pretending.
I don't think that we can pretend anymore in any form.
We will go into the world independent or we will not
succeed, we will go by our own efforts because there is
no one else to help us, we will fulfil our own visions
because no one is going to lend us theirs.
We have always been ambivalent about who we are. Robert
Menzies of course resolved the dilemma by saying wie we
like a child that is we were not so much two people at
once as one caught between childhood and adulthood.
He imagined us in our relationship wi:: thBri4, tain as being
like a youth returning to its mother, the old family as
if back from a spell at Timbertop, or jackerooing.
Hudson uses a similar metaphor but puts a different spin
on it.
When Britain formalised her withdrawal into Europe, he
says, Australians " felt bereft and betrayed".
Australia was like an adult son having affairs
( economically with Japan and militarily with the
United States) but still living at home and, worse
than kicking him out of the old home, mother was
moving house and not taking him with her. 
In the 1990s without the slightest disrespect to a
country for which I have the greatest admiration, and to
whose language and institutions I am a very grateful
heir, I want to see us leave home.
Of course, we do not remain there in any substantial
material way but we are there emblematically and to a
degree psychologically, and it would be much better for
us in the real world that we now inhabit if we removed
the emblems and excised the doubts.
We need very badly that spirit of independence and faith
in ourselves which will enable us to shape a role for
ourselves in the region and the world.
I mean a faith that is deeper than the mix of chauvinism
and expediency which has tended to shape our political
culture: and a degree of confidence which will allow an
image of us to form that is both more helpful and much
closer to the truth than the lingering stero-types of
gormless men, and shrimps and barbecues.
In this connection I might tell you that yesterday I
presented Australia's Second Report to the Chair of the
UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women. The Chair, Mrs Mervat Tallawy, pointed out that, in
legislation to protect and improve the status of women,
Australia was a model for the rest of the-wo'rld,-
surpassed by none, and equalled perhaps only by the
Scandinavian countries.
Nowhere in the image we present to the rest of the world
nor, I suspect, in our self-image is there a
reflection of that fact.
It would do us good if Australians did know that, and if
the rest of the world knew it.
It would do us good psychologically.
And because we have learned things in getting there and
so have skills and experience which other countries need
it would do us good materially.
I think our ignorance of these things comes from that
same abdication of responsibility for our own destiny,
and our own history.
Let me quote another historian, Professor Stuart
Maclntyre of Melbourne University, who said recently: 
Australian history lacks a civic dimension that
would record how it established its forms of selfgovernment
and the values for which the polity
stands. Just as a survey revealed that more
Australian schoolchildren knew of the Constitution
of the United States of America than the
constitution of their own country, so Washington and
Martin Luther King are more celebrated figures than
Wentworth and Catherine Helen Spence. Our interest
in the past is an interest in family history but not
civic history.
How else could we consider removing Caroline Chisholm
from our currency the most signif1fit woman of our
colonial history, and one engaged in the most significant
phenomenon of aiL our history immigration.
The fact is that for a very long while the focus of our
historical interest was not our own history.
In the age of multicultural Australia we have not by any
means entirely replaced the old sentiments with
unequivocally Australian ones.
Indeed, in a sense, multiculturalism combined with the
lingering Britishness of the place to circumvent the
emergence of a singularly Australian identity to replace
the old imperial one.
As Professor Maclntrye says, " at the very moment when
Australia asserted a more forward-looking and pluralist
identity, the public culture lapsed into inarticulacy."
Again, it seems to me, the questions of identity, image
and our place in the world are linked.
We have very rapidly transformed ourselves from a
notoriously xenophobic and insular society to one which
has the beginnings of a reputation for its remarkably
successful multicultural experiment.
But that success does not form a significant part of our
image abroad, and we do not take much pride in it here.
Nor do we take sufficient advantage of the skills,
experience and cultural insight which our multicultural
population offers us in international business.
The Japanese will tell us that their success is built on
their uniquely monocultural society.
The fact that we can't do that should not concern us
the United States achieved phenomenal success from a
multitude of cultures.
I believe we can too. 
But I think we have to make clear that our belief in
liberty, tolerance, equity and the encouragement of
ethnic diversity in no way compromises our expectation
that the first loyalty of all who make their home here
will be to Australia.
In the 1990s I think we should make it clear.
As a simple step in that direction, I believe the Oath of
Allegiance sworn by new citizens at naturalisation
ceremonies should proclaim unequivocally their loyalty to
Australia and the things we believe Australia stands for
including liberty, tolerance, social justice those
very beliefs which underpin multiculturalism.
As Professor Maclntrye says, there is at present " no
doctrine of citizenship.. The new citizen swears an oath
to abide by the laws of her or his new state, but these
laws are not spelt out, nor is there any elaboration of
their guiding principles or the ethos they encompass."
My own feeling is that the truth about us is more
profound than we are accustomed to admit.
We are still very often described as a place which is
" 1new" or " young". But Australia is n= young.
The truth about the continent is that it is the oldest in
the world and the continent shapes our culture.
The truth about the Australians who were here before 1788
is that they lived in the oldest continuous civilisation
in the world and they have shaped our culture.
The truth about the people who have come here since is
that they brought cultures as old as Europe's, Asia's,
the Middle East's.
The truth about Australian democracy is that there are
few older.
The truth about the first few years of our nationhood-is
that we were in the vanguard of social and democratic
progress. Just as it is true that we are once more.
We are a mature social democracy in need of more
direction and cohesion than we have so far had, and more
confidence than we have presently but mature and robust
nonetheless. A mature social democracy, ladies and gentlemen, with a
remarkably active publishing industry and literary
culture. 
7
A mature social democracy in which the people read books.
And involve themselves in the arts to an extent at least
equivalent to other cultures. And seek to make civilised
lives. And think and invent.
And they write books they win Nobel, Booker, Pulitzer
and other international prizes.
They win Au tralfan prizes. Many Australian prizes.
I wonder if any other country has more literary prizes.
Increasingly they have an international profile in the UK
and the USA.
I hope that increasingly they will be read in Asia that
this book fair will mark a turning point in the
internationalisation of our cultural industries, and that
the book world will do all it can to develop export
markets in our region.
I cannot stress too much how important that task is.
That answer to our biggest contemporary problem
unemployment the answers about our economic future, are
bound to our success in Asia.
And our success there, like our success at home, is bound
I believe to many of the issues I have talked about
tonight. Books already play a vital role in carrying the message
of who we are: the message that this is a culture of
imagination and sophistication.
It is also a culture like the nation itself of vast
unrealised potential.
No industry will play a more significant role in
realising it than the publishing industry.
None will do more to shape and project our identity.
I hope that tonight I have made reasonably clear why I
think this task is so very important.
So I congratulate the industry for this week's great
convention. I also congratulate all those who have been short-listed
for these awards and, of course, all those who have
won.
And I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity
to speak.
a I 



PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRIME XINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING NP, TO A FUNDRAISING DINNER FOR
PER DUNCAN NP, CANPANIA CLUB, HODEURY NORTH# ADELAIDE
28 aLW 1992
JrUNE
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Peter ( Duncan), Julie, my Cabinet
colleague Neal Blewett, distinguished parliamentary
colleagues in Federal and State Parliament, distinguished
members of local government, ladies and gentlemen, boys
and girls, there are a few of them here too.
Well it's lovely to be here and its nice to be here with
Peter. It's always a measure of a colleague when you go
to his or her electorate to see how much real and support
they have and how much genuine affection with which they
are held, and if tonight's 700-odd is any demonstration
of that then Peter Duncan is held in pretty high regard.
And that great humanity of him comes through, and that's
why he has got so much support. I'm glad I've had his
support as he is glad he's said to have supported me. I
didn't win by many so I needed it. So thank you Peter,
thank you for the faith, and I hope I won't let you down.
When I was coming here tonight I said to my staff who
will be there? They said the Left will be there, and I
said I'm a bit of a ' Leftie' myself so I'll get on
alright with them. I said all the Left Wing things we've
done like capital gains taxes, fringe benefits taxes,
occupational super, I've been in all those. And they
said there's a few Poms there too, and I said I'll be OK
with them too, It's only the ones in tabloids that I have
a problem with. It's not the local ones, they know what
I'm saying. And &amp; part from that, they said there are a
good supporters of the Labor Party and other people in
the community who are interested in public life and
interested in a fair go. And I said, in that case we'll
do well. 
I am very pleased to be in this part of Adelaide and it's
nice to be back in South Australia once more. Peter said
I'll be coming to South Australia more, and it's true I
will because Australia these days does have some
disparity in prosperity between States, and that's why it
is important to get around the States. South Australia
has its share of troubles which are not exclusively of
its own making, just the way in which the nation has
changed. And it is important, I think, for all of us in
national politics to come through you to understand about
the place and to try to focus things the right way.
I think the most important thing for us to know is that
Australia and Australians have a great opportunity in the
world. That's the most important thing to know. Not
many people, in fact we are unique in the sense that we
have a continent to ourselves. No other nation on earth
has a continent to themselves. And not just any
continent, but the oldest continent. The oldest
continent where we came to a place with the oldest
civilisation. The High Court, in a very land mark
decision a week or two ago, made that clear when they
rebuked the doctrine of Terra Nullius. That this was an
unclaimed place when the British arrived.
And we know that we are in a subtle country, an old
country, where the residences of the country changed the
way we all are and make us unique. Even though we may
have European antecedents, we are a unique country
because of the way in which Australia is unique. And
most of us in the Labor Party know that we'll never come
to terms fully with this country until we come to terms
with the original Australians, the Aboriginals.
One of my staff was in a group that climbed the Himalayas
and somebody said to him ' you don't have mountains like
this in Australia'. He said, ' no, ours are fifty times
older than this and they've since worn down'. And that's
a fact this is an old place and the subtleties of the
landscape and the nature of the place have changed us and
mad us unique, uniquely Australian. We're not British,
we're not Dutch, we're not Italian, we're not Lebanese,
we're not Vietnamese, we're not Chines, we are
Australians. And it is time for us to declare that we are Australians,
to make that declaration. It's psychologically important
to us the more often we make it. And it's economically
important.
Our colleagues in the Coalition parties believe that talk
about our nationalism, our Australianess, is a
distraction, thfey say, from the economic facts and
economic life. But there are enough facts around to know
that there can be no distraction from the recession and
unemployment and other things. 
It is important to know, and important to our economics,
to * our future, to our trading future, to assert ourselves
economically as we assert ourselves psychologically and
nationally. It's an important link to make.
The great national spirit of one hundred years ago in
another recession, in 1890, put the Australian Labor
Party together and drove the forces of our Federation.
And that nationalism, that high-spiritedness of
Australia, ran until it was snuf fed out in the first
World war. And in that great radical act, where so many
young Australians went and fought, and 60 000 in 4
million died, that radical act was then by our
conservative opponents wrapped in the flag and turned
into a conservative thing. And it has remained a
conservative thing, and the great nationhood and
nationalism of the period died with it.
Then, of course we had the ' 20s under the conservatives,
the 130s in the recession, the ' 40s largely in the War,
the Rip Van Wrinkle years of Menzies until the end of the
160s, and then the do-nothing years of Fraser, and then
finally a chance under Labor to get back to those goals
and threads. To get back to the sense of Australia being
a nation and claiming the place as being a unique place,
a derivative of no other place, and a place where we can
make our way in the world and hold our head up in the
world. Now it is an accident of history that a largely European
country has been developed in the bottom of Asia. That's
now changing as we see people from the Middle East, and
from the Asia-Pacific coming to our shores and being part
of our community. But the fact is the we are now in a
unique position to make Australia part of the Asia-
Pacific, part of the fastest growing region of the world,
and truly define our place in the neighbourhood.
Because at least now we are saying to people in Asia we
want to be here, we want to be part of you, we want to
part of our local community. We don't want to fly over
you to Los Angeles, or fly over to you in London, or pay
lip service to the region, we want to be part of it. And
they are basically welcoming us with open arms.
So this is our great chance to find our place in the
region, in the neighbourhood, to be part of it, to be
relevant, and to share in the wealth and growth of this
very prosperous area. That more than anything else is
what will change the face of Australia, change the race
of South Australia, and change the face of Adelaide.
That single fact. 
Now I know, and you all know, that the most important
thing for us now is to get back to recovery. Because the
Labor Party has never believed that unemployment is a
residual that drops out of the policies. This is not the
British conservative government, it's not the US
Republicans, it's certainly not the Liberal Party of
Australia. We don't believe the unemployed are the
people at the end of the queue, the shock absorbers who
take the shock out of the system to protect the economic
viability of everybody else.
And we know that this kind of society cannot tick over
with unemployment rates of 10 per cent, or 10 per cent
plus, or higher in some places. And so we want to get
back to remaking Australia so we can have product growth
and better rates of employment.
But that can only happen by looking forward. It won't
happen by looking backwards, as John Howard would have us
do looking back to the dead-end Jobs, looking back to
the 1950s where he thought things were fine. well they
might hove been, but they won't provide the increments to
growth and wealth that we have today.
The things that are going to put us up the international
scale are technological qhange and education.-And it is
to that withwh ich thisa Government has committed itself
to open Australia up, to make it internationally
competAiive find Australia doing the interesting, novel
things, which add value to products and let us find
places and niches around the world, which give us that
external orientation that we never had. That is, selling
the most valuable resource of all the creativity of our
people. And not the resources which Malcolm Fraser had
ready for us in the mineral boom of the late 1970s,
because that was just another mound of minerals that
somebody found. Or, not another paddock full of wheat,
or even wool, as important as those things are, but the
most important resource of all our creativity and, of
course, our children.
In 1983, three children in ten completed secondary
school. Seven in ten were left untrained. That's how
much regard the Liberal and National Parties had for
Australia's youth. They were happy to see seven in ten
spill out of school on the labour market untrained. That
retention rate today is not eight in ten eight in ten
children now complete secondary school. And between the
middle 1980s and now this Government added 122 000 places
to universities, we've created the equivalent of twelve
new universities, or added 50 per cent extra places to
tertiary education. So that as those kids stay on in
school, 35-40 per cent of them go onto tertiary
education. 
And now as a result of our One Nation statement, we are
working on building up the-sy-stenM-6that sits below that
technical and further education, or TAFE. So that the
six to seven out of ten who come out of secondary school
and don't go to university are not cascading into
shopping mall plazas, railway stations, or somewhere, but
they are cascading into training and education. So if we
want to move Australia up the international division of
labour, we move it up with education, creativity, and
skills. And that's the sort of society we're trying to build.
One that has a f ocus on research and development, product
innovation, staffed by a clever workforce with creativity
and ideas. Selling those ideas around the world which
will make Australia a better place. And not staying in
the industrial museum, the industrial archaeology, which
the Liberal and National Parties left us in the late ' 709
and the early 1980s.
and the opposition's policy is basically to let the
unemployed carry the weight of the recession and the
recovery so that those who are in comfortable positions
can carry on.
I said today in another place, that if we take the view
that the Federal Director of the Liberal Party
articulated this morning on television, supporting his
leader John Hewson, that people on unemployment benefits
should go off them after 9 months and find accommodation
in the St Vincent de Paul Society, or the Smith Family,
or any other similar organisation the voluntary
agencies which are already stretched to capacity the
notion that somebody with a spouse and children, or a
single person, should find themselves after 9 months cut
of f from support by the government, stigmnatise the
unemployed, and basically told they're on their own, they
can go down to the soup kitchen, or they can go down to
some other voluntary agency to get some basic modicum of
assistance, or if they don't have accommodation to huddle
under a carton, as you the people huddling all around the
United States looking for warmth in the winter, we'll
have a Los Angeles on our hands in this country at some
stage. That it, the social strife which has racked the
United States is basically generated by poverty.
And in the Labor Party, we won't sign up to those sort of
policies. We're not going to tip the unemployed of f
unemployment benefits after 9 months. We're not going to
be running heartless policies like that. We're not going
to let the unfortunate carry the stigma and shock of
economic policies and economic adjustment. Yet they are
the policies of the coalition. 
And then on top of that they want to introduce a 15 per
cent consumption tax, which is a very large level of tax,
when one considers that the average rate of income tax in
this country is just over 23 per cent, is an enormous
addition to the burden of taxation in Australia. And as
the Governor of the Central Bank said during the week, it
will add 6 to 7 percentage points to inflation. It will
take our inflation rate to the record low levels of 1 1/ 2
per cent where we have it at the moment, to around 7 or 8
or maybe 9 per cent once more. And with it will go
interest rates as well, and guess who pays the piper
the low and middle paid people who will see a transfer of
wealth from them to the higher paid.
These are the policies of unfairness which our colleagues
in the coalition are offering Australia. That is, if
you're not basically well-off you are a bludger, if
you're unemployed it's your fault, if you go down looking
f or the job search allowance or unemployment benefits
then you are only sponging on the system, that you are
basically to be swatted off the system after 9 months.
On medicine, Dr Howson stood up a couple of weeks ago at
the AMA and said we'll let the AM set the common fee,
not the government, the doctors. Hie's opposed to all of
the unions except the doctors union, where he'll let the
AMA set the fees for medical consultations.
Then he'll cut Medicare to pieces and say you can
privately insure yourself. And you'll go and privately
insure yourself, which will cost about $ 22-23 a week
extra for the average family so that doctors can charge
what they like, and charge what the traffic will bear
under a privately insured system.
And we'll end up with a position like the United States,
where if you're in an accident or you're critically ill,
you'll go up to a hospital door but if you don't have the
blue cross card in your pocket they don't admit you.
They just turn you back, sick, sore, or sorry. That's Dr
Hewson's Australia.
These are the spiteful policies of the current coalition.
These are the policies which would make Menzies and
Malcolm Fraser look like Bolsheviks. Who would roll in
their graves at this approach to say that if you can't
help yourself you're kicked out. If structural change
has made you unemployed, you're stigmatised and you bear
the burden of it, if you're sick you can only get medical
protection if you can afford it, and if your children
want a place in university it's OK if you pay it for them
full fees and then there's a place for you, but beyond
that, if you're a child of the low paid or middle paid,
there's no place for you in universities or other forms
of training unless you pay full fees. 
They call it opportunity to succeed, freedom to achieve.
Freedom to achieve providing your parents have got
$ 12 000 to $ 15 000 for university place per year.
That's an income of $ 30 000 before tax to put one child
through one university course for one year.
And let me take their industrial relation policies.
They're now saying they'll let federal awards expire.
They will let the industrial relations system turn down,
so that an employee cannot band together with his or her
brothers or sisters and make an industrial agreement with
an employer as a union, but only can we see negotiations,
says Dr Hewson, between an individual person and their
employer. That is, no role for unions. And we'll all
have to say, what hope in the end does an individual
person have with an employer? The whole balance of
society which has come from the right to organise, and
collaborate in industrial negotiation would disappear.
And to add insult to injury they want all the federal
awards to expire, and all the conditions under them
rates of pay, conditions of employment, annual leave,
sick pay all go with them. And you only get the award
back if the employer and the employee opt back into the
system. But if the employer doesn't agree to opt back
into the system, the award expires. So all the things
that people have fought for a century holiday, sick
leave, rates of pay go out the door and you're left
tied up as an individual person with a common law
contract between yourself and your employer.
This is the tough world which Dr Howson has ready for
people. Slipping back to early Thatcherite policies of
the late 1970s, or the ' greed is good' policies of
President Reagan's America. if you're not a millionaire,
you're a bludger, you're a layabout. Well we've seen in
that country the extremes widen between the wealthy and
the poor, that finally the poor took to the streets of
Los Angeles and said something about it.
These are the sort of un-Australian policies that the
Coalition are seeking to introduce into Australia. No
sense of togetherness, no sense of community, no sense of
inclusion, no sense of cooperation, no sense of
kindliness to one another, no softness in policy, no
concern for the weak, the sick, the aged, or the young.
Just a hard computer model that comes out the Federal
Liberal Party's Fightback! proposals.
Their Federal Director today brazenly said that the
taxpayer shouldn't have to put up with you if you're
unemployed for 9 months. You can go to a voluntary
agency, which John Hewson has been around making sure
that they're equipped to look after these people. That
is, they're equipped to receive you and hand out someone
else's clothes, or blanket, or food, or throw you on the
mercy of your family because there will be no support
from the state. 
They are the things we are opposed to. We want to put
Australia back together. We want it to grow. I can grow
and succeed to become a smarter place while we have the
focus on education, upon technology, upon product
innovation* But in the context of a nice society one
that looks after you when you're sick, one that looks
after you when you're aged, one that looks after you when
you're infirm, one that looks after you when you're young
and gives you an education and a future, one that looks
after You when you're in the middle of your life's work,
and retrains you, or as a woman gives you a child care
place to let you go and work. This is the sort of
society which we believe in.
Ifm always told by John Howson that I'm wearing a Zegna
suit the same as he is, and who am I to say he has
crossed the tracks. So I said to him the other day in
Parliament last night in the Senate we put our hands up
for occupational superannuation. We voted for the
Superannuation Guarantee Charge ( SGC) which will see 9
per cent paid by employers go to employees to give them a
standard of living in retirement which is now twice the
current age pension. All Australian working men and
women. That's what we put our hand up for in the Senate
last Wednesday night. I said to him, where was your
hand? Your hand was down. You had the boots into
ordinary working people again. They might get themselves
an advantage by building up a pool of savings to provide
for a decent standard of living in retirement, they might
even help put together a pool of national savings which
will help with investment and the current account deficit
and our overseas debt. But you and the Liberal Party
voted against it, as you always do.
And that's the difference between us. The boy from
Welfare Avenue crossed the tracks to vote down
occupational superannuation, to vote down Medicare, to
vote down the right to unemployment benefits when you're
unemployed, to vote down the right of education to
children of working class families. These are all the
things that I believe Australians will not tolerate. And
that's why our party stands for the innovators in
Australia and the party which will draw people together
to declare for Australia proud, unique and to hold our
head up in the world.
We know that we have to get the economy cracking again to
get employment going. And we recognise that too many of
our young people are not finding jobs. It is a problem,
a real problem. We're having a national meeting with
employers in a couple of weeks to get to a basis of
agreement on wages, terms and conditions of employment,
and training, that will help provide many thousands of
new jobs for young people, particularly in that 5-19 year
category. 
Dr Hewson criticises us for holding a meeting behind
closed doors. Well, does anybody think that the
industrial practices of 40 or 50 years are going to be
traded away under the glare of television cameras, that
there is going to be a real discussion about these
problems other than the genuine one where people can
discuss things and talk genuinely to one another in
private? That can only happen privately. That's what
we're going to have soon. And that will also help on the
employment front, particularly with young people.
So ladies and gentlemen, can I say this. I thank you
very much for coming to support Peter tonight. This is
the start of his campaign for the next election. And I
can't say it's the start of ours because it's going to
start later than this I think. But we're campaigning, in
a sense, all the time. And we're campaigning for the
right to make Australia an interesting country, a country
with economic promise, a country where people are not
left behind, be it the unemployed, the sick, the aged, or
the young, but one where we take the view that everybody
has the right to inclusion, and we sit down cooperatively
as a society and come together and make this country a
greater place than it is already, find our place in the
Asia-Pacific, declare ourselves to be as we are unique
as a nation and to take our place in the world, which
will lift up the prosperity of Australians.
That's what the challenge is about. That's what we're
going to be working to, and are going to be keeping those
Labor principles in mind, for the greater benefit of all
Australians, not just the wealthy, or the well-to-do, but
all Australians, young and old alike, to give them a
decent, prosperous economy, but in a society which is a
soft, nice society where we care for one another, and
where those great humanitarian values of Labor are not
forgotten in the rush to make a quid.
That's what we stand for and that's what we're going to
be fighting for.
Thank you. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT THE FREMANTLE PORT AUTHORITY, PERTH
JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Pam ( Bcggs), Prcmicr Carmen Lawrence, ladies and gentlemen.
I am very plcascd to be here today. I have taken an interest in at least coming to
the port site of the various ports around Australia to get a better minds cyc vicw of
exactly what is happening, where developments arc, where they need to bc and
how to make our port system more cornpctitivc. And because wc have as a theme
of thc ' Onc Nation' package, linking the ports to the rail systcm and as Pam says
creating a rail highway around Australia, a standard-gauge highway and the big
link of course in that being from Adelaide to Melbourne and then improving the
track from Melbourne to Sydney through to Brisbane. That such a system does
provide opportunitics for Western Australia, for Frcmantle for a landbridging
operation across Australia through Melbourne and up through to Sydney or if you
like, as well through Broken down to Sydney.
We're still going through an important phase of the great post-war change In
Australia which began with the removal of exchange controls and the floating of
the exchange rate in 1983. The things which started to pccl back the layers of
management and protection of Australia so that the areas of comparative advantage
were able to excel themselves in this economy and where the focus was taken off
the areas of comparative disadvantage.
I've said over the last day or so in Western Australia and I'll say again, that in the
areas of comparativ. e advantage inmining and agriculture and services in
commodities where we clearly have an advantage, national economic policy has
favoured those areas so it's therefore not a surprise that the two states which have a
great preponderance of thesc industries Western Australia and Queensland arc
7. iul. 92 11: 23 No. 005 P. 01/ 03 
TEL 2
now recovering more quickly and growing more strongly than some other regions
of Australia. But to really make it all work, we've got to break the major economic
barriers down and improve the efficiencies of the country and that includes from
the port side right through to plants and services and it mcans in this case, trying to
lift the valuc of the port/ rail interface, the quality of thc port, the efficiency and
productivity of ports and at the same time try and rejuvenate the rail systerns'so
we've got a better balance betwccn sea freight, rail and road so that there's a more
mature system out therc to servie the country as a trading entity.
I'vc said before and it's worth saying again, we are always criticised by the
-Coalition for the speed at which these changes were occurring and T make the
obvious point, if they were so urgent why did they leave them for forty years? My
colleague John Hewson who was advising John Howard, I don't remember him
running any rear guard actions along port productivity or Port reform or manning
levels or ship crewing levels or fixing up the run-down rail infrastructure of
Australia or repairing and putting competition into the road trade system with rail
or In the telecommunication system or any of these things. It has been left to thc
Labor Party to try and crack all these micro-economic nuts and we're In the
process of trying to crack this one now. And in relation to the rail freight system,
that is the national railway, we are trying to conclude ageenficids industrial
agreemcnt with the trade unions for the National Rail Freight Corporation so that
we can start to see the ' One Nton' money flow from next week. From the
beginning of the financial year in the course of the next couple of months, to start
to see the rail improvcments around Australia in a system which is fundamentally
going to be more competitive and where we can see the yield coming from those
efficiencies as we improve the infrastructure that wherc we have efficiency in
staffing across the rail system of Australia.
So that's why I think the. Fremantle landhridgc projpct-study Is Important. That is
the government of Western Australia has undertaken the study as to the prospect of
landbridging in thc new rail system across the continent and particularly accessing
Melbourne and Sydney via Melbourne as well as via Broken Hill. This study is
conclusive in the sense that it believes that such a systcm that Fremantle can
succeed as a landbridging port and a landbridging policy can operate cffectively
from Western Australia across Australia as the first port for much traffic from the
region near Western Australia and where for cargoes in demand that have time
constraints and the rest on them that thcre is a real possibility of cutting down sea
freight times and also port clearance times in the larger ports by landbridging out
of Frcmantlc.
One of the things that Western Australia is now doing and will continue to do is
get that. balanc into its primary exports sector with a larger scrvicc sector. And
the city of Perth largely is a service city and it serves the grcit agricultural and
mining industries of this State and we want to see it develop and proliferate as a
service centre also in things like freight. And in doing so it provides more ballast
to employment in Perth and hopefully by getting an efficient transportation system
TEL.: Jul. 92 11: 23 No. 005 P. 02/ 03 
TEL: 7. Jul. 92 11: 23 No. 005 P. 03/ 03
3
it will mean that Western Australia can play its role as a service centre to South-
East Asia, to Indonesia, to Malaysia, to Singapore and all the countries in the
region where the sophistication of Australian services can be provided from thc
city of Perth and from Western Australia generally.
FIn hoping that as we pull the threads of this great change in the rail system
together under the ' One Nation' package and get the greenflelds agreement in place
and start the reconstruction of the Adelaide-Melbourne line, cleaning up the
access through the hills, lifting the bridges out of Fremnantle all the way to
Kalgoorlie so that we can put double stacked containers on rail, that wc Can start to
bring up the efficiencies that makes the rail system competitive with other forms of
transport, shipping included. That may not be designecd to gladden the heart of
shipping companies, but at least it will mean that there may be opportunities and
probably be more opportunities for shipping and landbridging across Australia for
cargoes in demand.
So, can I say that I'm very pleased that the Wustcrn Australian Government has
taken the issue up and now have plans in place to spend the ' One Nation' money to
fulfil the commitment to landbridging and that this study which is part mid parcel
of that which concludes in favour of landbridging that we will see it come to pass
and that the efficiencies which we are seeing coming from thc changes to the
waterfront productivity levels to crew manning on the coast to improvements in
the efficiency of the rail system will lead to a kind of transportation system In
Australia which reflects what it should have always been a more cfficient one for
the kind of trading country we are.
So it is with much pleasure that I launch the project, announce the study, publish
the study and conclude by congratulating Pain as the Minister, but particularly the
Premier for the farsightedness of the Western Australian Governmecnt in finding a
place for Western Australia in the great freight network of Australia and calling
Fremantle first in the great long run across the continent.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING MP, TO ALP BUSINESS BREAKFAST,
QUALITY LANGLEY HOTEL, PERTH, 30 JUNE 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
NOW, we've got our One Nation package out there working,
really in earnest -froi-thi6-financial year beginning
tomorrow. A lot of it we've got into place. We're now seeing the
road programs, the arterial roads in the capital cities,
the airline policy, the movement to a national
electricity grid in the Eastern States, the vast changes
to depreciation of the tax system.
There are a few bits we've still got to move along. And
we are now in the concluding phases of a greenfields
agreement on the rail system for the National Rail
Corporation. And when we get that into place, and we
hope we can have that into place in the next month, we'll
start to see the building of the standard . gause rapway
between Melbourne and Adelaide,-and the upgrading of the
-Adinaide,-and the upgrading of the railway line between
Melbourne and Sydney, and Sydney and Brisbane.
And that will mean that a whole new industry springs up
in Western Australia, as people landbridge across the
country into Melbourne, which they now can't do without
changing bogies in South Australia. And it will lift the
efficiency of the rail system and create the kind of rail
network which Australia needs as a trading country.
Now that's all on the cards. And I'm going to try to
push that spending along in the next few weeks, as we get
that agreement concluded.
So, most of the One Nation spending will start to hit its
straps in the coming months, the next month or two, and
that will itself start to pull the economy up even
faster. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MPENTOMBING
CEREMONY, CANBERRA, 2 JULY 1992
On behalf of the Australian government and people it is
my pleasure to welcome you here.
I extend a particular welcome to those who are veterans
of the Vietnam War, and to the many relatives d~ d-fr-en-s
of those -who died in Vietnam and whose memory we are
honouring today.
I thank you all for coming to this historic ceremony in
the life of our nation.
The men to whom we pay tribute gave their lives for their
beliefs. They believed in Australia.
They went to Vietnam as their fathers' generation had
gone to Europe and the Middle East and Asia and the
Pacific; and as their grandfathers' had also gone to
Gallipoli and France and other foreign battlefields.
They went in defence of their country and the things they
had been raised to believe in.
Like those previous generations, they saw no incongruity
in travelling far from home to defend their country's
freedom. They saw their duty.
They went believing that in defending democracy in
Vietnam they were defending democracy everywhere and,
most particularly, Australian democracy.
Today we do not judge the political wisdom which sent
them there, or which-delivered Australians to other
theatres of war throughout this century.
These people gave their lives for Australia.
We pay tribute today to their bravery and sacrifice. We
pay tribute to their love of this country and their faith
in its traditions and its future. 
2
And in commemorating them we hope and trust that this and
future generations of Australians will find in themselves
the same love of Australia, and the same faith in its
future.
The Vietnam War cut deeply into Australia's soul.
By comparison with the two World Wars the list of names
recorded here is small.
Yet this is somehow a measure of the burden the veterans
of Vietnam had to bear and have borne ever since.
Vietnam touched us all: it went deep into Australian
politics, Australian life, Australian thinking.
It divided the country to an extent unequalled since
1917. It did great damage. It did some good.
Its effects are still with us.
They always will be.
But no Australian knows these effects half as well as
those who fought and suffered there.
And no others paid the price that these 504 Australians
paid. In honouring their valour and sacrifice today, we
acknowledge that in this most debated and disputed of all
wars, the first war to be televised, the real burden
remained where it has always been in war on those who
fought and on their families and friends.
I think it can be said that the passionate debates at
home contrived to obscure this fact: as if the war was
really being fought here.
It was not. As these 504 Australians knew. As the
veterans of this and all other wars know. As their loved
ones know.
In fact I think it is true that our forgetting this was
an extra burden, an extra pain, for the veterans of
Vietnam and their families and friends to bear.
That is why today those words " Lest We Forget" have a
profound meaning.
The memorial will be henceforth the symbolic resting
place of all those who died serving Australia in Vietnam. 
3
Those who visit the memorial in future years will know
that Australia did not forget.
They will know that these Australians were heroes of the
same order as the Anzacs, as those who fought in France,
the Middle East, New Guinea and every other place where
Australians have gallantly fought and died.
From now on Australians will know that and they will
know it better if our hopes today are realised:
I mean our hope that now we are putting aside for all
time the differences and the bitterness which the Vietnam
War engendered in our community.
Our hope that such faith and courage as these Australians
had will not be found wanting in this and future
generations. Our hope that this commemoration of those who died will
be taken as a symbol of the gratitude which the nation
owes them and their loved ones.
And our hope that we will succeed in building in
Australia a fair and just democracy, faithful to our best
traditions and brave enough to embrace the future.
For there can be no better way to honour the memory of
those whose names are recorded here.
Thank you. 



TEL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 01/ 09
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING, MP
AWGIE AWARDS PRESENTATION DINNER
MELBOURNE, 10 JULY
Ladies and gentlemen
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address you
tonight at Australia's most prestigious awards for
_ playwrights and qcriptwrit-ers meaning the people who
work at the creative edge of the arts and entertairnent
inuty value-adders to the nation's life.
I think you will understand me when I say that in view of
the economic setbacks of the last couple of days and the
human cost which those unemployment figures spell, this
occasion might not seem on the face of it a place to
address national issues.
And I can tell you without reservation that for the next
couple of months or for as long as it takes, every
government effort has to be directed at turning the tide
of unemployment.
Fundamentally that means turning the economic tide and
getting investment and growth back and with It, newlos
It also means making new jobs and making the best
possible provision for those without Jobs.
This is not to say that the arts and entertainment
industry does not have a role to play in creating jobs
and generating wealth,.
On the contrary, the arts and entertainment industry is
one of the industries that Australia always has been good
at and which has an excellent future.
But your role is broader than simply generating income
and employment. 
TEL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 02/ 09
2
You are engaged with the fundamentals of Australian life
the way we see ourselves, the way we are seen, the
things we value, the things hope for.
Just as these things are at the centre of our lives, they
will be at the centre of reoery because, as much as
anything else, recovery depeias n our confidence, our
faith In ourselves. It depends on our spirit.
In no small measure the future of Australia is a cultural
Issue.
so I'm pleased to be here among those who work in one of
Australia's great industries and one of the industries of
the future.
I like to believe, some occasional evidence to the
contrary notwithstanding, that those who work in the
realms of Australia's culture and identity continue to
recognise that the Australian Labor Party is their
political ally.
My faith In this was reinforced by the letter which came
from your President.
In it he talked about the way in which the writers
gathered here express in their work some of the qualities
we badly need which any nation needs from time to time
namely a heightened sense of identity and a revival of
spirit. He also said that these writers had achieved significant
levels of excellence, and that excellence was important
to Australia.
I have a feeling he thought that I would be moved by
these sentiments and beguiled into coming and I suppose
my presence here, after a flight from the Solomon
Islands, is evidence that his instincts were right.
Although I am always a little bit cautious about
discussing such things.
Over the years I have come to accept a bit of
sensationalism and distortion.
Although even I was surprised at the media's recent
response to my remarks about Australia's image abroad and
my supposed slight on Paul Hogan.
All I wanted to say on that occasion was that we should
be increasingly building our image overseas on the
subtleties and diversity of Australia, on the wide band
of our achievements as well as that easy-going, droll
and likeable side of our character and lifestyle.
TEL 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 02/ 09 
T1EL0: . JuI. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 03/ 09
3
My point, of course, was never the ludicrous one that the
Paul Hogan campaign was somehow damaging: it was that we
need to broaden the canvas which really means nothing
more than doing justice to the reality.
In truth, as Treasurer in the 1980s, there can be few
people who know better than I the value of the Paul Hogan
tourism campaign, anld I doubt if anyone is more
appreciative of Paul Hogan's role in it.
If Abraham Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address in 1992
the chances are the journalists wouldn't report the
speech but the so-called " doorstop" interview that
followed it.
And the first question they'd ask is, " how come you're
talking about democracy and freedom when there's a war
on? And there'd be learned articles at the weekend about
whether it had been 8 lapse of political judgement for Mr
Lincoln to deliver the Gettysburg address in Gettysburg
instead of Philadelphia.
It is not easy to assert principles or ideas in the
Australian political culture.
It's certainly very difficult to express more than one
idea at a time.
It is not easy for politicians to have views on history,
even if it is their own history.
One historian said recently politicians shouldn't
meddle in history giving those of us in politics the
impression was that he was content for us to make history
but not to discuss it.
That is why your President's letter of invitation was
welcome. it is good to see that Australia's writers want an
enlivened and enlarged public intellectual life.
I hope so because those of us in politics who want to
see Australia fulfill its very old hopes of being a great
society and a great democracy, and who are determined to
have a go, need the support of all good hearts and minds.
And good hearts and minds I think will recognise that to
solve our social and economic problems we'll need a
renewed sense of national purpose and new levels of
national cohesion.
To go successfully into the Asia-Pacific and the rest of
the world we'll need new levels of confidence and mature
self-esteem. TEL: 
T1E0L: . Ju1.92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 04/ 09
4
But despite the enticement in David's invitation, that is
not what I want to talk about tonight. Not specifically.
I want to talk about the arts or, perhaps more
accurately, the arts and our-cultural development.
I'm starting from the proposition that if we are to make
those economic, political and social advances I have just
spoken of, we have to make a parallel cultural advance.
I think the time has come to recognise that however we
define it narrowly or broadly our cultural
development cannot be left to merely follow in the wake
of the nation's economic progress.
I think It might be the best way to develop a better
understanding of ourselves and the rest of the world. It
might help give us the direction we need.
The truth is that ideally we should not need to have
these debates about identity and nationhood.
They are understandable historically, but they are
regrettable. It's regrettable that we lack to some extent a knowledge
of our history and our political and social system an
unselfconscious cultural dimension.
Those who still reach for their gun when they hear the
word culture, might be more easily persuaded if they
think of it as an extension of the argument for valueadded
industries.
Value adding to bauxite creates aluminium and adds dollar
value to it. But the process also adds cultural value.
You've made something something useful which adds
more depth and a self-esteem.
The economic imperative and the cultural one are not
capable of separation they have the same conclusion.
We need to make things. And we need to export them
whether it's a ballet troupe, or an Olympic Team or a
brand of tennis shoe.
We need to send these things of excellence out into the
world with our imprint on them.
That's why in the 1990s I think we should be seeing our
cultural development as an integral part of national
development. Resourcefulness, prizes in achievement and identity woven
into a strand of national endeavour.
What I say tonight, however, remains a general view.
TEL: 
TEL
I'm in no position to say just now what specifically the
government should do to best help the development of our
culture. Nor is it up to me or the Government for that matter to
prescribe how Australia should develop culturally.
That is something that has to grow naturally from within
our society.
The role of the Government is to ensure that that process
happens and is not left to wither in isolation.
As you probably know, the Department has published a
discussion paper on " The Role of the Commonwealth in
Australia's Cultural Development".
There are already in motion a number of review processes.
Submissions have been received. Wide consultations are
about to commence.
I don't intend to pre-empt the expert opinions these
discussions will produce.
But we know that Somewhere between the receipt of this
advice and the creation of policy a great deal of sifting
and judging will have to be done.
And the best way to do it is not, I believe, by the
Government. Bureaucratic assistance will be essential, but to do the
work of assessment, to gather the necessary additional
information which will inevitably be required, to help
the Minister shape and finally formulate policy, Wendy
Fatin and I have decided to establish an Advisory Panel
drawn from the arts and the wider cultural environmentincluding
film, television and broadcasting.
Wendy Fatin will be announcing the composition and terms
of reference of this Advisory Panel shortly.
We want to treat all these submissions in the context of
a Commonwealth strategy.
As far as simple principles are concerned all I want to
establish tonight is that the Commonwealth government has
a clear and very important responsibility to maintain and
develop Australian culture.
This means, among many other things, that on a national
level, innovation and ideas are perpetually encouraged;
that self-expression and creativity are encouraged; that
our heritage is preserved as more develops, and, Just as
importantly, that all Australians have a chance to
participate and receive that we invigorate the national
life and return its product to the people. EL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 
TEL 6
1 think these sorts of questions cabou1. d engage us now.
I think good policy in this area needs to both set goals
and re-assure us of our achievements.
The last is as Important as the first in a prolonged
period of radical change I think people need to be
reminded of achievements as often as they are reminded of
those things which have still to be achieved.
That seems to me a function of culture it provides both
the stimulation that comes from the new and the
reassurance that comes from the familiar.
Now, however we decide to go about doing it, what we need
is a Commonwealth strategy for cultural development.
Put one way that means establishing the best way for the
Commonwealth to deliver funding and other forma of
assistance to all those activities which presently come
under the aegis of the Australia Council, and the film
and television bodies, and all those which are placed
under the heading of " Cultural Heritage" Including the
National Library, the National Gallery and the National
Museum. In that way we can throw in such cultural organisations
as the ABC and its of fshootsf the orchestras; and the
Australian War Memorial.
We need to know what is the best way to fund these
organisations, and what is the proper relationship
between the Commonwealth, the States and Local
Government. That will be the kernel of the task for the Review Team
over the next year.
Put another way, it is to find the best way to gather in
our heritage and our ideas and deliver them to the people
of Australia.
Until now, of course, we have adopted a European model
meaning our ideas about delivery have come from
relatively geographically small and much more populous
nations. if we are serious about a national cultural policy, we
need an Australian model one which takes account of our
geographic and demographic peculiarities.
Obviously, establishing those relationships between the
tiers of government io an essential component in this,
but there are others as well. E: 1J0u. 1 .92 18: 30 No .009 067) i 
TEL 7
I mean it might lead us to place a very strong emphasis
on touring. A principal component of a national cultural
policy could be touring.
We might decide that we have to be very good at taking
excellence to the provinces delivering the nation's
arts and heritage to people remote from the big cities.
Visiting the nation's life upon them, if you like.
It should be, after all, as much a right as a railway
line or a road.
There is nothing unnatural about drama or orchestras
performing in Mount Isa, Broken Hill, Kalgoorlie or Alice
Springs. On the contrary there should be more of it.
The much mooted National Museum is also a case in point.
I cannot conceive of a way to justify building another
expensive mausoleum filled with inanimate things under
glass. But a museum housed imaginatively if unpretentiously, a
uniquely Australian museum, has a certain appeal.
I mean uniquely Australian in that it would tell the
Australian story by taking the ideas and heritage it
houses out to the people.
A strategy which obeys these imperatives geography and
demography, access, education, stimulating public
discussion, developing national networks, encouraging
Ideas and intellectual life.
This is something I would expect the Advisory Panel to
address. Perhaps something like the American Endowment for the
Humanities, or a second Australia Council for the
Humanities, or as Donald Horne has suggested, a
Foundation for Australian Cultural Development might also
have its place.
The name we call it by, like the eventual shape it might
take, is not as important now as our thinking about a
national cultural policy and what role such a body might
play. It might, for instance, be the principle vehicle of
Australian cultural diplomacy: for promoting Australian
culture including Australian science and education
overseas. T1E0L:. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 07/ 09 
TEL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 7P. 0,69
There is no doubt that we need to do this. How do we
measure the Importance to this country of a Booker Award,
or a tour of the Australian Ballet, except, perhaps, to
say that it is immeasurable?
We can say the same about film and television including
those soaps which we now so successfully export or indeed
the popular music industry of which we are the third
largest producere.
I'm not talking simply about image, but about income.
I'm talking particularly about the services we can
provide in Asia and the potential that exists for such
industries as publishing, arts and entertainment.
In all this we are talking about a role for the
Commonwealth, and by implication for State and local
governkments$ Yet I believe that one of the keys to our cultural
development will be a new culture of non-government
funding. I would expect that in the formulation of a new strategy
we would want private individuals and companies to invest
more In the creative life of the nation that generally
has been no case to date.
In summary, I think the overall object should be to
create a role for the Commonwealth government which at
once stimulates our national creativity and returns it to
the people.
I imagine a cultural policy which raises both the level
of participation and the level of excellence.
I see this policy as an integral part of building a
better and more secure Australia.
Indeed I believe the essence of our cultural policy
should essentially be interwoven with the philosophy and
spirit of the nation.
This country is poised on the edge of extraordinary
opportunity. We have unparalleled advantages.
We must not let the recession cloud our awareness of
that, or of the great strides we took in the eighties.
There is no doubt that we can get back to economic growth
and general prosperity that must be the overriding aim.
But the prosperity will be more secure and the effort to
secure it more worthwhile if we also realise our culture
is tied in with it and becomes part of it. 
TEL: 10. JuI. 92 18: 30 No. 009-P. 09, Qg
9
I mean that creating things, all manner of thingsincluding
of course the things that people here createshould
be the nation's commnon purpose.
Creativity should be a word we value above all.
It is because I know that you value it so highly that I
ami grateful for the chance to speak tonight, and honoured
to pay tribute to your work through the presentation of
these awards.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTERI
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
GLOBALISM AND REGIONALISM: AUSTRALIA'S TRADE POLICY
AGENDA 70R THE 90S KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURERS' CONFERENCE ON " ASIA 2010"
MELBOURNE, MONDAY 20 JULY 1992
You have been talking at your conference here today
about our region, and how we the people of the region
will fare over the next couple of decades.
This evening I want to talk about how Australia and
our region may change over this time, and how the
choices we make today will decide what kind of world
we and our children will find in the new century.
You'll notice that I have already taken Australia to
be part of the Asian region, which is in itself
something of a change in our thinking. We are
geographically part of it, and much of the change in
Australia in recent years has been a process of
cultural attitudes somewhat reluctantly accommodating
themselveg' to geographical facts.
As Presid'ent Soeharto and I agreed during my recent
visit to Indonesia, it is hard to change attitudes,
but not as hard as changing geography!
our economy is also increasingly integrated into the
region, and the visitors here this evening will have
seen in our cities evidence that the fastest growing
migrant population in this country is from Asia.
In the last decade or so the Asian region has been
transformed into the most rapidly growing regional
economy in the world, with a high share of exports in
output, and a high degree of trade within the region. 
If we include Canada and the United States irn the
wider region, as we do in APEC, then of course we are
talking about the preponderant grouping in the world
economy, with half the world's output and almost half
the world's trade. Of that trade, nearly two thirds
is with other members of the group.
Australia has been a full participant in these
regional changes, and over the next few decades we
intend to integrate ourselves into our region even
more closely.
But I think that we will soon have to make important
choices in our region. We will soon have to decide
how we as a region, and Australia as a member the
region, will respond to the emerging new pattern in
world affairs which follows the collapse of the Soviet
Union-.. one of the powerful realities we must recognise is
that economic regionalism is shaping the post Cold War
order. As the era of the Cold War ended, we discovered that
we were already entering the era of Maastricht and
NAFTA. In our own region Asean has said it will form
a trade area, and all the countries of the region have
created the 15 member APEC grouping with an agenda of
discussions on trade liberalisation.
But paradoxically another powerful force encouraged by
the of the end of the Cold War is globalism.
The market economy model is now nearly universally
accepted in industrial countries. The former
communist countries are rapidly being integrated into
global institutions like GATT, the IMF and the World
Bank. We are seeing issues like the environment and
weapons proliferation dealt with in global forums.
And in Ki. wait and Cambodia we witness the United
Nations play a role it has not been able to play for
decades. Though they appear to be contradictory, these two
forces of regionalism and globalism are in fact
complementary. They are the two economically unifying counterweights
to the forces of nationalism, ethnicity and religion
which have also been released by the end of the post
war ideological battle.
Certainly I regard them as complementary, and
Australia's international economic policy-embraces
both a global and a regional strategy. 
3
The job for governments everywhere is to fit these two
forces of regionalism and globalism together at a time
when, for better or worse, the Uruguay Round of the
GATT is coming to a conclusion.
This recognition that economic regionalism is a
dominant force in the world economy does not for a
moment mean we have lost faith in GATT. It does not
mean that we will cease doing whatever we can,
whenever and wherever we can, to entrench through the
GATT a stronger set of principles of fair trade to
which all countries subscribe.
But we do recognise that trade and investment growth
today is predominantly within regions, that Europe
from the Atlantic to at least the Urals and perhaps
beyond is firmly set on a course of deep economic
integration over coming decades, and that in all
probability we shall be dealing with another free
trade area from Canada to Mexico by the end of this
year. We might not like this evolution, but whether we like
it or not we cannot stop it. The only question is how
we should respond to it.
That is a theme to which I will return later, but let
me set the scene for the next few decades by telling
you about how Australia has changed in the last decade
to prepare itself for the changes to come.
For the decades following World War Two we in this
country hid behind tariff barriers, creating what by
the early eighties had become an industrial museum.
The economy was highly regulated and unable to adjust
to the explosion of growth which was then occurring in
Asia. Over the l~ st decade we have radically reformed.
We tloated the dollar and deregulated financial
markets, replaced conflict with consensus in
industrial relations, set in place a program of tariff
cuts and industry modernisation, and pruned the
government sector
More recently we have encouraged a wholesale shift
into enterprise bargaining as the principal means of
deciding wages, and pushed forward a program of
industry reform which has dramatically increased the
productivity of our ports, and changed the face of our
aviation and telecommunications industries.
We are beginning now on vast new improvements to our
railway~ s and roads. 
4
In our One Nation statement earlier this year, we made
changes to our business taxation system which make it
one of the most competitive Among industrial
countries. And I am glad to say that the results of this reform
process have shown up in the transformation of our
trade a transformation in volumes, composition and
destination. A decade ago Australia exported less than one sixth of
our production.
Today we export over a fifth, and it has been steadily
climbing over the whole period.
A decade ago we more often than not imported more
goods pnd services each month than we exported.
Today, we export more than we import. Most Australians
would probably be surprised to know that we have a
stronger goods trading balance than many other
countries in the region, including Singapore,
Thailand, Malaysia, and Korea.
A decade ago Australia had one of the highest
inflation rates in the industrial world.
Today it is one of the lowest, and lower than most of
our regional trading partners.
A decade ago our cost structure made it hard for
exporters to compete.
Today we have increased our competitiveness by a
tenth, and entrenched our competitive advantage with
low inflation and high productivity growth.
As the sheer volume of our exports increased, their
compositi-, on and direction changed.
Both our services exports and manufactured exports
have tripled over the last decade. Last year for the
first time we exported more manufactured products than
rural products. Manufactures earn us more than metal
ores and minerals, or tourism or coal.
Nine out of ten of our largest export markets are now
in Asia and the Pacific.
Today, more than half of our merchandise exports go to
Asia. The countries of. ASEAN are today collectivrely a bigger
export market for us than either the US or the EC. 
Ou~ r aim is to be at home in the region, with a highly
competitive world class manufacturing sector,
exporting a diverse range of commodities, manufactures
and services to the region and beyond.
The slow growth we and most other industrial economies
are now experiencing as we recover from recession
obscures the very real change in the economy. But
even with slow growth, we have found that far from
destroying our manufacturing base in this country our
structural reforms have nourished it.
Our manufacturing output today is nearly a tenth
higher than it was a decade ago and nearly a third
higher than it was twenty years ago, the so-called
" golden era" of protected Australian manufacturing.
And as I have explained, we are exporting more of our
manufdoturing output than ever before.
The range and pace of our structural reforms over the
last decade demonstrate our recognition that whatever
happens in the world trading environment we will cope
with it best if we ourselves are as nimble, fleetfooted
and adaptable as possible.
Both the region and this country have profoundly
changed over the last decade. What will happen in the
next two?
I spoke earlier about the strategic choices we face as
the Uruguay round comes to an end, as Europe continues
on a deeper and more comprehensive integration, and as
the United States creates its own free trade area with
Canada and Mexico.
The choice is between entrenching the prosperity of
the region through increasing global openness, or
being forced onto second best paths which restrict
trade and ' Ieave us all worse off.
if governioents make the right decisions, if the
Uruguay Round succeeds and the countries of our region
continue to liberalise, then over the next two decades
East Asia will continue to be the fastest growing area
of the world economy.
Growth of Asian markets will continue to exceed that
of other markets, including the EC and North America,
as population grows and incomes rise.
Japan will be an even stronger, better balanced
economy, while the smaller Asian market economies will
increasingly be concentrating on services and of fshore
manufacturing. 
Some, like Korea will have joined the OECD and other
industrial3i-sTd-cuntry organisations. There will be a
new pack of " tigers" in South East Asia, benefiting
from political and strategic stability, and more
outward-looking economic policies.
With a new generation of leaders, China is likely to
commit itself increasingly to the market model, taking
the lead from its thriving coastal trading economy.
Korea may perhaps be reunited, ultimately bringing to
the North the economic prosperity that is transforming
the South.
If all goes well, the three nations of Indochina will
also be growing market economies.
APEC will evolve into an outward looking regional
trading group, with the participation of both Japan
and the United States.
Australia will be changed, too, with an even larger
trade sector, more exports of services and
manufactures, and a-still sharper focus on markets
within the region.
The realisation of this world depends upon increasing
trade within the region, which in turn depends upon
countries' being as willing to buy other countries
exports as they are to sell their own.
It depends on making the right decision to lower
regional trade barriers at the same time as we
entrench fairer global rules.
But if we make the wrong decisions, or if they are
forced upon us, we face another possible future by
2010 a future quite different to the one I sketched
earlier. If the reD~ ion cannot continue to open its own markets,
and still worse if we begin to encounter difficulty in
markets of Europe and North America, then the forces
now underpinning the region's success will be
reversed. We would see a weakened world trade system, with GATT
rules increasingly flouted.
We could see an inward looking North American Free
Trade Agreement, possibly extended throughout the
Americas, edging out competitors from its markets.
We could see Europe going its own way, placating a
multitude of domestic constituencies at tfie expense of
foreign competitors, and of its own future prosperity.. 
We could see Japan defensively creating a regional yen
bloc, based on preferential trade and investment
rules. Lesser developed areas, like China and Indochina,
stunted in growth.
And Australia, its exports markets restricted, forced
into difficult economic and strategic choices between
the United States and Japan.
As I said earlier, the choice between the bright
scenario and the gloomy scenario will depend on how we
fit together the forces of regionalism and globalism
in trade policy.
For my part I think the best fit is attained when we
work towards the strongest set of universally agreed
minimwft standards we can on a global basis, and at the
same time attempt to do better on a regional basis.
Given the large and diverse membership of GATT, it is
inevitable that an agreement which is universally
acceptable must leave plenty of opportunities for
regions and subregions to improve on the benchmark
without violating its rules.
And given the fact of propinquity, it is inevitable
that regional arrangements which are GATT friendly
will nonetheless be of greatest benefit to the region
concerned. So we will be seeking constantly to strengthen
international trading rules through the global
institution, GATT, at the same time as we seek to
build regional trade and economic arrangements which
take us beyond what we have been able to achieve on a
global conpensus.
We remain* committed to a successful Uruguay Round
because i~ t can bring us substantial benefits, not just
in agricul'ture but also in manufactures, services,
intellectual property rights and many other areas.
According to one cautious Canadian study, the package
now before us would, if agreed, increase global income
by something of the order of 120 billion dollars a
year. As you know, no breakthrough came about during the
Munich Summit of the G7. I do not pretend to be other
than disappointed at the failure so far to bridge the
remaining differences. We will be pressing hard for
the G7 leaders to make good their commitmqnt to reach
a balanced agreement before the end of the year. 
8
Stalling the round indefinitely would be a failure of
political leadership on a grand scale. It would
represent a shameful capitulation to the self ish
forces of economic protection.
But while successful GATT outcome is important it
won't begin to exhaust the trade growth possibilities
in the region.
According to a study by the Centre for International
Economics, the Asia Pacific region would gain the
equivalent of $ 300 billion if the countries of the
region were to agree to liberalise with a fifty per
cant reduction in tariff and non tariff barriers.
APEC holds great promise in this next phase of trade
reform. Institutionalisation of APEC will signal a
new area in regional economic co-operation. APEC
members have committed themselves to reducing barriers
to trade amongst themselves in a GATT-friendly way.
Already APEC working groups are hard at work in
different sectoral projects. In the next 12 months we
are likely to see substantial outcomes from various
projects which will yield significant practical
benefits for business. These include customs reforms,
changes to administrative barriers to market access,
development of tariff databases, and others.
in some areas it will be possible to move forward in
smaller groups of economies say like-minded groups
in the Western Pacific and then extend agreements
later to take in all APEC members, or even economies
not yet in APEC.. The Trade Minister, John Kerin, and
I will therefore be asking our senior trade officials
to explore some of these options with regional
countries before the end of the year.
One possibility is to look at the potential offered by
the. growihg aviation market in our hemisphere. on
current trends, by 2010 Asia will have consolidated
its place hs the world's pre-eminent international
aviation market. -This process could be enriched
through an expansion of regional aviation rights.
Other possibilities include regional agreements on
investment and on services, including
telecommunications, banking and insurance.
As a steel exporter, and also as a supplier of raw
materials to the steel makers of north Asia, Australia
would also be receptive to discussions on a regional
steel agreement, if the global talks remain stalled. 
9
over coming months we will be reexamining trade policy
options in the light of the Uruguay Round outcome and
regional developments. Some of these options are
reviewed in discussion papers commissioned by the
government and prepared by Professor Richard Snape,
which will be released by the Minister for Trade on
Wednesday. The papers will contribute to the debate on our
national trade strategy which will be capped by a
comprehensive Ministerial Statement by Mr Kerin in
October. I have no doubt that regionalism will become
increasingly important to us in coming decades. That
is why I have this evening suggested a few regional
trade initiatives we will pursue. But we should
always bear in mind that the region has founded its
development on trade and, more than any other, enjoys
the benefits of the principles of interdependence and
openness. Over the next two decades we must continue
to demonstrate that the best outcome for all economic
regions is attained when we have strong global rules
while maximising regional trade opportunities. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
GLOBALISM AND REGIONALISM: AUSTRALIA'S TRADE POLICY
AGENDA FOR THE 905 KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURERS' CONFERENCE ON " ASIA 2010"
MELBOURNE, MONDAY 20 JULY 1992
You have been talking at your conference here today
about our region, and how we the people of the region
will fare over the next couple of decades.
This evening I want to talk about how Australia and
our region may change over this time, and how the
choices we make today will decide what kind of world
we and our children will find in the new century.
You'll notice that I have already taken Australia to
be part of the Asian region, which is in itself
something of a change in our thinking. We are
geographically part of it, and much of the change in
Australia in recent years has been a process of
cultural attitudes somewhat reluctantly accommodating
themselves to geographical facts.
As President Soeharto and I agreed during my recent
visit to Indonesia, it is hard to change attitudes,
but not as hard as changing geography!
our economy is also increasingly integrated into the
region, and the visitors here this evening will have
seen in our cities evidence that the fastest growing
migrant population in this country is from Asia.
In the last decade or so the Asian rpgion has been
transformed into the most rapidly growing regional
economy in the world, with a high share of exports in
output, and a high degree of trade within the region. 
If we include Canada and the United States in the
wider region, as we do in APEC, then of course we are
talking about the preponderant grouping in the world
economy, with half the world's output and almost half
the world's trade. Of that trade, nearly two thirds
is with other members of the group.
Australia has been a full participant in these
regional changes, and over the next few decades we
intend to integrate ourselves into our region even.
more closely.
But I think that we will soon have to make important
choices in our region. We will soon have to decide
how we as a region, and Australia as a member the
region, will respond to the emerging new pattern in
world affairs which follows the collapse of the Soviet
Union. One of the powerful realities we must recognise is
that economic regionalism is shaping the post Cold War
order. As the era of the Cold War ended, we discovered that
we were already entering the era of Maastricht and
NAFTA. In our own region Asean has said it will form
a trade area, and all the countries of the region have
created the 15 member APEC grouping with an agenda of
discussions on trade liberalisation.
But paradoxically another powerful force encouraged by
the of the end of the Cold War is globalism.
The market economy model is now nearly universally
accepted in industrial countries. The former
communist countries are rapidly being integrated into
global institutions like GATT, the IMF and the World
Bank. We are seeing issues like the environment and
weapons proliferation dealt with in global forums.
And in Kuwait and Cambodia we witness the United
Nations play a role it has not been able to play for
decades. Though they appear to be contradictory, these two
forces of regionalism and globalism are in fact
complementary. They are the two economically unifying counterweights
to the forces of nationalism, ethnicity and religion
which have also been released by the end of the post
war ideological battle.
Certainly I regard them as complementary, and
Australia's international economic policy embraces
both a global and a regional strategy. 
The job for governments everywhere is to fit these two
forces of regionalism and globalism together at a time
when, for better or worse, the Uruguay Round of the
GATT is coming to a conclusion.
This recognition that economic regionalism is a
dominant force in the world ecoomy does not for a
moment mean we have lost faith in GATT. It does not
mean that we will cease doing whatever we can,
whenever and wherever we can, to entrench through the
GATT a stronger set of principles of fair trade to
which all countries subscribe.
But we do recognise that trade and investment growth
today is predominantly within regions, that Europe
from the Atlantic to at least the Urals and perhaps
beyond is firmly set on a course of deep economic
integration over coming decades, and that in all
probability we shall be dealing with another free
trade area from Canada to Mexico by the end of this
year. We might not like this evolution, but whether we like
it or not we cannot stop it. The only question is how
we should respond to it.
That is a theme to which I will return later, but let
me set the scene for the next few decades by telling
you about how Australia has changed in the last decade
to prepare itself for the changes to come.
For the decades following World War Two we in this
country hid behind tariff barriers, creating what by
the early eighties had become an industrial museum.
The economy was highly regulated and unable to adjust
to the explosion of growth which was then occurring in
Asia. over the last-decade we have radically reformed.
We floated the dollar and deregulated financial
markets, replaced conflict with consensus in
industrial relations, set in place a program of tariff
cuts and industry modernisation, and pruned the
government sector
More recently we have encouraged a wholesale shift
into enterprise bargaining as the principal means of
deciding wages, and pushed forward a program of
industry reform which has dramatically increased the
productivity of our ports, and changed the face of our
aviation and telecommunications industries.
We are beginning now on vast new improvements to our
railways and roads. 
In our One Nation statement earlier this year, we made
changes to our business taxation system which make it
one of the most competitive among industrial
countries. And I am glad to say that the results of this reform
process have shown up in the transformation of our
trade a transformation in volumes, composition and
destination. A decade ago Australia exported less than one sixth of
our production.
Today we export over a fifth, and it has been steadily
climbing over the whole period.
A decade ago we more often than not imported more
goods and services each month than we exported.
Today, we export more than we import. Most Australians
would probably be surprised to know that we have a
stronger goods trading balance than many other
countries in the region, including Singapore,
Thailand, Malaysia, and Korea.
A decade ago Australia had one of the highest
inflation rates in the industrial world.
Today it is one of the lowest, and lower than most of
our regional trading partners.
A decade ago our cost structure made it hard for
exporters to compete.
Today we have increased our competitiveness by a
tenth, and entrenched our competitive advantage with
low inflation and high productivity growth.
As the sheer volume of our exports increased, their
composition and direction changed.
Both our services exports and manufactured exports
have tripled over the last decade. Last year for the
first time we exported more manufactured products than
rural products. Manufactures earn us more than metal
ores and minerals, or tourism or coal.
Nine out of ten of our largest export markets are now
in Asia and the Pacific.
Today, more than half of our merchandise exports go to
Asia. The countries of ASEAN are today collectively a bigger
export market for us than either the US or the EC. 
Our aim is to be at home in the region, with a highly
competitive world class manufacturing sector,
exporting a diverse range of commodities, manufactures
and services to the region and beyond.
The slow growth we and most other industrial economies
are now experiencing as we recover from recession
obscures the very real change in the economy. But
even with slow growth, we have found that far from
destroying our manufacturing base in this country our
structural reforms have nourished it.
Our manufacturing output today is nearly a tenth
higher than it was a decade ago and nearly a third
higher than it was twenty years ago, the so-called
" golden era" of protected Australian manufacturing.
And as I have explained, we are exporting more of our
manufacturing output than ever before.
The range and pace of our structural reforms over the
last decade demonstrate our recognition that whatever
happens in the world trading environment we will cope
with it best if we ourselves are as nimble, fleetfooted
and adaptable as possible.
Both the region and this country have profoundly
changed over the last decade. What will happen in the
next two?
I spoke earlier about the strategic choices we face as
the Uruguay round comes to an end, as Europe continues
on a deeper and more comprehensive integration, and as
the United States creates its own free trade area with
Canada and Mexico.
The choice is between entrenching the prosperity of
the region through increasing global openness, or
being forced onto second best paths which restrict
trade and leave us all worse off.
If governments make the right decisions, if the
Uruguay Round succeeds and the countries of our region
continue to liberalise, then over the next two decades
East Asia will continue to be the fastest growing area
of the world economy.
Growth of Asian markets will continue to exceed that
of other markets, including the EC and North America,
as population grows . and incomes rise.
Japan will be an even stronger, better balanced
economy, while the smaller Asian market economies will
increasingly be concentrating on services and of fshore
manufacturing. 
Some, like Korea, will have joined the OECD-and other
industriallid co6untry organisations. There will be a
new pack of " tigers" in South East Asia, benefiting
from political and strategic stability, and more
outward-looking economic policies.
With a new generation of leaders,_ China is likely to
commit itself increasingly to the mariket model, taking
the lead from its thriving coastal trading economy.
Korea may perhaps be reunited, ultimately bringing to
the North the economic prosperity that is transforming
the South.
If all goes well, the three nations of Indochina will
also be growing market economies.
APEC will evolve into an outward looking regional
trading group, with the participation of both Japan
and the United States.
Australia will be changed, too, with an even larger
trade sector, more exports of services and
manufactures, and astill sharper focus on markets
within the region.
The realisation of this world depends upon increasing
trade within the region, which in turn depends upon
countries' being as willing to buy other countries
exports as they are to sell their own.
It depends on making the right decision to lower
regional trade barriers at the same time as we
entrench fairer global rules.
But if we make the wrong decisions, or if they are
forced upon us, we face another possible future by
2010 a future quite different to the one I sketched
earlier. If the region cannot continue to open its own markets,
and still worse if we begin to encounter difficulty in
markets of Europe and North America, then the forces
now underpinning the region's success will be
reversed. we would see a weakened world trade system, with GATT
rules increasingly flouted.
We could see an inward looking North American Free
Trade Agreement, possibly extended throughout the
Americas, edging out competitors from its markets.
We could see Europe going its own way, placating a
multitude of domestic constituencies at the expense of
foreign competitors, and of its own future prosperity. 
We could see Japan defensively creating a regional yen
bloc, based on preferential trade and investment
rules. Lesser developed areas, like China and Indochina,
stunted in growth.
And Australia, its exports markets restricted, forced
into difficult economic and strategic choices between
the United States and Japan.
As I said earlier, the choice between the bright
scenario and the gloomy scenario will depend on how we
fit together the forces of regionalism and globalism
in trade policy.
For my part I think the best fit is attained when we
work towards the strongest set of universally agreed
minimum standards we can on a global basis, and at the
same time attempt to do better on a regional basis.
Given the large and diverse membership of GATT, it is
inevitable that an agreement which is universally
acceptable must leave plenty of opportunities for
regions and subregions to improve on the benchmark
without violating its rules.
And given the fact of propinquity, it is inevitable
that regional arrangements which are GATT friendly
will nonetheless be of greatest benefit to the region
concerned. So we will be seeking constantly to strengthen
international trading rules through the global
institution, GATT, at the same time as we seek to
build regional trade and economic arrangements which
take us beyond what we have been able to achieve on a
global consensus.
We remain committed to a successful Uruguay Round
because it can bring us substantial benefits, not just
in agriculture but also in manufactures, services,
intellectual property rights and many other areas.
According to one cautious Canadian study, the package
now before us would, if agreed, increase global income
by something of the order of 120 billion dollars a
year. As you know, no breakthrough came about during the
Munich Summit of the G7. I do not pretend to be other
than disappointed at the failure so far to bridge the
remaining differences. We will be pressing hard for
the G7 leaders to make good their commitment to reach
a balanced agreement before the end of the year. 
8
Stalling the round indefinitely would be a failure of
political leadership on a grand scale. It would
represent a shameful capitulation to the selfish
forces of economic protection.
But while successful GATT outcome is important it
won't begin to exhaust the trade growth possibilities
in the region.
According to a study by the Centre for International
Economics, the Asia Pacific region would gain the
equivalent of $ 300 billion if the countries of the
region were to agree to liberalise with a fifty per
cent reduction in tariff and non tariff barriers.
APEC holds great promise in this next phase of trade
reform. Institutionalisation of APEC will signal a
new area in regional economic co-operation. APEC
members have committed themselves to reducing barriers
to trade amongst themselves in a GATT-friendly way.
Already APEC working groups are hard at work in
different sectoral projects. In the next 12 months we
are likely to see substantial outcomes from various
projects which will yield significant practical
benefits for business. These include customs reforms,
changes to administrative barriers to market access,
development of tariff databases, and others.
In some areas it will be possible to move forward in
smaller groups of economies say like-minded groups
in the Western Pacific and then extend agreements
later to take in all APEC members, or even economies
not yet in APEC. The Trade Minister, John Kerin, and
I will therefore be asking our senior trade officials
to explore some of these options with regional
countries before the end of the year.
One possibility is to look at the potential offered by
the growing aviation market in our hemisphere. On
current trends, by 2010 Asia will have consolidated
its place as the world's pre-eminent international
aviation market. -This process could be enriched
through an expansion of regional aviation rights.
Other possibilities include regional agreements on
investment and on services, including
telecommunications, banking and insurance.
As a steel exporter, and also as a supplier of raw
materials to the steel makers of north Asia, Australia
would also be receptive to discussions on a regional
steel agreement, if the global talks remain stalled. 
9
Over coming months we will be reexamining trade policy
options in the light of the Uruguay Round outcome and
regional developments. Some of these options are
reviewed in discussion papers commissioned by the
government and prepared by Professor Richard Snape,
which will be released by the Minister for Trade on
Wednesday. The papers will contribute to the debate on our
national trade strategy which will be capped by a
comprehensive Ministerial Statement by Mr Kerin in
October. I have no doubt that regionalism will become
increasingly important to us in coming decades. That
is why I have this evening suggested a few regional
trade initiatives we will pursue. But we should
always bear in mind that the region has founded its
development on trade and, more than any other, enjoys
the benefits of the principles of interdependence and
openness. Over the next two decades we must continue
to demonstrate that the best outcome for all economic
regions is attained when we have strong global rules
while maximising regional trade opportunities. 



" C
PRIINMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF OPENING REMARKS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING, MP TO THE NATIONAL MEETING ON YOUTH
TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
22 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much, I think we might call the
meeting to order. Could I begin by saying that I have
already had the pleasure of meeting most of you this
morning, as have my colleagues, but could I say formally
on their behalf and mine welcome to this meeting. It is
very gratifying to see you here and it is a reflection
of, I think, the concern that Australia feels at the
moment for unemployment, the problems which come with it
and particularly as the problem attends our young people.
We all know, I think, that unemployment in the kind of
society we have is not the shock absorber in the economic
system. We don't regard it as a buffer at the end of the
station, we don't believe that a group in a society
should carry the adjustment burden of any economy, in a
transition no matter how important or fundamental, that
that kind of policy approach is unacceptable, and that
the fairness and sense of equality and egalitarianism of
Australia as always deigned that everyone should have a
right to a job regardless of age. And it has been on
that basis that we have as a country operated.
Structural unemployment is of course not a new phenomena
for us or many other countries, but in the last ten or
fifteen years of quite rapid world change, change in
trade, and change in the structure of economies we have
seen this appear. And it is difficult to deal with it,
and we now have compounding that problem unemployment
coming from the cycle of the recession. We are now
emerging into recovery, but thie unemployment is still
with us. It is a social evil and we have got to do what
4e can to beat it, and as a Government, may I say, for
the years 1983, certainly up to 1990, we took the view
that unemployment had to be dealt with and that
employment should be an express outcome of policy, that
employment should not be simply a residual which falls
out the bottom of the growth numbers, but was an express
objective of policy. And that's why I think we have
progressed so far. That is, in the .' 80s we were able to 
grow our labour market at about three times the pace of
most comparable countries, and why today the labour
market is still 25 per cent larger than it was in 1983.
But the fact is that growth stopped, unemployment has
risen, and we have now got to do all in our power to get
it down. Yesterday in respect of the fortunes of young
people and youth unemployment, we took I think a great
leap forward in what I think one can conscientiously
describe as an historic change. We arrived at an
agreement, the Commonwealths with the States, to
establish a National Training Authority, that is to make
another path-waayi n e-: idu6fii5ii-eh-Ybid-thit which we have
now through the tertiary system and through compulsory
education. Arnd as all of you who are interested in this
subject know, almost half of the kids who live school are
untrained. And part of the reason for that is that we
have never really had the structures in place to train
them. So, at least from the Governments' perspective,
Governments plural, we put our heads together and I think
came up with a cooperative model which will allow the
Commonwealth and the States to work together for the
benefit of Australian young people, and those mature age
students who will also find themselves in vocational
education. But I think today, that was yesterday, but
today I think we can do more. But we have to advance on
three fronts. Obviously growth is key to whatever we
might do and the economy is now growing again and we
shouldn't be too forlorn about its prospects, there's
every chance that in the year to June the economy will
grow by about 2 per cent. This compares with growth over
the same period in Europe of about 1.7. So we're doing
as well or better than comparable countries. We're not
growing as fast as parts of Asia but we are growing
certainly as fast or faster than Europe or North America.
In the coming year we expect to be growing much faster,
of the order of 4 per cent. And it is, as we all know,
GDP, growth, which pulls up employment. And when one
sees any graphic illustration of employment and growth,
they go together, one line with the other, whenever we
see a lift in GDP, in growth in output, we see a lift in
employment. The problem for us now is we're living with
the lag, the lag which comes from higher productivity,
more output being produced by fewer people, in the first
instance, to see employment pick up later. So growth is
the key, and no matter what we do here today, no matter
how clever we think some of our solutions may be, if the
growth isn't there of course it will retard our progress.
The second front, I think, is education and training.
And that goes right across thie -gammi-t oif the -' Estiem, ffr om
school, primary to secondary education, retention in
secondary education and as we've been prone to say
lately, we've taken that participation rate from 3 in
in 1983 to now 7 in 10 and we want to see that get to
9 in 10 before too much longer, and we've now very
rapidly and dramatically expanded higher education with a
per cent addition of tertiary places since the middle
1980s. 
3
The key now is to get that school to work transition into
place and to look at struciured training which can only
really come with the notion that the later teenage years
are years of vocational preparation, and where it's now
up to us to see that there are pathways between school
and work and that it's no longer acceptable for those of
us who are involved in society to take the view that half
of the school leavers can just meander their way through
a labour market untrained to find that opportunities are
denied them. So education and training, I think, is the
second front.
And the third front is to help the unemployed now. That
is, particularly those young people whose later teenage
years will precede the more fundamental transitions from
school to work, the more structured training arrangements
which are portended in the Carmichael Report and in other
places those people who are disadvantaged now, that's the
other front we have to work on to deal with the
unemployed now.
So we've invited you here today, each of you, because we
know you've already done things, and are doing things,
about these problems, about unemployment generally. And
particularly about unemployment for young people and
we're particularly gratified that we've had many young
people themselves participate in the process and give us
the benefit of their views which we will also see again
today, with further expression by them of their opinions.
For the Government's part, we will listen attentatively
to what's said. The process of national meetings on
points of difficulty in society, has been I think a good
one over the last decade or so, and it does give
governments a chance to listen to what the community has
to say and fashion policy accordingly. So we will
listen, we'll take note, we've got a reasonable structure
in our own ideas already, as would be obvious, but we
want to try and assimilate some of the views which are
put today with those ideas and to produce a structure of
value. So the Government will not be responding today, because
to do so would be to not take the views of people
seriously because obviously they can't be considered at
the same time as they're being put. But we will respond
next week, after we digest what has been put today and
when we have the time, the thinking time and the time to
structure a response, a sensible response and to
structure a response sensibly.
So could I just say, I conclude on those remarks again by
saying it's very gratifying to see you here.
Thank you very much for coming. We'll be having an open
session this morning of about, I think, five speeches
including my own, two from two young people representing 
4
the Australian Youth Policy and Action Coalition
Delegation, one from the ACTU, from Bill Kelty and
another from Eric Mayer the chair of the Business in the
Community for Young People and following those speeches
we will then move into closed session, where we can have
a general discussion, and I think, take other
presentations. So with those few words I think we'll move the agenda on
and I might ask now Miss Belinda Cant to address the
meeting. ENDS 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING HP,
QUEENSLAND STATE ALP FUNDRAISING DINNER, GREEK COMMUNITY
CENTRE, 30 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Ian McClean, the Lord Mayor, and of course the Premier,
Ladles and Gentlemen.
Well thank you very Much for those kind words, Wayne, and
for so many of you coming along tonight. I don't know
about the Canberra Raiders, I'll be gone by then, but I
hope at the Grand Final when it really matters I can do a
Lazarus too, and be there when it matters.
But as Wayne and I came tonight into the building with
the demonstrators outside, I thought of that remark
passed by a predecessor of mine also in Queensland, I
thought if I knew Wayne was that unpopular I mightn't
have come with him. But jokes aside it's great to share
a platform with him, the most popular Premier in
Australia, a clean cut guy in every way. Clean cut
personally, clean cut politically, given hope and heart
to the Queensland Labor Party and restored it to its
position in Government as the oldest Labor Party in the
world, a real achievement.
For some reason there's a great empathy between the New
_.. ZuhWales Labor Party and the QueenslandLabor 95i-ty.
When you go __ to a___ 07eensland1 Labor Party' ConTerne-yralways
feel at home, there's always working people there.
it has not been middle-classed, and it's always great to
be amongst the Labor Party in Queensland, it feels like
there just isn't a boarder between us.
But ladies and gentlemen, I've had a wonderful week in
Queensland and I must say that in the six odd months I've
been Prime Minister no better reception and nicer time
have I had than Townsville, Innisvale, Rockhampton,
Glandstone and now in Brisbane. And the thought occurred
to me today and yesterday as we talked to those
communities, and also recently when I was in Newcastle in
New South Wales, not long after recovering from an
earthquake, and in Geelong in Victoria which of course
has had more than its share of economic woes. But the 
one thing I found in all of these places is a great sense
of purpose as communities, cohesion, common sense, social
partnerships and of course spirit, and I found that
yesterday in Townsville, I found it at lunch at the Civic
Reception given for us in Innisvale, in Rockhampton last
evening, and in Glandstone, when a few years ago and I
use to go there as a Shadow Minister for Minerals it was
a small community of a few thousand, now grown to over
23,000 and an international port city of Australia.
And it just makes the point that these communities
understand better, than perhaps Some in the major cities,
about how to make Australia work, how to work together,
how to achieve things, how to have pride and have that
spirit and go out and grasp the future. Because that's
what I found around Queensland, that great spirit of
optimism, that spirit that says we're not going to let
anything defeat us and we're going to get out there and
grasp the future.
We're pretty lucky in this country, we're the only nation
in the world that has a content to itself. We've got
what a lot of countries don't have and that is clean air,
clean water, a lot of space and a great future. You know
what they always say about real-estate ' position,
position, position', well we've got the best real estate
in the world. And that is, a continent in the South
Pacific and the Asia Pacific area, which is the fastest
growing part of the world, where we can carve out for
ourselves a lifestyle and an existence which is unique
amongst nations. That is a multicultural country,
inheriting a continent, coming to terms with it, coming
to terms with the resonances of Australia, the old
continent of Australia, coming to terms with the first
Australians, making a life for ourselves in this country,
locking ourselves in with the Asia Pacific, and giving
ourselves a style of living and an income which I think
can be the envy of the world. Very few countries have
those possibilities now, Australia still has it, and that
great spirit I found in Queensland today is the thing
that will capture it for us.
Now ladies and gentlemen, It's a case of working
together, of partnerships. And if you look at that
tremendous community spirit in those towns and cities
I've mentioned, it's all about partnerships, the
community comes to you as a whole. They don't come to
you as factions or with divisions, they approach you as a
whole. And that's the great strength, and must be
strength in pulling Australia together.
Now we've had good times and we've had some tough times,
we've been in a recession we're now into recovery, we've
got unemployment as a result. But we've still come a
long way. Our labour market today is 7 1/ 2 million. it
was 6 million in 1983, even with the unemployment it's
per cent bigger. In 1983 the size of the economy was
worth $ 200 billion, GDP was $ 200 billion, today it's $ 400 
billion. And sure, the economy has not grown in the last
18 months very much, ityVgr-owng again now. But as a
result we've not had enough employment to take people up
into the labour market and _ 4npeiR_; oYment has risen. But
we'e arglyettTe jobs of the 1980s and we-had three
times the employment growth of the western world then, we
had very high work force growth coming from our natural
population and migration, and we succeeded in taking
those people up and bringing unemployment down and
doubling the nominal size of our gross domestic product,
not a bad achievement in that period.
But now that we're in a position where we've been in a
recession, again we've got to make it clear there's a
role for government in directing Australia to the future.
It's not simply a case of relying upon the old question
of private initiative and private reward, as important as
they are, it is not a matter of relying on those alone
but having government create markets, making markets work
and governments doing the things in infrastructure, the
building which we know has made Australia great.
Now I was at the South Johnstone sug9Ar mill yesterday and
interestingly it wai W fff by-Fthe-6ueeniii Government.
It's no longer owned by the Queensland Government, it's
very competently managed now by the people who produce in
the region. But it's another example of how Government
can kick a community along when those resources don't
exist. That's the attitude we've taken in the One Nation
program, which Wayne mentioned, and where today Bob Brown
and I announced a $ 2 billion road program for Australia
and one of the biggest infrastructure spending programs
ever 45 per cent increase in Queensland this year over
last year, $ 600 million extra dollars from the One Nation
package in roads.
It's just another example of Government playing its
proper role, in roads, in rail, in airlines, in all of
the things we know a private company can't provide. A
private company can't build a highway. A private company
is not going to build a ring road around the capital
cities. A private company is not going to build a
railway line down to Robina. A private company is not
going to restore the National Rail Highway of Australia.
These things can only be done by Government. And there
is a role for Government in providing that public
infrastructure and kicking the economy along at a time
when private spending is down, so when private spending
picks up it can play its role as we know it has to.
there is a real role there for Government, and part of
that, of course, is even beyond those great building
programs for which the Labor Party has always been proud
and had a great history, but as well as that in the areas
of social policy.
Now Wayne mentioned earlier the fact that we're now an
externally oriented country. This is true. We've thrown
off the Menzold, Menzian era of believing that we were a 
lucky country, and that we needed to nothing more clever
than dig up another mount of minerals, grow another
paddock full of wheat, grow a bit more wool and Bobs
you're Uncle. Well Bob wasn't you're uncle. And we
found by 1980 that we could no longer pay for our
imports. And that the so called ' lucky~ county. was not
really a very clever country, that the post war trade in
goods and services had passed us by, that we were still
buying things from the shelves of the world, computers,
colour televisions, video tap recorders all the rest, we
expected to have those things but couldn't pay for them,
and then started to borrow to be able to maintain our
standard of living.
Now this Government said we can't go on like this, we'll
end up like some of the South American economies, and how
could you tolerate a position where you claim to be a
smart society but only three children in ten completed
secondary school, where the university system was falling
to pieces, underfunded and under utilised. And so we
started on that long road of getting from three kids in
ten completing secondary school to seven in ten, now
moving to nine in ten, we rebuilt our university system
added 50 per cent of places, and in a great historic
decision of two weeks ago, in which your Premier played
an historic part, we're now going to build a National
Training Authority to do for technical education what we
did for universities.
Now what we want to be is smart soclety. A smart society
where kids are given an opportunity for training and good
jobs. And we regard those years of 15 to 19 as a period
of vocational preparation and we stream them through to
the sort of clever jobs, the high quality jobs that we
know that this country needs. Because what we don't want
to go sell is selling our labour cheaply, we don't want
to compete in the international division of labour in our
neighbourhood in the world. I don't want to see
Australians working for $ 1.30 a day as is the lot of the
workers of Indonesia. That is not the league we want to
be playing in, we don't want to be pushing wages down and
selling our labour cheaply, we want to be selling our
brains, our creativity, our ability and become as we've
always been, a smart society which is capable of research
and development, producing innovative products and going
getting a premium for them and selling clever goods out
there. That's Australia's role, that's Australia's
future, not downgrading our people saying that they are
incapable of it and that they've got to cut their wages
to be competitive. That's not the society we want.
in this great transition where we've lowered the tariff
walls, where we've floated the exchange rate, where we've
restarted Australian manufactuxring sotathsyr
elaborately transformed manufactured exports where
greater than rural exports or mining exports. That sort
of important transition, the transition to services
industries like tourism, which are now helping the 
Queensland economy, didn't exist a decade ago. And which
have come along because of this great transition, this
great external transition. And it's that transition
which is going to underpin our standard of living.
So I put to you that a Labor Government, it took a Labor
Government to introduce a market economy into Australia.
A Labor Government to itouearemrkteconomy
into Australia. But we did it with a Labor heart, we did
it with a Labor heart. Because we grafted onto that
economic policy a social policy which we think is the
kind of policy that sticks with the central tenants of
Labor's thought and philosophy, and keeps that
egalitarianism and fairness of Australia together. And
such things and the right of access to medical services
is a basic right and we have it there with Medicare.
Equal access to education, as I mentioned, giving all
children the right to secondary education or tertiary or
vocational education. Access to education is a basic
Australian right, a right of everybody. Or the right to
support women with childcare, or the aged with age care,
decent pensions, geriatric assessment, the Home and
Community Care program, the Hostel program, the Nursing
H~ ome program. These are all the great reforms of Labor
in the
And of couree, no greater than access to occupational
superannuation for the whole workforce, a right to a
decent-r4t ement income. And it's that right to a
decent retirement income which will do these two things:
not only when my generation, when the baby boomers turn
and there are twice as many retired aged people in the
community as there is today, we won't put that terrible
burden on our children to pay for us, that tremendous
inter generational transfer which will occur as a huge
aged population relies upon their children to provide for
themi in later years, now's the time to provide for
ourselves by saving and producing a decent retirement
income. But in so doing, build 8 pool of national
savings which will fund our development, fund our
investment and fund our growth into the future.
Because the problem we're all going to face in the 1990s
is that the world economy of today was last like this
before the first World War. This is the first time since
1914 that the old Soviet States have rejoined the world
economy, since China is now rejoining the world economy,
India, the Americas, South America. And they'll be all
out there in the ' 90s bidding for savings, bidding for
investment capital, to rebuild Russia to rebuild eastern
Europe, East Germany, India, China, South America, and we
don't want to be out there with the savings begging bowl
trying to fund our current account deficit. We've made
the step already to do it with occupational
superannuation, to put those savings into place.
we'll have there by the end of this decade about $ 800
billion, $ 800,000 million which is about five times our 
6
national debt, and we'll be in that comfortable position
of being able to fund our investment programs and with it
bring on the employment which is entirely necessary for
giving us the kind of society that we've always believed
we should have, one where a right to a job is a basic
Australian right.
So ladies arnd gentlemen, these are the things that Labor
has done. We've introduced a market economy, we've
opened Australia up, we've started to produce clever
things again, we've opened ourselves up for services, but
we've done it with a decent social policy. We've done it
with a social policy that looks after the sick, the aged,
the young, the poor, women, migrants. We've done it to
keep Australia together. We've done it the Labor way.
We've not been, as somebody said of Dr Hewson the other
night who described him as a feral abacus, we are not a
feral abacus. We're not about simply ticking of f numbers
as though people don't matter, counting beads as though
people don't matter. We're about developing Australia,
interlocking it with the Asia Pacific, having an
efficient economy but at the same time having a decent
social policy.
And we all know we're going through a phase where we're
getting more output from fewer people. And it's
producing unemployment. We're getting more production
from a smaller workforce. Loads of productivity, it's
called productivity, and we need it to be efficient.
That is, we're getting much more production from those
who produce it. So what does that mean if we're going to
get unemployment down? What it means to get unemployment
down is that we've got to produce even more output. if a
given level of output produces only so much employment
and it's not enough, the only thing to do is to produce
even more output, and that means that the Australian
economy has to grow at a reasonably fast pace. And to
have it grow at a fast pace, and still control inflation
can only be done with an incomes policy. It can't be
done with interest rates, it can't be done with a central
bank jumping on the economy because to do that it cuts
the speed down and therefore cuts the employment growth
o f-f.
We've always had employment as an express objective of
Government policy. It hasn't been a residual that fell
out of the numbers. And when I used to stand up in the
OECD in the 1980s and talk about employment being the
express objective, some of those European Finance
Ministers would look at me as though I had a case of
leprosy. Because they are interested only in their
current accounts and inflation.
We on the other hand have always had employment as a
c~ lear and express objective. And that means you must run
with a high workforce growth of this country, even with
modest immigration growth, without natural population
growth, with workforce growth of 1.6 per cent a year, you
n % A J L V L I I U V 1 11 F V Q I A 
have got to run the ecoinmy at a reasonable speed. Every
time we have done that before our incomes Policy, before
the Accord, that speed spilled Into 8 price and wage
round, and we ended up with higher inflation, lower
growth, and higher unemployment. We beat that dismal
legacy in the 19809 with an incomes policy. We ran the
economy at quite a speed but still had decelerating
inflation. So much so, that yesterday we chalked up the
lowest figure in just on thirty years with 1.2 per cent.
So, having the mechanism in place to let the economy grow
and not kill it with interest rates to save inflation,
and tolerate a pool of unemployment, means that you must
have a conversation with organised labour and with
business. Now, whether you call it cooperation, or
discussion, or an Accord really doesn't matter. There
has got to be a discussion about national income
determination how much national income goes to wages
and how much goes to profits. And it is in that model
with the ACTU we have been able to run Australia quite
fast and still have decelerating inflation.
In contras4t D~ r niewson's model has unemployment as a break
upon wage increases. In his model unemployment is
actually sitting there as a tool, to actually moderate
wage claims and to moderate inflation, but of course you
will have no conversation with organised labour, and the
central bank would simply be in instructed to lift the
interest rates to sit on the economy. And so in his
model, not only is employment not an express objective,
unemployment becomes a tool of government policy. We
reject that absolutely, totally.
In the end the difference between the Labor Party and its
opponents is a matter of heart. The Labor Party has it
and they don't. The Labor Party grew with the soul of
this country and the Liberal Party has tried to graft
itself onto it, all these years. But this was never
plainer then now, as Dr Hewson and that rotten remnant of
the New R~ ights agenda, Fightback, comes-as the creed of
the new conservative parties. But in the end, the proper
end of economic policy is social improvement, and the
notion we have heard him speak about in the last day or
two about cutting wages, taking kids to $ 3.00 an hour,
getting rid of awards, rates of pay, and conditions of
employment to go to three quarters of average weekly
earnings, or some such figure for the average person, is
not social improvement.
The point of economic policy is to lift people up, not
push them down. Dr Hewson thinks it's a crime for me to
say I want to see Australians with higher real wages. Dr
Heweon I do. And I make no apologies for it. And we can
do it by the sort of economic policies that Australia can
have. But you won't get anywhere economically by destroying the
country socially. So don't my word for it, ask all of 
those people who fell through the social trap door in
Britain and the United States. All those people, You can
almost draw a line in Britain for the people who are
lucky enough to enjoy the best of the British economy
living South of London, arnd all the rest living in the
North, broadly living in the North, who don't have that
social improvement. Or in the United States, if you are
unemployed there, like or Hewson after nine months, after
six months your out with no support, no income support,
no unemployment benefits, and if you are cold you huddle
over a railway grate and try and live in the warm
exhaust. That's not for us, and we are not having it.
Or, in the United States if you are sick and you get
admitted to a hospital and you get to the door, even if
you are acutely sick, if that blue cross card isn't in
your pocket they turn you away. Now you couldn't
comprehend anybody with medical training turning someone
acutely sick away because they are not insured and they
don't have the card with them. That's what happens in
the United States. We will never let it happen here.
They get to this position where Dr Hewson is so down on
-unions, but he is not down on the -DoctoruFn'aio n. He
turned up to the AMA about six weeks ago on a weekend and
said he will let the AMA set the common fee. Not the
Commonwealth Government, which is now paying a large part
of the health bill, but the AMA. And he will let doctors
basically generate the incomes they think the traffic
will bear. But If you are a working person three
quarters of your pay for you and $ 3.00 an hour if you are
a kid. That's his policy. And we are not copping that,
policy, and we are not copping it for this reason that
people will not be able to afford medical insurance. we
are not having a position where low income people, or
even middle income people with children, can't afford to
insure themselves when they are sick and get access to
medical insurance. Because under Medicare now you can be
on an income in the $ 20,000s with a coul of children
and pay no levy whatsoever, and society gives you that
right to medical treatment because those of us who are
earning the higher Incomes pay it for you under Medicare,
which is an equitable policy.
These are the things which are important. The same with
education, Dr 1fewson has a voucherpoigy. Voucher
policies have never worked anywhere in the world. You
get virtually a bus ticket which has so many dollars
written on it, you go and check it in at a university, or
someone else. And he says this puts incentive into the
system and the freedom to achieve. It costs $ 120,000 to
train somebody for a Medical degree. What freedom does
an ordinary working persons child have if they don't have
the $ 120,000 for the full fee place, or the child of a
working family that might want an Arts degree which is
going to cost of the order of $ 20,000 to $ 30,000? They
haven't got it. When we get as a society where the
bright kids get jammed out of the education system
because their parents can't afford it, that's the time to 
pack it in, that's the sort Of policy he wants to put in
education. These are the things that the next election will be
decided on. It will be about bringing a recovery on,
consolidating the recovery, having a role for Government
to lift that spending, to be the catalyst in a recovery,
to bring private Investment back up, and to see it go on.
And at the same time to build on all of the social
advances we have made and the things I have been talking
about health care, education, childcare, age care, all
of the other things, support for Aboriginals, migrants,
all of these areas are the things which we will continue.
But he has basically one policy with two prongs: higher
prices end lower wages that's the policy. 15 per cent
addition to prices, which will blow our inflation rate to
pieces in an exercise in economic vandalism, that would
be entirely culpable given the fact that we now after
twenty years have the inflation rate under 2 per cent, to
add a net 6 or 7 per centage points to the price system
to take it back to double digits would be unconscionable.
That's what he wants to do. And while he lifts those
prices he cuts people's wages. Now you all know If you
are on $ 20,000 to $ 30,000, whether you tax someone's
income or their expenditure is entirely beside the point,
because they are one in the same. An ordinary person
spends every cent that they earn, so whether you tax it
as income or as expenditure it is all the same. But the
person on the high income spends only a proportion of
their salary and saves the rest, and those people have
the benefit of the proposals put by Dr Hewson and the tax
benefits for them are paid for by the low income and
middle income people who spend all their income in the
supermarket or in their daily living.
The OST will blow our inflation rate to pieces and with
it d6r~ 1nterest rates. It will effect a huge transfer of
wealth from the low and middle income earners to the high
income earners. It will essentially derail Australian
investment while at the same time the consensus we have
had for a decade now about wages, profits end national
incomes will be put asunder as he tries to abolish
centralised wage fixation, the only thing in national
wage cases which protects the low paid, as he tries to
knock them off, knock of f federal awards and cut people'ss
wages. This is what he holds. We don't need lower
wages, the wage share and GDP at the moment Is in the
1960s, at 1960s levels. We don't need to sell cheap
labour to the rest of the world, we need to sell our
brains to the rest of the world making smart products and
educating people, and lifting our people up. And that's
the difference between us.
So, ladies and gentlemen I say this, I think as a Party
we have been very fair in this sense. We have never said
to Australian business, look we believe it can be all
done on the public sector. When I became Treasurer the
-4 
Commonwealth public Sector was over 30 per cent of the
size of the economy, it is now about 24. It is 6 per
cent of GDP smaller, or about $ 25 billion a year smaller.
Ipso Facto the private economy is $ 25 billion bigger. We
shifted the profit share so that people in business can
af ford to invest by a higher level of profit, which we
effected in the late 1980s and is fundamentally still
there. As the volumes pick up the profits will go on the
bottom line and the profit share will come up as we saw
in last quarter's National Accounts. we have got that in
place, we have got a 39 per cent tax rate in place for
companies, we have got full dividend imputation, we are
one of the few countries in the world that only tax
equity and dividends once where most other countries tax
them twice. We have got all of that sitting in place and
a stock of savings coming down the pipeline of
superannuation to fund the investments this country is
going to need. We have given business a fair break, and
as we come out of the recession into a strong recovery
all of those benefits and low inflation will count for
Australian business.
But while we have done that we have understood the real
traditions of Australia and we have stuck to them.
Unlike the Coalition who say we are the tradition
breakers, they're the people who attack the tradition,
and the tradition is equality, egalitarianism, and
fairness. That is, we don't have an under class left
behind, we pull everybody along. We have business
pulling along, tugging along, and with it the workforce
and with it the aged, the sick, the poor and the young,
with proper social policies. And if some group drops
back we lean our caring arm out and pull them up, pull
them up with us, and move along as a community and a
society. And that's the basic difference between us and the
conservative parties. The Labor Party is a true
political party, it has feelings, it has a soul. it is
not simply an organisation committed to getting votes
like some sort of business group, or some sort of
business organisation, it's a political party with
feelings, with substance, with loyalties. And our
political party demands that as we progress ourselves we
take Australian society along, all of us along, and we
produce the sort of country we have always had but a more
prosperous one.
So ladies and gentlemen, that's what the contest is about
in Australia. Never before have we seen such a contrast,
well we have, but not recently between the parties,
between the philosophy of the Coalition and the
philosophy of the Labor Party. And we say to
Australians, you're in a fundamental transition from the
old Australia locked up behind a tariff wall, which
disfavoured the big agricultural and mining States like
Queensland and Western Australia, to the advantage of the
industrialised areas, locked up behind a tariff wall and 
TEL: 3. Aug. 92 18: 09 No. 018 P-11/ 1
basically becoming uncompetitive. That's not the sort of
position we want to see. we have taken it, we have
changed that, but we have changed it in a way where we go
forward. We don't need to smash the place socially to
advance ourselves economically. And we won't, that's
what the basic contest will be about.
So when we go to the election sure we will have had the
aftermath of the recession and the attendant
unemployment, and we are doing everything to be rid of
that. But as that goes down we say to Australians, stick
with the change, stick with the basic historic transition
to a modern society, to a modern Industrial state locked
into the Asia-Pacific, one with a great bountiful
continent with fresh air, clean water, space and a decent
environment, loyal to our original Australians, and at
the same time giving ourselves a decent standard of
living. i don't think they will take the hard-hearted
alternative. I don't think they will take the clinical
technician, because in the end I don't think he has got
much to of fer. Pain for pain's sake, misery for misery's
sake, cutting ordinary people back and disadvantaging the
poor never did anything for anybody. And that's why we
have all got to move together as a group, and that's why
it is important for Labor Governments to stick to their
guns, have faith in their creed, and see the difficult
changes through. And that's what has put this Government
of yours together in Queensland under Wayne Goss, that's
what will restore and retain us in the national arena
because we are basically better, we basically can think
better, and as importantly as that, we think with a heart
and 8 soul.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for coming,
you have done me a great honour, and the Queensland Labor
Party has done me a great honour in inviting you and
assembling such a large audience of people, arnd I thank
the members of the business community who have come along
tonight. I will just say, you have always been part of
us from the 1980a onwards, as the whole constituency of
Australia is part of us. Whether it is the rural
community, or the business community, or the poor, or the
sick, or the aged, they are part of the Labor family.
And we will go together as a family, and we will stay
together as a family.
Thank you. 



EM' 9.
.41 USRLI
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGO: AGAINST DELIVERY ( 8. l15PM)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
CEDA SYMPOSI4UM, MELBOURNE, 3 AUGUST 1992
Ladies and Gentlemen, many of you here tonight will have
heard me go through my paces as Treasurer many times.
I can still do a passingly good imitation of a Treasurer
when I'm asked.
But these days I prefer to leave that thankless task to
John Dawkins.
Tonight I thought I might stand back a bit and outline
what we see as great possibilities for Australia in the
future. I want to talk about the philosophy_ of the Government,
our ideas and priorities.
I'm told there's a rumour going round that the government
is run by fanatics, pointy-heads and zealots.
Those who have observed us over the years as you have
will know this is a long way from the truth.
These people do exist, it is true but they are not our
people. And, contrary to another related rumour, we have never
been of the New Right view that the way to economic
success is through a mixture of rationalisation and hope
and only a hope that new competitive industries will
miraculously rise to replace the old inefficient ones.
We are wiser than that. We take the view that there is a
role for government to clear the decks for business
to create a market and sometimes where appropriate do
business with business.
We believe in competitiveness. It has been the linchpin,
the guiding philosophy a'nd the one great goal since
we came to office nearly a decade ago. And it remains so.
You and we both know that an economically competitive
Australia is the only Australia which can survive as a
healthy social democracy into the twenty-first century. 955 
As a Labor Party whose primary commitment is always to a
healthy social democracy, we have taken the business of
competitiveness more seriously perhaps than the
conservative parties were ever able to.
Indeed it is an irony that it took a Labor Government to
give Australia and open market economy.
For us economic policy is the servant of a greater goal
which is prosperous society, but, more than that, a fair
and just society.
I think that is why we took up the task of restructuring,
renovating and radically reforming the
Australian economy when the Opposition, over seven years,
had failed to.
For us, nothing we wanted to do could be done without it.
We could not think of social reform without facing the
fact of economic reform.
You should remember that, I think as all Australians
should: strange as it may have seemed at the time to both
Labor and conservative observers, we grabbed the
initiative on these changes for the same reason that
Labor has alw~ ays grabbed the initiative they were
necessary to realising our traditional ambitions for
Australia. I say you should remember it because there is an
immutable lesson there that is, if you want to see the
necessary change in this country, Labor is your best, if
not your only, bet.
We have a much bigger incentive. Change is our reason for
being. Change is our business.
Our opponents might do a bit of this and a bit of thatthey
will do some slashing and some burning and you can
be fairly sure that they'll do a lot of hoping.
But you can't be sure they'll follow through.
And they won't take the country with them.
What they will do is alienate a lot of people and a lot
of important organisations.
They'll raise the temperature of industrial relations,
for instance.
Some of you might not like trade unions.
Some of you might not like environmentalists either.
That I do not share that view is not the point.
q 7,1 
The point is that, if you weigh the record, you'll see
that it's better to come to terms with them, better to
show a bit of subtlety, a bit of give and take, a bit of
understanding, than to trigger guerilla warfare across
the country.
Not just a bit better fundamentally better, more
profitable and productive.
The consensus approach has accelerated reform, and not as
our opponents assert, retarded it. Many of the things
that have been achieved would never have been achieved by
their confrontationist methods.
The fundamental improvements in our industrial relations
system. which have seen strikes reducd-to thir lowest'
levelfor 30 years, wages at competitive levels, a decade
of growth and now inflation reduced to an historic low,
simply would not have been achieved by the policies of
our opponents.
Rancour is not a creative condition. We've got a lot of
it out of the system out of the most important
relationship in the economy, the workplace relationship.
And, as you know, we're still pushing towards a more
rational, effective and competitive workplace.
To take just a couple of examples:
in shiping, in the last three years crew sizes have
fallen by a quarter, to equal the average crewing
for OECD ships visiting Australia. As a result ship
owners have spent nearly $ 2 billion on 28 new ships
about a third of the fleet.
on the waterfront, by October this year the
stevedoring workforce will be half of what it was
three years ago. Our reforms have doubled the
number of containers handled per man.
I said on the night we delivered the One Nation statement
that our reforms to industrial relations have been the
most constructive step we have taken in this country
since the war: that a nation cannot be strong if at the
very point where wealth is created the people are locked
in conflict; that modern industry has to be a
cooperative process.
I say it again, in part to remind you of the government's
philosophy and achievement, but more importantly to
remind you of Augtralia'Ls achievement.
I mean the degree of the change and it's a continuing
change should not be underestimated. It should give
all of us confidence. -957 
For there ha be remarkable change in Australia in the
past ten years. Australians have recognised necessity
and adapted. They've proved both their willingness and
their capacity.
I believe we should recognise this as an important
factor in the nation's favour.
At the same time I think we should recognise that there
are costs~ for people in this process social and
psychological costs and they must never be left out of
the economic equation.
That's why I say it's important to take the country with
US. It's why I say that it is always a government's
responsibility to play a role, and those who still argue
that the market, unfettered and alone, should determine
national outcomes do not understand good government, good
economics or what is good for people.
Ladies and gentlemen
We take an eclectic view, not an ideological one.
We have not gone willy-nilly into industry plans, but
where we have thought it sensible to intervene we h~ ave
intervened.
Where we think our responsibility stops at getting the
business and industrial environment right, we will stop
there.
Which leads me to another rumour presently doing the
rounds. Don't believe this one either.
If people ask what good the great reforms of the last
decade have done, tell them heaps.
When we opened up the Australian economy with a. floating
dollar, open financial markets and and phased dbwn
industry protection, we were aiming at making Australian
industry more internationally competitive.
And today it is.
When we set out to replace conflict with cooperation in
industrial relations, to restore profit share, encourage
workplace bargaining, and dramatically reform the
waterfront, aviation and telecommunications industries,
we were determined to give our industries a chance.
Today they have a chance.
o~ o 
When we put foreign policy to the service of Australia's
trade, with thei-amal-ja-mat ion of the Foreign Af fairs and
Trade departments, when we created Austrade and this year
expanded it, took the initiative in tihe formation of the
Cairns Group and APEC, we sought to integrate Australia
with the fastest drowing economic region of the world.
Today we are integrated as never before.
Don't believe the claims that it hasn't worked.
Both our service exports and our manufactured exports
have tripled over the last decade.
Last year, for the first time, we exported more
manufactured products than rural products.
A decade ago we imported more goods and services than we
exported. Today we export more than we import.
A decade ago we did not have a tourist industry
deserving of the name. In the eighties it was our
fastest growing industry. In the first four months of
this year, foreign arrivals were nearly twenty per cent
higher than in the first four months of last year.
A decade ago, as we came out of recession, we had double
digit inflation. Today we have entrenched our
competitive advantage with one of the lowest inflation
rates in the industrial world.
I'm inclined to think this is not well enough known.
I'd also venture that the fact that Australian
manufacturing has grown by 10 per cent since we came to
office is -not' well known.
People who talk and write about Australian manufacturing
as if it were without hope should look at the evidence.
So should those who want to tear the place apart in
search of what they think will be economic progress.
Look more closely at the evidence. Look at the growth in
Elaborately Transformed Manufactures, for instance.
We're all aware there is still a lot more distance to be
travelled, but it does not hurt to remind ourselves that
we are on the right path and that we've already come a
long way.
Elaborately Transformed Manufactures, of course, are
generally characterised by high levels of value adding.
They include motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts,
computers, scientific equipment, industrial machinery,
telecommunications equipment. 959 
Australian exports of ETMs have recorded the fastest
growth of any export category since 1981.
Exports of minerals in that period increased by 104 per
cent. Rural products increased by 38 per cent. ETMs
increased by 211 per cent.
In 1981 ETM exports were worth 2.1 billion dollars. Last
year they were worth $ 10.1 billion.
Motor vehicle exports increased from $ 20 million to S414
million. Motor vehicle engines increased from $ 28 million to $ 351
million. Office machines and computers increased from $ 19 million
to $ 415 million.
Telecommunications equipment increased from $ 27 million
to $ 226 million.
Industrial machinery increased from $ 235 million to $ 799
million. Asia was the fastest growing market: between 1981-1988
averiage annual growth rates of 30 per cent or more to'
Korea, Taiwan Japan: between 1988-91 growth of 40 per
cent or more to Thailand and Indonesia while maintaining
strong rates of growth in the North Asian countries.
That's to name a few.
Significantly, ETMs have sustained their export
performance through the recession: indeed, in most of the
cases quoted, the greater part of the increase has been
recorded in the last two or three years.
The performance can be put down to a number of factors:
our increased competitiveness is obviously one of them.
The much more competitive environment which the opening
of our economy has created has been complemented by the
adoption of international best practices in many
companies. Those who say there is no light on the horizon should
look at Toyota in Melbourne, or Email in Orange,
Henderson's Automotive in Adelaide, ICI at Yarwun in
Queensland and more than 120 other companies whose
radically overhauled workplace arrangements have been
ratified by the Industrial Relations Commission and who
are now enjoying improved productivity and
competitiveness. 960 
Our increased concentration on Asian markets is plainly
another reason for the improvement. That is where the
greatest growth has been in North Asia, and in the last
three years, in South-east Asia.
And, while a few people are making a lot of noise about
foreign investment in Australia there is no doubt that
our export performance has benefited from the increased
integration of Australian manufacturing into world
productions processes which companies like Toyota, Ford,
IBM, Mitsubishi and Erricson have brought to this
country. As I said, we take the view that what is best left to the
market place should be left to the market place but,
equally, where government can play a role it should.
It's not the simple position to take. It involves
judgements difficult judgements which can prove both
socially and politically costly.
It's a position which requires skill and subtlety.
To my mind it is simply part of a government's
responsibility. But it is also logical.
We could demonstrate the logic in any number of ways
but one of them is that a sizeable part of the growth in
exports of elaborately transformed manufactures is coming
from areas of the economy and where the Government has
shown an interest.
We will continue to phase down tariffs which have
rendered Australian industry so uncompetitive, but we
will not leave good viable industries to fail for want of
a fair chance.
We believe Australia should have a sugar industry, so
while we have reduced tariffs, there will be no further
reductions without consultation with the industry.
We believe in a motor vehicle industry, so we are
reducing tariffs, but not to zero.
And we believe in textile clothing and footwear
industries, so we have established a Textile Clothing
Development Agency to help the TCF industries make the
adjustments which must be made if they are to have a
future. For workforce and industry adjustments we have provided
$ 250 million in assistance.
Government action through the Parnerspfor Development
Progran has played a subs tanti1al role 7in the g rowth of
' the Computer industry whose exports alone have more
than quadrupled in the last four years. 961 
It is estimated that the 21 participating companies in
the Partnerships Programs will generate over 400 million
dollars on Research and Development and produce exports
worth b[ li-on by -1997.
It's projected that the* Factor F _ Pro ram will have
generated 1.13 billion diollars in pharmaceutical exports
between 1988/ 89 and 1993\ 94. By 2000 it is expected
that, through Factor F programs, exports will be in the
vicinity of 2 billion dollars per year.
Just two weeks ago my colleagues the Minister for
Industry, Technology and Commerce, Senator Button, and
the Minister for Industry and Commerce, Mr Crean,
announced a $ 12.7 million 4 year program to encourage
greater efficiencies in food production, more cooperation
between producers, processors and marketers, and a
sharper focus on international markets.
This is a great country for food for growing it and
processing it. All kinds of food.
We can grow the kind of food that the people of Asia
traditionally eat.
We can also grow food that, as the region changes, the
people of Asia will increasingly eat.
Food processing is an industry with enormous potential
for Australia 7 billion dollars' worth, we estimate, by
the end of the decade.
Without doubt, there are more industrial opportunities
in the construction industry for instance. And in the
tourism and finance industries.
We are looking for others.
We want the Industry Commission to find the impediments
to industries * which should be doing better than they are.
We are getting moving on those programs for
infrastructure development we announced in One Nation.
The 2 billion dollar road works which are about to begin.
The beginnings of construction of the national rail
highway. If you want to understand our philosophy One Nation is
the place to look.
You will see there, beside the great capital works which
will serve industry well into the next century, programs
and initiatives designed to further improve the
environment for free enterprise
-accelerated depreciation
9 G2 
the development allowance
special arrangements to encourage private sector
participation in infrastructure developments
All of which have given us a business tax system
competitive with the best in the OECD.
You will also see in One Nation a commitment to training,
and the reform of the training system, which just a
fortnight ago was realised in the creation of the
Australian National Training Authority and the Young
Australians Plan for Employment and Training.
We haven't stopped with One Nation. Ninety two years
after Federation, in March next year we will create a
national market for goods and occupations under an
agreement in which all the States and the Federal
government recognise each others standards and
regulations.
After March 1993, if it can be sold in one state it can
be sold in any other. If your occupation is recognised
in one state it will be recognised in all states.
All these programs are aimed at building a successful
industrial nation for the twenty first century.
It is for that reason that we are prepared to support
industries with a future.
It is for the same reason, of course, that we have
introduced the Superannuation Guarantee Charge we will
need savings.
They will give ordinary Australians a chance. They will
give business a chance and Australia a chance.
It is necessary change as necessary as those changes we
made to internationalise and open up the economy in the
1980s. And as necessary to our ambitions for a great
Australian social democracy.
I said earlier that there were costs associated with the
radical changes Australia has undergone in the last
decade. I believe good government demands that we take account of
them. While most of the current high level of unemployment is
due to the downturn in the economy some is a consequence
of restructuring.
But we cannot cry success while we have such high levels
of unemplomment. 963 
In the coming budget we will be doing what we can to
create jo; bs, extend the reach of training and retraining,
and soften the blow for those who have dropped
out of the work-force.
We will do everything we can to attack unemployment.
But we do not believe that an assault on the living
standards and security of those in work constitutes a
sensible or proper approach.
We don't believe this any more than we believe that an
inflationar-y consumption tax, cutting award wages, or a
return to an adversarial industrial relations culture,
constitutes a useful approach to unemployment.
We don't think that a policy of putting up prices through
a consumption tax and cutting wages is the answer to our
problems. I don't think untrained men or women whose jobs have
disappeared should alone bear the burden of structural
change or the burden of recession.
I think the nation should share it.
If we all want our industries to be efficient, and we all
know that this means jobs will be shed, then we all have'
a responsibility to the unemployed and their families.
Caring for them is as much a part of the process of restructuring
as anything else we have done.
We saw at the meeting on youth unemployment how willing
Australians are to take on this sort of responsibility
Australian trade unions, governments, communities, and
business. But of course everything we do to ease the pain ot:
unemployment, every effort we make to reverse the trend,
must occur within the context of economic growth.
And it seems to me that here again we need a national
effort. We need it from those same groups who were so
enthusiastically represented at the meeting on youth.
We need leadership, ideas and commitment from the private
sector. We have the lowest interest rates and the lowest
inflation in a generation.
We have radically transformed the taxation sys tem, added
incentives and removed impediments to busiiness.
964 
We have the fastest growing economic region in the world
at our doorstep.
With our vast natural resources, our climate and
environment, our standards of education, our experience,
our incentive surely we can find a profitiable future
in the region.
Last week I was in Queensland.
In Innisfail I visited the Northern Iron and Brass
Foundry. Not a big plant, but expertly managed, clear
goals, very keen on training I presented a dozen or
more awards to their apprentices. They supply local
industry and they export to Asia and the Pacific.
I went to the South Johnstone Sugar Mill. Expertly
managed, the right technology, clear goals, keen on
training. They're exporting.
I went to Townsville and officially launched the harbour
devlopment there funded by One Nation. It's a harbour
for exporting.
I went to Gladstone where nearly 20 million tonnes of
coal was exported last year 60 per cent of it to Asia.
And, among other things, nearly 180,000 tonnnes of
aluminium all of it to Asia.
I went to Yarwun nearby, where ICI have built a chemical
plant to supply local industry state of the art in both
technology and management.
Gladstone was a town of 6000 people a few years ago.
It's now 23,000. It's built on exporting. It's future
is substantially Asia.
Recently I read of how a decade ago Australian winemakers
had made a thorough re-assessment of their industry a
" technological re-assessment". They knew they had a good
product. They knew that Australia had a future in wine.
They now have expertise second to none in the world.
They're growing the right grapes, making the right wines.
And they're exporting. In May they sold as much wine
overseas as they sold in twelve months a few years ago.
Last year they sold 100 million bottles, for S234 million
in income. With the export drive they plan they expect to
raise that figure to Sl billion.
And every time they sell a bottle of course they do more
than earn income they project the name Australia in the
world, as a country which makes things. Very good
things. 9 
As taste changes in Asia the winemakers can expect to
increase sales there.
Today's announcement by Cadburiy that they will be
investing $ 28 million in Tasmania makes the point.
They're investing the money because the M~ arket for
chocolate is growing in Asia.
These seem to me to offer glimpses of Australia's future
string them together for a moment and you see a clear
horizon. In each of these recent cases the common threads appear
there has been earnest investment in the right products,
technology, the right management, the right training, the
right marketing.
The truth is, if we invest in what we have here, if we
invest in ourselves, there can be no doubt about the
future of Australia.
There are very good reasons why business should now
respond. Very good reasons in particular why the bankseven
allowing for the burns they received in the boomshould
now be lending.
You can be sure we will go on looking for ways to
encourage the growth we need.
Where we can remove obstacles we will remove them.
In the last few months we have managed to make some break
throughs in things like aviation, pay television, and
technical and vocational training.
Where we can, we are prepared to break through log jams
in industrial development.
And where we can inspire or engineer a national effort
such as that which emerged from the meeting on youth we
will also do this.
Because it has become increasingly clear to me i. n-the
past few months there are vital intangibles in this
recovery, which go under such names as spirit, and hope
and purpose.
As modern business people you will understand their
importance.
As Australians I believe you will want to join the
Government in attempting to deliver them to the nation. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP TO
THE FEDERA! Z; ON OF ETHNIC COMM4UNITY COUNCILS
SYDNEY, 12 AUGUST 1992
Ladies and Gentlemen
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address so many
distinguished members of the Australian community tonight.
It is something that I have looked forward to since I became
Prime Minister.
I want to particularly thank the Federation of Ethnic
Communities Councils of Australia and the New South Wales
Ethnic Community quncil for organising this occasion, and
Carl Harbaum. and Edna AcGill for their involvement.
Ladies and gentlemen
Like most Australians I have spent a small part of the last
three weeks watching, listening to, or reading about the
Olympic Games in Barcelona.
Amid all the drama, the thought occurred to me more than
once that what the world achieves every four years Australia
achieves every day which is a quite extraordinary measure
of cultural diversity and tolerance.
If we were inspired by the scenes in Barcelona, perhaps we
can also draw a little inspiration from our achievement
here. The economic troubles we are going through along with the
rest of the world are cause for grave concern.
But we have made social advances in Australia superior to
virtually anywhere else in the rest of the world,-and we.
should take pride in them, value them, preserve them.
The rich, diverse and tolerant society Australia's
multculura policies have produced is among the greatest
of these advances advances which many other countries envy
and admire. 1223 
And you can be sure the Government will preserve and improve
upon that society.
Perhaps the most moving and symbolic moment in Barcelona
occurred at the end of the women's 10,000 metres: when we
saw the embrace between the Ethiopian winner and the South
African who finished second.
This seemed to me more than an advertisement for the
transcending capacity of sport to bring people together.
It was a reminder, in a technocratic era when the icons of
success are predominantly economic, that the greatest
aspiration of humanity and of any society is to live
together in peace.
It is also, then, a reminder of how well we have done this
in Australia.
A reminder that we should, in no small way, measure our
success in these terms.
And, perhaps, count the fact that we live in a society
relatively free of ethnic strife as one of the great
blessings of being an Australian.
Pe ter Robinson made the point very well a couple of weeks
ago In-i7t1cle in the Financial Review.
It was an article against the nihilism which many
Australians, including young Australianis, these days
frequently express.
Comparing Australia to other countries around the world, he
pointed out the rare privileges of living here.
And he stressed the degree to which these privileges depend
on the spirit of the people.
" Nations are not created, evolved or fully represented by
governments", he wrote. They spring from, and grow because
of, their people's sense of community".
On the other side of the world, in an article appearing in
the New York Review of Books, the President of
Czechoslovakia, recently made a remarkably similar point.
In re-building his nation, he said, it will be essential to
develop among the people a sense of confidence and pride, a
feeling of " co-responsibilty for public affairs".
He stressed how much his hopes depended on " what we
understand as the human spirit".
1224 
I might say that increasingly I feel that Australia's future
as a nation depends in large part on these same things.
I have been stressing them not just in talking about the
organisation of government, but in cultural policy, where we
are attempting to put questions of Australia's cultural
development in the mainstream of national development:
in Aboriainal affairs, where we are attempting to make
this the decade of breakthrough so that we might all
feel more pride and confidence as Australians:
in various aspects of socialpol * icy, in industrial
relatipns, in policies for Australian wompn and in
eiducation where we have increased participation rates
and set up aNational Training Authority to provide for
all our young peopleand
not least in economic policy where our efforts are
aimed at a truly national effort involving all
Australians in recovery and growth.
This is the idea of One Nation.
It applies also, of course, to our multicultural policies.
For ethnic communities give much and have much to give, to
our economic, social and cultural goals.
They have always given much of course.
Imigation is the central fact of this country's history
it's how we all got here. All those who arrived in the last
two hundred years at least.
It has been the source of our energy in the frontier eras
of pastoralism and mining, in industrial and postindustrial
Australia. I need not reel off the names of
Australia's most successful entrepreneurs past and present
to make the point to this audience.
Nor need I mention the outstanding professional people, the
writers, artists and performers, the sportsmen and women,
and no less those vast numbers who invested not only their
labour but their life in Australia and gave it life in
doing so.
The waves of post-war immigrants have helped Australia
define itself' helped u -s see -ourselves, raised our selfawareness,
made it easier for us to judge what to build on
and what to change.
In this way they have made Australia much more dynamic. 1225 
4
And of course, each wave of immigrants has invested
Australia with new ambitions, new skills, new energy.
And, of course, new cultures, new ways of living, new ideas.
So Australia has been made stronger, richer in every sense,
more worldly and outward-looking and, because Australians
have trusted to their. faith in the principles of fairness
and democracy, they have also been made more tolerant.
A better country without doubt.
There are some . who say that Australia cannot be strong
because of our cultural diversity.
The Leader of the Opposition is one of them.
Dr Hewson says that our multicultural policies are " the
politics of division."
The innovative and compassionate policies which have
produced a society remarkable among the nations of the world
for both diversity and peace he sees as " absolutely a
fundamental mistake."
All we do", he says, " is elevate a few professional
ethnics." I say he is wrong.
Australia is no less one nation for the diversity of its
heritage, than is a house less stable and strong for the*
diversity of the crafts and materials which go into building
it. The trick is to work from a few sound principles, while
allowing enough flexibility to solve problems and encourage
innovation. Those principles have been given expression in the
multicultural policies of the last decade the ones which
Dr Hewson describes as " absolutely a fundamental mistake"
I said that one of those principles is tolerance. ' In the
last forty years or so Australians have much ' to be satisfied
with in this regard.
The country has been transformed -from an insular and
xenophobic society, to one widely admired in the world for
its openness.
With that openness has come perhaps an unexpected benefit
that is, more confidence and, I think, greater levels
of mature self-esteem.
1226 
We need those things now. We will need them in the coming
years. They are essential components of success.
We will = QZ need some of the more negative perceptions which
can emerge.
I mean the belief, that our identity is derivative; or a
poorly knit patchwork of other identities, or one to be
hidden behind an imperial cloak for fear that we might be
exposed as second rate.
In otherw4ords we will want to obliterate the cultural
cringe . and with it both the servility and the jingoism
which have sometimes characterised our behaviour.
What we want to preserve and enhance is the sense that
Australia represents an opportunity to build something new,
something better.
It is from this that the lasting contributions to our
national life have come: from those who have said this
Australia is my home. This is where my loyalties lie.
So long as those basic principles are there, so long as the
common ambition is there, there will-always be strength in
our diversity.
It seems to me that just now Australia is rather like the
great port cities of old Europe and Asia which got their
material wealth from trade, but their greatness from being
at the cross-roads of cultures from the people and ideas
which flowed about them.
In the challenging and competitive world that we now live in
that we now face Australia, I believe, can draw strength
from the same human sources.
As I said before, tolerance will continue to be one of the
essential principles in this.
I think I should also say that tolerance is a two way
street. It is essential to a multicultural society to welcome
newcomers, accept and learn to enjoy difference.
It is equally essential to respect the traditions of the
Australian nation.
Australia is not a new place or a shallow one. It is one of
the oldest democracies in the world. Its political
institutions are a unique blend of the British, American,
European and home-grown Australian. 4227 
Its traditions derive from hard and unique experience on
this continent and from battles in defence of it, as much
as they do from the varied cultures of the British Isles
or any of the other countries from which Australian settlers
have come.
These traditions deserve and must. receive respect. No
country taking itself seriously would demand less.
I think it is also true that just as the newer cultures of
Australia should enjoy tolerance and support, so should
those who see a threat to the old Australia in the emergence
of the new.
You will know that I believe in change when change is
necessary. You will know that I don't believe any group of
Australians can claim a monopoly on our past or on our
future.
But I also believe in maintaining the best traditions of the
culture from which I came.
The same principles which lead the Government to hold the
enhancement and preservation of social harmony as an
imperative, leads us to build on the old traditions as well
as the new.
Ladies and gentlemen
A little earlier I mentioned Australia's cosmopolitan
potential. I said that there is more than trade to any great city or
state. But there is nothing like trade to attract people. Nothing
like trade to give them energy and ideas. And there is
nothing like it to encourage liberty and to transcend
cultural differences.
Trade or let us say a healthy vibrant economy is the
surest guarantee of general prosperity, of healthy social
democracy, = nd of our multicultural society continulaig to
flourish. Just as it creates common ground between nations, it creates
common ground within them.
So when I say that our attention to the social and cultural.
concerns of Australiat are central ones, I do not for a
moment cease to regard the economy as the framework on which
all our hopes ultimately hang..
1228 
My point has been that it is pointless and self-defeating to
separate our social ambitions from our economic ones.
And nowhere is this more clear, surely, than here in this
audience. Because, as I have said, it is people like yourselves and
those you represent who have done much to drive the economy.
And I believe it is becoming increasingly apparent that our
diverse and open society may well yield us economic benefits
we really did not expect.
The langu. ae skills of multicultural Australia, the personal
knowledge of other countries and their markets, the
international networks which so many Australians maintain,
all offer unique trading advantages.
There is quite clear evidence, for example, that the small
businesses of Asian Australians havebeen succeeding to an
unparalleled degree during the last few years, including the
recession. One reason is their ability to operate effectively in Asian
markets. Given that we have the same facilities of language and local
knowledge, there seems to be no reason why we cannot enjoy
more success in Middle Eastern and European especially
Central European markets.
The Government will be seeking to encourage these
advantages. They will be the focus of a special conference the Office of
Multicultural Affairs in my department will be co-sponsoring
in October this year.
In talking about the real and potential commercial
advantages which the ethnic communities have conferred on
Australia, you can be sure that the Government has not
forgotten its particular responsibilities to those
communities. I mean we must work to see that there are genuinely equal
opportunities for new and better jobs when they are
displaced by restructuring; that there is adequate English
language training as well as vocational training.
There is more than fairness involved in the discharge of
these responsibilities: there is the recognition of the need
to encourage talent and ambition and energy in the process
of restructuring. 1229 
F 8
Migrant groups have been at the forefront of every major
industrial step we have taken in Australia.
Just as they were in the vanguard of the industrial readjustment
after the war and the sustained surge which
followed, so they will play a leading role in the restructured
economy of the nineties and beyond.
Ladies and gentlemen
Perhaps some of the things I have said tonight could be
interpreted as overly optimistic or complacent.
I do not mean to be. I do believe that there is much to be
proud of.
But there is also much to do.
The government is aware that the need to manage our diverse
society is not one which appreciably fades with time.
We need to go on taking those steps necessary to keep the
barriers down the difference flourishing but the barriers
between Australians down.
There are times when this is acutely necessary when, for
instance, overseas wars impact directly on Australian ethnic
groups. I take this opportunity to congratulate those communities
who have so ably done this over the years; most notably in
recent times during the Gulf War, and the tragedy now
occurring in Yugoslavia.
The Government acknowledges with gratitude and admiration
the restraint that has been shown.
There will always be times when specific communities are
under particular stress. The government will listen and do
what it can.
The more usual but no less necessary task is to listen on a
regular basis through formal consultations, like those
conducted by the Minister for Immigration and E * thnic
Affairs, Gerry Hand, and through channels like'-the Office of
Multicultural Affairs.
I say " listening" I mean " including".
I say " ethnic communities" I mean all Australians.
I mean what we do is part of this Labor Government's
commitment it's historic commitment to social
improvement, to social justice.
1230 
Access and equity policies are an essential part of this.
They ensure equitable access to government programs and
services for all Australians regardless of their background.
Those who argue that multiculturalism divides the community
should consider the~ alternatives.
Providing programs which some Australians could not use at
all because of language or cultural barriers; or of
providing one set of programs for the majority community and
another for those whose backgrounds are not English speaking
these are divisive, these would create two classes of
Australians.-' The multicultural policies of the Government are intent upon
not creating ghettos strife, or special treatment, or
" professional ethnics".
They are intent on managing diversity for the good of every
individual and for the good of the country.
It is for these reasons that we have, for example, sought to
remove the barriers to participation in the media and the
arts through that uniquely Australian institution, the SBS
and more recently through traineeships designed to ensure
that young Australians of non-English speaking backgrounds
have a chance in the media.
We don't do these things to support particular cultures for
their own sake.
We do it to keep the barriers down.
As I said, we take the view that these policies are an
extension of our democratic traditions.
They require good faith on all sides.
For our part we stick to the principle that all Australians
have the right to express and enjoy their cultural identity
as they choose, provided they do not infringe the rights of
any other Australians.
It's as true for a recent arrival from Vietnam as it is for
an Austral-Celt from Bankstown with half a dozen generations
born here.
We expect all Australians to observe these rights and
liberties. Australian governments have also included in their
responsibilities, the provision of the basics for survival. 1231 
Since the days of Arthur Caiwell the Australian immigration
policy has taken a share of the responsibility for
settlement after immnigration.
Today's government continues that tradition and, indeed,
through access and equity policies, extends it.
Our continuing success depends on that unspoken partnership
between Government and the community.
In this context I pay tribute to the work done by FECCA and
its many affiliates.
It has been an immensely useful task a crucial task to
bring together Australians from so many backgrounds, and to
foster among them a sense of belonging to this country.
So it is with pride, not complacency, that I address you
tonight.
Australia's immigration policy and its multicultural
policies have been one of the great undertakings of our
history, one of the great achievements.
Also, one of the great risks.
It involved trust in our people and our traditions to manage
the sort of diversity which in so many other countries has
led to tragedy.
Just in recent times look at Los Angeles, Bradford,
Saraj evo, Boipatong.
We have managed it. We are determined that we will continue
to manage it.
The pride comes not merely from the sense that we, the
Australian Government, has done well, or we the old Anglo
and Celtic Australians.
It comes in large part from seeing how well the peoples of
the world have done in Australia.
In that, as an Australian, I take great pleasure and pride.
The achievement of Australian governments, and ministers
like Gerry Hand, has been to match in imagination, ambition
and courage, the imagination, ambition and courage of the
people who have left their homes to come here.
They are the qualities we need now. Indeed they are the
qualities a nation always needs.
Tonight I am grateful for the opportunity to meet you, to
express my thoughts and feelings, and to pay tribute.
1232 
It is a very appropriate time. All those great moments at
the Olympics could not disguise the fact of world events.
Events which make clear that working and living with
cultural difference is one of the great global challenges of
our time.
I do not believe it is overstating the case to say, then,
that--in Australia we have some lessons for the world.
Thank you. A' 1233 



* TEL: 20. Aug. 92 18: 33 No. 018 P. 01/ C
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINIS1' ER, THE HON P J KEATING MPP
STRICTLY BALLROOM PREMIERE RIECErrlON, THE MUSEUM OF
CONTEMPORARY ART, SYDNEY0 19 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, Ita ( Buttrosc), Annita and I are delighted to be here. We have seen
the film, so the pleasure you had here tonight we had a littlc earlier about a week ago.
And In fact my whole family saw the film and T must say they loved it, all of them.
There are a lot of peoplc to be congratulated the producers, the actors, the director, the
choreographer. I think it is going to havc a marvellous reception and Strictly Ballroom
deserves It for the faith that everyone has had in it., right from its conception.
It's a light hearted film, but of course it springs from deep traditions of Australia which
those who arc old enough to remember would remember. And there's a few of us around
here tonight.
It comes from that old music and dancing tradition of Sydney. And therc was a namesake
of mine called Jack Keating who used to run a ballroom studio in Newtown. Some of you
herc won't remember it. He was really an institution. And whencver you walked in there
it was always thc same sort of hail with thc same sort of trusses across the ceiling, the
same sort of posters on the wall, and the steps and the rest. And old Jack would sidlc up to
you to see what you were made of and you'd do a couple of things, and if you weren't any
good he'd just dismiss you quietly, and if you showed any promise he'd follow you for
five minutes and he would then turn one of his trusted former pupils onto you and they'd
take you on to learn dances.
And T can see a lot of Jack Keating in Barry Fife. The only thing is when Jack was going
he had receding hair, where Barry had a very bad rug on. And Bill reckons he's still got it
on. I think the way rm going, I'm going to need it. But the thing was, I think it came
from that old tradition, and as a rcfugee myself from many a ballroom dancing show, the
scrublands at Marrickvlle, or over at the HurStville Civic Centre where a couple of
thousand would line up every Saturday night with the girls on one side and the boys on
the other, everyone eyeing each other off, not knowing whether one would cross the 
TEL: 20. Rug. 92 18: 33 No. 018 P. 02/
2
divide and actually ask the question, and often get a refusal. All of that was in the great
tradition of ballroom dancing. And the great competitions that my own father and mnother
were ballroom dancers and comnpctitors at these various things the Trocadcro, the onc at
the Sydney Showground that's the Harden Pavilion now, and at various othcr places where
It was all done, the old Calais, and all the various spots around Sydney. And it came from
that tradition.
And what I think is wonderful, that wc had that supported by a family which has a great
tradition in Australian entertainment and radio, the Albert family. But it also camne from
NIDA which was another payoff for that long teiiin-vestxnent In the nation's cultural
devclopment. And I think the same can be said of the Sydney Dance Company, with that
brilliant performance by Paul Mccurio and Tara Morice, which of course has sprung again
from the equally brilliant Graham Murphy and his Company. And other Australian
cultural institutions like the Sydney Thcatrc Company, thc Film Finance Corporation, who
benefited again in the Budget last night well if you don't gct a clap for $ 60 million,
you're ncvcr going to get one. T'he Australian Film Institute, the New South Wales Film
and Television Offie.
So therc are many Institutions involved in this. The real heart of Australia is involved
here. And the concept is a peculiarly Australian thing, and it's great to revive that sort of
thing In this year 1992, when not so long ago it was all the vogue. But as we all know,
ballroom dancing has come back, I won't say it has come back into its own because I don't
think It has, but it is coming back as a form of dance, and it's obviously attracting many
peoplc again.
it's a lovely film, a happy film, and a lovely ending, a nice happy ending. The nasty old
bugger who was running the show ended up being sidelined, and Mum and Dad, Dad
came good at thc cnd, and Mum, you could have chokcd her couldn't you? But in the end
be picked hcr up, she decided to bc in it as well, which is a really quite a marvellous thing.
But it's a sweet, sweet show. It's also of course a charity event tonight. And I do need to
say the AIDS Trust in Australia, M A Film Corporation and Ronin Films, thank y'ou for
organising this evcnt. Just as we congratulate those people who made the film, we also
would like to give credit and thanks to those whosc efforts helped so much to restrict the
spread of AIDS in Australia. The Bobby Goldsmith Foundation, to whom the funds from
this event will go, is one I want to pay tribute to.
I also mean those In thc gay community where ALD_$ jemnains largely confined, who, in
the midst of the tragedy, have worked hard to provide education and support, the
Government has been in there helping them. I would like to pay tributc tonight to those
people from the scientife and medical professions and other walks of life who have given
so much time and skill to deal with the complex scientific, social and legal issues which
the epidemic has raised. 
TEL: 3
I might also take the opportunity to thank those on both sides of politics who have set
aside differences to deal constructively with the threat of AIDS.
We've done well in Australia, I think, to contain it and better in fact indecd than In most
countries. I know that's very small comfort for those who have lost friends and relatives,
and for those who are suffering from the disease. I doubt if there's anyone here whose
lives have not In some way been affccted by AIDS. Of course, with It the nation's life has
also been affected. We've lost some of our best people.
And tonight I think Is the best possible response-the celebration of an artistic triumph, as
a way of helping the ight to deal with AIDS.
So this is quite an event. It's always an event in Australia to produce a feature film which
has that peculiarly Australian quality to it, and at the same time Is commercial and
attractive and successful, and restoring, bringing ou~ some of the old Australia while we're
doing It, entertaining ourselves with the work of an enthusiastic cast, producers, director,
and backers, and while wc do, help in one of the worthier causes of the nation, fighting
this terrible epidemic.
So congra ul at ions to everyone involved. Thank you very much for having me along.
Arinita and I loved thc film, so did our kids, and I hope it's a huge success for everybody
involved. T2EL0:. Rug. 92 18: 33 No. 018 P. 03/( 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY ( APPROX. 7: 30 PM)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEAING MP,
TO THE AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW DINNER, SYDNEY,
19 AUGUST 1992
My long experience of this forum is that many of you will have questions to put to me
about our economic strate y, and I want to leave as much time as I can to answer them
after dinner. But I do want to say something now about the thinking behind the Budget,
and what it means for our future.
All Budgets are significant, but this one is uniquely so, because it marks the beginning of
a new phase of economic reform in Australia.
Certainly the Budget is our annual financial statement and our annual forecast for the
economy. It does the things Budgets always do, and no doubt you will be quizzing me on
the forecasts and other numbers later.
But this Budget is also a declaration.
It is a statement of some of our principal policy goals for the nineties and what we will do
to attain those goals.
If I can put it in the most general way, I would say that our policy and material resources
as a government will be focused on enhancing the value of the work we do in our shops,
offices, factories, mines and farms throughout Australia, now and into the future.
We want to improve the quality of our workforce, and the way in which it is used.
In this next stage of reform we have four priorities:
1400 
to create good jolbs and get the unemployed back into productive work
to improve the training opportunities for people new to the workforce, and
retraining opportunities for those already in the workforce.
to encourage a wholesale transition into w aieargainingb etween the parties
as the principal industrial relationship in this country.
to continue the redesign of Australian indiustry so it provides the right jobs for a
more highly skilled and productive workforce.
The priority today is uremploymrent, not only because it is good economics but because it
is the right thing to'do.
It is the unemployed who are disproportionately bearing the cost of changes like
disinflation, productivity improvements and a more diverse industrial composition from
which the rest of us benefit.
It is the unemployed who are bearing the consequences of the world wide asset price
unwinding of the late eighties.
So we do this because it is our responsibility to the unemployed, because as Australians
we want to move forward together.
But as unemployment comes down we will continue to invest in ourselves, because
improving the quality of the workforce is the best investment we can make in meeting and
beating global competition.
It is at the heart of our economic strategy for the nineties and beyond.
Over the next two years we will give the young a better chance and Australia a brighter
future. We offer every teenager who has not found a job within a year a vocational training
course of at least six months, with a job subsidy at the end. By the end of next year we
plan to have given learning and job chances to at least 100 000 kids who might otherwise
be the long term unemployed adults of tomorrow.
We will enhance the skills of young Australians now, and we are putting in place the
programs to continue to enhance them through the decade.
Through the. new. Australian National Training Authority, through pilot programs to
inrouihe e uaiy rinn i ndsry, Throug a higher level of funding we will
entrench the commitment by creating a stronger and better vocational training system.
1401 
We have already increased the number of young people staying on to the end of secondary
school from three in ten when we came to office to seven in ten. The number of
Commonwealth-funded university places will have increased by half between 1983 and
1994. Ten years ago 349,000 people were participating in university and college
education. Today the number is 559,000.
Now its time for vocational training.
We will give young Australians a better chance, and we will give adult Australians a
second chance.
This year we will offer around 200,000 training places unemployed adults, targeted
especially at those who have not found a job within a year. We have doubled the number
of places under our wage subsidy program to over 100,000 in 1992-93, to help in the
transition between retraining and a job.
In regions that have been particularly hard hit by the downturn, we will create jobs as well
as offer training programs. We will spend $ 345 million with 411 Local Government
Councils, funding a refit of regional and community facilities. We will also create jobs in
a program which combines training and paid work experience for unemployed adults.
Young unemployed people will receive direct job assistance in programs to improve the
environment. We will enhance the skills of adult Australians now, and continue enhancing them over
the decade.
As our industry becomes more complex, training and retraining throughout our working
lives will become as customary as repainting the house.
What we do in workforce training will be complemented by changes in work practices and
job design.
Over the next two years we will encourage the proliferation of workplace bargaining to
cover more than half of the workforce, while asking the AIRC, the employers and the
ACT1J to confine the exercise of the compulsory arbitral powers of the Commission to
general adjustments in minimum rates.
Those of you here from industry will know that more changes have taken place in the
workplace in the last few years than took place in several decades before, and that there
really is a new spirit of cooperation and willingness to change. You may say its not
enough. You may say we can do more. And let me tell you right now that I agree with
you. We must do-more, we can do more, we will do more and the workplace
agreements at GMH, Toyota, ICI, ITT' Sheraton, and the oil industry are showizig us the
way.
1402 
Our goal is not merely to improve on what we have done, but to match the international
best. Let me say in passing that I regard our tax rate changes planned for 1994/ 5 and 1995/ 6 as
quite crucial to our success in transforming the workplace and enhancing the quality of the
workplace. The cuts, you might recall, are targeted at bringing the current 38 cent second
bracket to 30 cents. It is this rate which most affects work incentives for middle incomes
earners, and the rewards from productivity bargains.
Finally, we,% yill continue to encourage the transformation of Australian industry to match
the supply of better trained and more productive workers with smarter products for them
to make. We are making permanent the 150 per cent tax deduction for research and
development and increasing export incentives, all on top of a One Nation program in
which we legislated more generous depreciation rates, a development allowance for major
projects, tax benefits for private companies in public projects, and pooled development
funds for medium sized business.
The government makes the economic policy, but it is the private sector which produces
the goods. Of the growth we forecast this year, less than one third will be contributed by
government spending and most of that additional spending is anyway in the private
sector. It is the private sector which is now making the concrete sleepers and steel rails for
the national rail freight highway, it is the private contractors who are out pouring the
concrete and spreading the bitumen for our national highway system, and private
businesses which are taking advantage of more generous tax rules to invest in new plant
and equipment.
And it is the private sector which realises the gains from our new emphasis on workforce
jrigigg, and on workplace bargaining.
The shift in priorities in this Budget and in our long term economic strategy will help get
unemployment down now, and our workforce quality up over the long term.
After all, there is no greater economic waste in the economy than the waste of
unemployment, there is no resource more valuable which is used more unproductively
than the unemployed, and no change we can make in the economy which has as much
impact on growth, prosperity and living standards as bringing the unemployed back to
work. And for the longer term I wholeheartedly agree with the view of Michael Porter of the
Harvard Business School, who writes that " education and training constitute perhaps the
single greatest long-term leverage point available to all levels of government in
upgrading industry".
Over the last ten years we have deregulated the financial system and floated the dollar,
restored the profit share, cut your marginal income tax rates and sliced the share of
national income we take as taxes, put in place a program of tariff changes which is
1403 
changing us from a frightened inward looking economy into a competitive outward
looking economy, and entrenched an Accord with the union movement and created a
cooperative industrial relations environment.
It was the decade of reform in which we transformed government authorities into business
enterprises, began to reform our wharves and coastal shipping, opened up our aviation and
telecommunications industries to competition, and changed our business taxes to give us
one of the competitive systems in the OECD.
More recently we have rebalanced the share of investment made by government to
improve our airports, roads, railways, ports and electricity distribution, while enacting a
supErannuation scheme which will increase national savings for investment in the future.
We have begun to see some of the results of that decade of reform.
We now have one of the lowest inflation rates in the OECD. We have tripled both
manufacturing exports and services exports, and increasingly we are finding our growth
markets in our own region. Commonwealth Government business enterprises are in the
black. We have a strong profit share, but also strong productivity growth and rising real
wages. The result is that Australia is emerging from the recession with an economy that is
fundamentally stronger than it has been for a generation.
We are directly creating jobs, and we are enhancing the employability of the currently
unemployed, but we all know that putting people into good jobs in coming years depends
on steady economic expansion.
Certainly our growth forecasts have been clipped back since we last analysed the outlook
in our One Nation statement. But I am by no means pessimistic about either the
immediate outlook, or the likelihood of reasonable growth through the nineties. The
Economist magazine reported recently that Australia is set to have the highest growth and
the lowest inflation of any of the 13 largest Western nations, according to a survey of
forecasters. We are looking at inflation of 2 per cent this year, about the same as our
record low this year. We are looking at 3 per cent year average product growth, which
means we will be doing better than most, if not as well as we would wish. We are looking
at some acceleration in the years beyond that to give us a good show of creating around
800,000 jobs over four years in an economy in which low inflation is normal, in which we
have successfully internationalised, and in which we have strong proiuctivity growth and
rising living stan~ dards.
We are seeing results, but at the same time we are beginning a new stage of reform.
A stage when the emphasis will be on people.
1404 
The great and durable gains of the nineties are not going to be made by shuffling around
the tax burden.
They are not going to be made by slicing government, when government spending here is
already one of the lowest in the OECD.
They are not going to be made by turning our industrial relations into a blood sport, by
hurling business against their employees and trade unions, with government as spectator.
They are not going to be made by totally eliminating tariff protection, when our program
of reductions is already making us one of the least protected countries in the world, and
one in which the discipline of readjustment is already strict.
They are not going to be made by telling the Central Bank to run the place as it sees fit.
They are going to be made by creating a top quality, fully employed and adaptable
workforce. They are going to be made by business people taking decisions in a tight, disciplined,
stable framework.
A framework in which government does well the things governments do best in which it
makes sensible rules, funds sensible things like roads and railways, and enhances the
quality of the workforce. 1405 



. J A R LI
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY: APPROX. 6.3OPM
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
THE AGE OF ANGKOR, AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY,
21 AUGUST 1992
The Honourable Lionel Bowen and Mrs Bowen, Mr Pich Kec,
Ministerial Colleagues, Mr and Mrs Hoare, distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am honoured to be invited to open this exhibition.
It is a very significant exhibition an historic one.
I know what imagination, hard work and persistence have
gone into it.
And part of my duty this evening is to acknowledge the
debt we owe to those who conceived the idea and worked
intensively through the past year to make it a reality.
In particular Mr PichKeo, the Director of the National.
Museum in Phnom Penh.
Mr Keo welcome to Australia; on behalf of the Government
and everyone here, I thank you for your part in this.
Your staff and many others in Cambodia also deserve our
thanks. Mr Hun Sen, I know, gave the project his personal
backing. I look forward to the opportunity to personally deliver
our thanks when I visit Phnomn Penh next month. While I
am there, I hope I will have a chance to visit the
National Museum.
I also want to congratulate Michael Brand,. the curator of
Asian Art here at the Australian National Gallery, both
for his vision and his stamina.
I know that in such things as this there is a long way to
travel between vision and realisation: I know also that
it takes a lot of team work to get there. 1485 
So, for the sake of brevity, I congratulate the people on
the team including the RAAF who took them to Phnom Penh
along with the empty packing crates, and brought them
back with the exhibition.
I must also pay tribute, of course, to my colleague, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Gareth Evans.
Gareth's outstanding contribution to the implementation
of a peace process in Cambodia is well known to everyone
here. His support for this proposal is a measure of his
admiration and affection for Cambodia and its people.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Cambodia, rightly I believe, sees the protection of its
cultural heritage as a vital part of the current
reconstruction. The culture of a people unites them. I always think of
it as a great healer.
And Cambodia has tragic wounds to heal.
Just as a nation's cultural heritage unites its people,
so can cultural exchanges such as this one bring people
of different cultures together.
It is because we want to expand our understanding of
Cambodia and other countries in the region where we live
that Australia seeks to develop cultural, as well as
economic and political, relationships.
Much has changed within a generation: among Australians
today there is an awareness and appreciation of Asian
cultures which was unimaginable twenty years ago.
Travel, migration, trade and communications have played
their parts in bringing us closer together.
So will cultural exchanges and in this context the
Australian National Gallery is to be congratulated for
for its efforts to raise the profile of Asian art in
Australia. There is still a long way to go, but the Australian
Government and its agencies are actively pursuing
programs aimed at heightening the level of mutual
understanding through culture and art.
This, then, is an exhibition of great consequence.
Not only does it comprise magnificent and unique works of
art, but it is the first time these works have left
Cambodia.
1486 
We are delighted that Australia should be the first
country in the world to have that honour.
Yet the significance of the exhibition goes well beyond
that. It strengthens the bond between our two countries,
our two peoples.
Australians have been shocked and saddened by the
terrible crimes and suffering inflicted on the Cambodian
people. This exhibition might be taken as a symbol of our hope
that Cambodians are at last succeeding in their struggle
to regain the opportunity for better lives.
As we admire these works, I think we should also pause
for a moment to recall that the peace process on which
these hopes depend still faces severe difficulties.
Along with many others who are contributing to and
supporting the United Nations presence in Cambodia, the
Australian Government is committed to doing all it can to
help the peace process succeed.
In addition to our significant contribution of military
and civilian personnel to the United Nations Transitional
-Authority in Cambodia, this financial year Australia will
provide approximately 15 million dollars in humanitarian
assistance to Cambodia.
We have much to gain from coming to understand the
societies of Asia and we have much to give.
This evening I am happy to annouce a small contribution
we may be able to make towards the rehabilitation of
cultural life in Cambodia.
In an effort to help preserve the important symbol of
Khmer culture and unity which these works of art
represent, the Australian Government and the Australian
National Gallery have agreed to contribute towards a
public appeal to raise S700,000 for urgently needed
repairs at the National Museum of Cambodia.
To help launch the appeal, which will be run at the
Gallery in the course of the exhibition, the Department
of Administrative Services will provide S250,000 in
technical assistance, the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade will provide S50,000, and the Gallery will
provide $ 25,000.
Our aim is to raise the remaining S375,000 through a
public appeal, with the Government matching public
contributions on a two for one basis. 1487 
I understand that a promising start to the public appeal
has already been made, with Qantas offering to pay the
cost of flying 12 specialists involved in the Museum
project return from Australia to Bangkok.
In addition to this appeal, theAustralianInternational
Development_ Assistance. Bureau has agreed to ' provide
training and development for the staff of the Museum at a
cost of $ 150,000 over two years.
This training will concentrate on developing skills in
the conservation and restoration of stone and bronze
works, as well as photographic exhibits.
Further assistance will also be possible within
Australia's established sponsored training program for
Cambodia which will allow Museum staff to study in
Australia in conjunction with the Gallery.
Ladies and gentlemen
As I said, it is a privilege to be present at this
opening as it is to see these works.
I sincerely hope we are the first among a multitude.
Once again, let me congratulate all those who have worked
so hard to bring this great project to fruition.
It represents, as I have said, a significant moment in
our cultural history.
I wish it every success.
And I hope in years to come it will be seen to symbolise
peace at last in Cambodia.
Thank you.
1488 



/ g'
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP,
COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB POST-BUDGET LUNCHEON,
MELBOURNE, 24 AUGUST 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much Allan ( McAlister), distinguished members of the Collingwood
Club, supporters, ladies and gentlemen.
Well I was at 4,539 not so long ago, that's where I started, he told mc no ones good
enough to hold number one in Collingwood so I've advanced from 4,539 to 101; 1
regard that as a real complement indeed. Thanks very much Al and can I say that it
is nice to be associated with Melbourne again and to be sharing the table, not just
with Allan by with my colleague and friend, the Premier Joan Kirner.
Ladies and gentlemen, Allan just mentioned Tony saying now he knows what it's
like to be a beetle, I spend my time these days between football clubs; Canterbury-
Bankstown in Sydney and Collingwood in Melbourne and I was up in Cantcrbury-
Bankstown last week launching a biography of another tough little player, captain
Terry Lamb, captain of the Canterbury-Bankstown side and at the end of the
biography, the biographer who wrote the book said put a question to him, he said
how would you like to be remembered? He's a little short guy about 5" 5 and he
said tough as nails he said, how would you like to be remembered Terry? He said
tall. And they said you're a streaky, long lank, what were you doing in rugby
league? I said I was on the wing, they said well why didn't you continuc in the
league? I said well I wanted to do something tougher, so I joined the ALP. And
here I am.
1 / 10" d V700" ON' 17 V 6 6nu-s -13 
And that's why I suppose I like the organisations which have a great sense of
tradition and particularly in the clubs who involve their players and also involve
their supporters. And whether it's Collingwood or Hawthorn or Canterbury-
Bankstown or St George the thing that's common about those sorts of club is it's the
old values of the community, the family and the club that holds the show together
where the players are part of it, where the supporters are considered, Allan was just
talking about the 40,000 at Vic Park on Grand Final night where everybody has a
piece of it and where the values go on from year to year and are held down. I mean
even though football clubs are apolitical in Victoria, it's well known in the dark
recesses of Collingwood's history it's had associations with Labor figures and to
have a Labor Prime Minister again associated again keeps that traditional value
their, that old link which has been there.
But despite the values the community and the family and the links with the players
and the traditions, the clubs can also be dynamic and modem and innovative and
we can see that with an old club winning the flag with one of the best
managements of any club in the AFL which is innovative as Allan says, he carries
the weight, they cross the four million mark because Collingwood's past the one
million, they fund the clubs 350,000 or something to the other clubs. They can be
innovative and modern and strong and still be traditional. So they're held together
by tradition and strong values and the same can be said of successful countries.
That is at the end of the decade of the ' 80s, the decade which finished off
monetarism and finished off communism, where we had those two competing
ideologies dead in the water, in the case of one after 70 years and the case of the
other after about 15 or
What we've seen emerge as a successful model, world wide around the world are
the social democracies and just a couple of weeks ago I had a breakfast with
Michel Rocard who was a former President of France and the likely contender for
the French presidency from the Left of politics after Mitterrand. a moderate person
from the Social Democratic Party of France and he was talking about the success
today, the complexities of running a modern society and the clear role for
Government that there has to be in government being involved in making a society
tick, no eschewing a role for government suggesting that there's some sort of pure
market approach where private initiative and private reward is all that needs to be
there to make a society to tick. But one where there's a happy mix between
efficient economies and at the same time a comprehensive social policy married to
it and this is the role of the Social Democratic Parties which are now I think,
becoming clear in a way the model in this sort of post-monetarist, post-communist
era and where people arc brought in and are made to become part or \\ wihai
TT/ ZO'd VOO* ONVO: VT Z6' 6nUSG:-131 
happening in the nation where it works at its best where we're not wasting talent
and where we can see people really feel as though they are part of the whole thing.
I think rather than to speak about the Budg~ et directly and I will in some respects, I
just thought I'd address these values, that is that ideology today is a luxury. The
difficult thing in any society today is gctting that economic growth, getting the
employment and at the same time distributing the wealth. We've always
distributed the wealth in western societies through employment, by and large
through employment. But we're coming to a period where as we are now an
external ly orientated country the focus is on eroductivi1X and it's on efficiency and
that means producing more output for fewer people. A given level of output is
produced by a smaller workforce and if that doesn't mean a pcrmanenft pool of
unemployment, it must mean more output because if we are going to be producing
a greater lcvel of output with fewer peoplc, how are we then to take the people up?
How are we to hold a society together, to not develop for the first time in our
history an underclass of people who are not wanted by society. How do we keep
them in? And the answer is by just growing the thing faster. But how do you grow
it faster and not have wages spill over into inflation, demand spill ovcr into
imports, all the other problems which come with high growth and these are the
complex things that we have to deal with.
This morning I had the pleasure of presenting the -Best -Practice Awards which
were recommended by a Committee set up under a Commonwcalth program
chaired by the Managing Director of BHIP and in there we saw a stack of
companies Toyota, Du Pont, BlIP ct cetera presented with awards for introducing
best practice into divisions, into their companies in general, in divisions of their
companies. And you could see these people all wading through how to produce
and efficient business, how to gct the right investment in the right place, how to
reduce your costs, how to improve the management structure, how to make it
leaner, more efficient, how to get hetter work practices, how to relate to the
employees. Nearly cvcry company that was there had the shop steward or the
union person from the division reprcsented with them today and you can sce that
co-operation moving, the efficicncies growing as thosc companies, many of which
now actually have divisions around thc world, are bringing best practice from their
overseas subsidiarics back into Australia to benchmark against for the way in
which their Australian division operate% or the companies that are wvell and now the
international leadcrs. We've got a couple there today who are international leaders;
one a maker of spectacle optics which is actually the world leader so who does it
benchmark against but itself? But all this sort of quest for efficiency which is what
it has to be about for a country trying to build a new position for itself in the world
as a tradcr of manufactures and a trader of services, the Sheraton Hotel for instance
TT/ MOd V700ON I VO: LT Z6' 6nb&amp; SZ :-131 
was presented the same because they are trading a service and in their hotels they
picked up a Best Practice Award.
So it's a case of trying to do these things so societal advance in the era of mi -cro
processing, robotics, where so much which was done formcrly by people are now
done -by machinesis going to be complex and it's going to be difficult and there's
going to be no one simple solution. Yet the notion that some ideology whether it
be Adam Smith or whoever, or survival of the fittest, or the market knows best or
some simple solution where government is assured and where we are not together
working as a society as the club works, to the players and to the supporters as we
work to the players in our businesses, to the workers or to the customers or
however it might be, if we're not running as a whole wc are not going to make it.
We're not going to be able to do this by some resort to ideology or some simple
view. We need in this country more output. That means more investment. -How do you
get more investment if you're not competitive? What's the key ingredient in
competitiveness? Basically the inflation rate. How do you keep it? Basically by
co-operation, consensus and agreement. You can't keep it by a draconian money
bank with a flame thrower burning business off the pavement, you can only keep a
low inflation rate by agreement, you can't do it basically by regarding the
workforce as enemies of the management and if that's the view, we certainly won't
make it. If the inflation rate is low, the interest rates will be low, and we've now
got bill rates in this country at 5 and 3/ 4 per cent, that's not all flowed through for
those who borrow, but as time goes by, as those margins come down it will, but
we've already seen lower reductions in rates and we can now go through with
lower interest rates. The same in that investment equation for more out put is
depreciation, you've got to have a tax system that works, a depreciation schedule
which is competitive with the rest in the world. Profits have to be good to spur
investment. How do we get a high profit share good enough to refire investment?
Answer: by national agreement about the division of national income. What
proportion of national income goes to profits? What proportion goes to labour?
And just last week I opencd ncgotiations up with the ACTU where for the first time
in our history, nearly three quarters of all wage settlements in this country in the
coming twelve months will be done by enterprise bargaining, by enterprise
agreements and not by a national wage case where we're seeing another leap in our
maturity so that we can negotiate and bargain our way through. But underlying
that, in the end result is a profit share which is high enough to kick investment over
again. And then of course, we can't do all these things if we don't have the savings. So
what are we going to do0? Be out with the savings bowl in the 1990s when China,
Tt/ t7O* d 17QO* O N17O: VT Z6* 6nU' S-131 
the old Soviet states, India, South America rejoin the world economy and look for
savings to invest in their industries, because no matter how competitive we are, no
matter how low our inflation rate, no matter how great our expectations, if we don't
have the savings we won't be able to develop as quickly as we might otherwiise and
we'ye now put into place through occupational superannuation a savings pool
which will stand Australia in great stead through the 1990s, so that can happen.
And the same with rcsearch and developmcnt, and with education. We're not going
to be able to produce more output and run the current account deficit down and
pick up more employment in an economy where only 3 kids in 10 complete
secondary school. That's as it was in 1983, that's now 7 in 10 this year, it will 9 in
In a few years from now and by now not only reforming tertiary education, but
by now recently reformed technical and further education, a role in the which the
Premier played a leading role producing a new national training authority to do for
vocational education what we've been able to do for tcrtiary education, picking up
the advantage of those higher participation rates will actually produce the kind of
educated workforce that you must have to produce the output in the goads we want
to produce in.
We want to play in the international division of labour which brings wealth to
Australia and that means selling product innovation, it essentially means selling
our brains. We don't want to be playing in the international division of labour in
the countries nearby, I don't want to see Australians compete with Indonesians, in
cities like Surabaya where the wage per week for a scmi-skilled process worker is
$ 7ust a week operating state of the art equipment. We can't compete in those
products and to try and push Australian living standards down to try and make it
compete is the wrong way to go. The thing to do is sell the product they can't make
and that's the product which has the natural advantage of our education system,
because even though we wish these countries well in their development it will take
them 50 years, even if they wish to try to catch up to us in education, research and
development, scientific application, applied research and the sort of things we are
capable of doing.
So it's going to be complex, so today when you see the Du Pont's and the BHP's
and the Toyota's and I was at Ford a couple of weeks ago, climbing up those
efficiency levcls and producing products which are bcnchmarked and proccsses
which arc benchmarkcd around the world, it's all part of an inflation, interest rates
depreciation, profit, savings,_ R&amp; D education equation; it doesn't happen with some
ideology, it's not going to happen with a consumption tax and our opponents are
saying put in a consumption tax,-all that-will hc solved. That is we go from a
simple change from taxing income to expenditure, all of a suddcn thc inflation,
interest rate, depreciation, profits, savings, R&amp; D education equation changes
tOOON'VO: VI Z6* 6nU* S132:-131 
overnight. Well of course it doesn't and we're now on the way to actually make
those changes.
I think many Australians forget how far we've come. In 1983 GiDP in this country
was $ 200 billion, this year it will be $ 430 billion. In 1983 there were 6 million
people employed in the Australian workforce, this year it's 7.6 million, it's over
per cent larger than it was in 1983. We often hear people telling us about New
Zealand and how we should adopt their policies. In 1983 when I became
Treasurer, and compared to now the workforce of New Zealand is actually smaller
than it was in 1983. There are fewer people employed in New Zealand today than
there were in 1983. In Australia there's 26 per cent more people employed than
there was in 1983. We had more growth in the Australian economy in the 1980s
than there is total product in the New Zealand economy, that is we had more
growth in our economy than there is total product in that economy across the
Tasman. That's not to belittle them, it's just to make the point don't deprecate what
we've done, people should not deprecate the great successes that we've had and the
same in manufacturing, it's doubled. Manufacturing exports have tripled, exports
of elaborately transformed manufactures have tripled, manufacturing exports this
year are greater than rural exports or mining exports for the first time in our
history. Services have tripled since 1985.
These arc great changes, all important changes in those milestones along the way
of moving along. Now, we believe in this country you can't produce the sort of
society that gives you those sorts of outcomes where there's access to cducation,
whcre you're producing a workforce which is educated to a high standard, where
there are opportunities for employment, where there is high profits, where there is a
decent basis of our productive wealth without having a safety net in there. That is,
decent social policies as well, access to hospitalisation and medical care, as a right.
Not if you can pay for it, as a right. Acccss to education, If you are a kid from a
poor family but you have got it upstairs and you want to do something with
yourself, you get the right. You don't get the right only if your parents can afford
$ 20,000 a year to pay for a fee paying place in the university.
These arc the sort of policies which will crush off the consensus, that view where
the players and the supportcrs have a role in running the club. Because I think if
the players and supporters think that it is only for the club executives, and for the
Captain and the Coach, and the rest of them arc on the outer then what will happen
is that club will diminish very quickly. And the club of Australia will diminish
very quickly if that h ard-hearted-view -that therc is no place to look after people, a
view which was expressed by my colleague, the Opposition leader, thc other night.
When I said a week ago we have got to lean down and pull thosc who arc weak and
poor behind us, hc said if you lean down you will go back with them, you will end
t700" ON'L70: tT Z6SfluVsz 131 
up mediocre like they are. That's not the view that will hold Australia together.
What will hold Australia together is saying we have an egalitarian spirit in this
country, a spirit of fairniess, a spirit of sharing. Not everyone is going to be equal,
but there is a place for everybody. You can put a roof over your head. If you are
sick you get looked after. If you have got kids they go to school, and opportunities
are going to be there for you.
John Hewso n promised us in his Budget reply the other night, a Hong Kong tax
system. But what he didn't tell us is what you get with it, it is a Hofng K-ong social
security system, a Hong Kong housing system, a Hong Kong health system and the
rest. That's not to deprecate Hong Kong, we should admire the success that colony
has had in changing itself to become one of the tigers in the world.-But the fact is,
I don't want to see people on Australian unemployment benefits on $ 32.00 a week.
I don't want to see Australian pensioners on $ 50.00 a week, as they are in Hong
Kong. And by the way, Hong Kong doesn't have a consumption tax, it's kicking
along without one, I don't want to sec that happen to Australians.
We are, bar a decimal point, the lowest taxed country in the OECD. There is only
a decimal point that separates Australia from Japan as the lowest taxed country in
the OECD. We have now got one of the smallest public sectors in the world, but
one of the best. A rcally efficient public sector that looks after people and so this is
the way I believe that we have got to keep thc social wage together, if you want the
high profit share, you want the low inflation rate, the better levels of productivity,
the social wage has got to be there. Medicare, aged care, child care, occupational
superannuation, access to education, these are all part of the fabric of thc place we
as Australia. And to get that fabric and teat it, and rip it, will produce a social
reaction the likes of which we have not experienced.
And the great gains of the ' 80s, and coming from a closed l ittle frightened economy
to an open aggressive thing that is out in the world trading, that must trade on its
inflation rate, its exchange rate, its competitiveness, its tax system, its profit share
-all of that is put a risk if people take thc view that survival of the fittest, if you are
not a millionaire you arc a layabout, and if the system is not for you a few crumbs
fall of the table, that's for the others. If that's the view then I don't think there is
very much left.
Now, in the Budget we put in a couple of important changes. We spent another
billion over the course of the year onigbs-Now, John HeIwson says they are
ntot-real jobs, -they are jobs that have come -off the public sector. But at atime whcn
privatc investment is down, as it is in the State of Victoria, and where thc Budget
deficit is now $ 13.4 billion, Dr H-ewson is advocating that we should cut it back by
$ 7 billion, 2 per ccrit of GDP. You just imagine what that would do to this State.
TT/ e . O'd V0OOON VO: L7T Z6.-6flt-sz 
What it would do to the recove. y2 it would kill it stone dead to take $ 7 billion out
of those natural stabilising in the Budget. That is, the payment on unemployrpncpt
benefits, the general Commonwealth spending, the loss receipts, and'the spending
on labour market programs. This year those lahour market programs will take 400,
000 people through them. 400, 000 unemployed Australians will get training, and
or a job as a result of those programs. And why wouldn't we take those people who
have been unemployed for six or nine months, get them the training and give them
the job experience, and the Job Start support, wvage subsidy provided to them so
they can go and get that work experience and then go on to keep that job? Why
wouldn't we do it? Why wouldn't we do it when the national economic condition
demands we should do it?
Also we made a substantial change to Medicare. We are going to spend $ 2.6
billion over six years on Medicare to make it easier for public patients to have
access to public hospitals. So that elective surgery, but important elective surgery,
particularly for the elderly like hip replacements and things which are not acute,
but which are vital, but are in a sense elective, can be catered for without long
waiting lists and so that Medicare is working bettcr. Medicare is running at 8 per
cent of-D . it is one of thc most cost efficient health systems in the world. The
American system is running at over twelve per eent of GDP. In thc United States if
you arrive at a hospital door without your blue cross card in your pocket they turn
you away. Even it you have got a cardiac condition, or whatever it might be, if you
don't have the card, out.
That's not Australia, that's not what we are used to. And that's not what we are
going to have.
So, we havc got a big change in there which will mean that Medicare is a universal
system that gives you medical consultations, 85 per cent rebate, no cost if it is a
hulk billing doctor, and better access through the public hospitals of Australia for
public patients. And also utilising the privatc hospital system better, and also a
program in there to look after waiting lists and bctter distribute the demand for
services betwecn hospital by a computer booking systemn and the rest. As well as
that we have got an incecase for pensioners, singles and married, $ 6.00 and 10.00
a fortnight. We have offered fringe benefits to all pensioners, including part
pensioners, which is a mile stone change in the Budget, rent assistance, improving
rent assistance by better targeting it which will affect 70, 000 people who are often
not well off, who are basically in thc lower income orders who are sitting in there,
in our social security system, and who can deal with that support.
Now thcse arc the sorts of things the Budget has cast I think exactly right for the
time, exactly right for the time. That is, we have got the deficit out at a time where
11/ 80' d VOO'ON VOV :. 131 
private spending is down, wc are trying to inject activity, and all the One Nation
spending is starting to come through. Two wecks ago we ordered 3 million tonnes
of rail steel to build that railway line between Melbourne and Adelaide. We
ordered a million concrete sle~ epers, we have announced a $ 2 billion road program,
$ 400 million then last year and Australia is starting to move again. We had 1.6 per
cent economic growth for the year to June and we are forecasting 3 for this current
financial year ending the 30 June 1993, so the economy is starting to move along
again. In fact, we are now moving faster then Western Europe and the United
States. I mean, I think a lot of people don't understand this is a very large, worldwide
recession we arc experiencing, and a colleague of mine came back from the
United States last week and said, in Australia it is not to be compared with the
atmospherics of the United States in the business community and the community in
general. And in Britain, for instance this year, we finished the year to Junc with
1.6 per cent growth, they finished the year to June with -1.5 per cent growth.
T'here economy contracted by 1.5 per cent over the year to June. So, we are
starting to grow and we have got it going.
Now, we had this debate the other wcek, we said that our starting point, we are
proving tax cuts in 1994-94 and 1995-96, but because the receipts fell away this
year our starting point deficit out there is around the order of $ 5 to $ 6 billion, and
we said we will introduce some compliance measures to improve the starting point
deficit if needs be, if in the end as forecasts the starting point is weaker. Dr
Hewson ran round saying Labor has got secret taxes, these wcre taxes which we
revealed in the Budget paper. Nothing secret about them, but were revealed in the
Budget papers. But of course what he didn't say was this, that the income tax of
Australia is $ 49 billion, the revenue for the income tax system is $ 49 billion. He
wants to introduce a consumption tax at $ 27 billion, it is over half the income tax.
It might be 15 per cent on all goods and services, but it is actually 50 per cent plus
of the current income tax. None of that consumption tax revenue is going to be
paid for, is going to pay for the tax cuts. It is spent wholly on the abolition of
payroll tax and cutting cxcise on petrol, and paying for the lost customs duty which
somes from zero tariffs, and abolishing the wholesale sales tax. None of it goes to
tax cuts. He has got tax cuts in there worth $ 13 billion that have got to be paid for
by cuts in Government spending. So, he is going to cut into, into a Budget of
around $ 110 billion, he is going to cut $ 13 billion out of outlays and that is all
going to happen basically in the welfare area, in the social security and health area.
So, wc are going to hop into all of that to give people tip the top end a tax cut and
try and hold the show together, and at the same time his starting point is exactly the
same starting point we are starting with. That is, wcrc he to win the next election,
and we think that is an unlikely prospect, not withstanding our relative positions at
thc moment, the starting point in 1994-95, 1995-96 is still going to bc as we have
it. That is, ahout 1 1/ 4 per ccnt of GDP and deficit. So, not only has he got to find
t00O0N tO: VT7 z&amp; 6nu~ sz 131 
$ 13 billion for tax cuts, but he has also got to find a couple of billion as we have to
find it out there to start with the same strength in fiscal policy from when the tax
cuts are paid. So, hc has got a sort of $ 12 to $ 15 billion Budget cutting task on his
hands which to date has sort of been hushed up in the media, but once that big
consumption tax hits the economy, the inflation rate, the interest rates, and they
start then ripping away at Medicare he is going to abolish that he said, basically
let the Doctors sct there common fee and charge what they like and you can all
privately insure yourselves which will cost you $ 20.00 to $ 30.00 a week at least to
do that when he starts ripping away at money in the education system, and things
like child care and age care, home and community care, the hostel program,
nursing homes, they all get hopped into and we then wheel out the survival of the
fittest ideology and say this is the way forward, people then turn around and say,
listen mate that was a way forward in 1979 when Thatcher was becoming Prime
Minister; that was the way forward before monctarism was discredited in Europe;
that was the way forward before the social values of social democracies around the
world re-established themselves in the late ' 80s and early 1990s.
So that's what I think all this is about. We have introduced a Budget which is about
right for the economy at this time, letting the shock absorber of the Budget take
some of the strain of the economy, until the economy picks up. Still making those
social changes, national training authority, building the rail highway, f&amp; Xing up the
airline system, creating a proper market for electricity down the East Coast of
Australia by separating power generation from distribution. Repairing Medicare,
getting that strength in there into the public hospital access. Getting those higher
participation rates coming through in schools. These are the social advances we in
the Labor Party continue with, because we want you in the business community to
feel as those you are playing for a club whcre everybody matters: where the
players matter, and where the supporters matter, and whether it be the employers or
the employees, whoever it is, they have all got a role in Australia; that this is a
society where we have a role. So, those values of egalitarianism, as I mentioned at
the start, the family valucs, the traditions of the club are important traditions, and
nonc of us in the political system put them asunder without putting society as we
know it, and the mores as we know them, at risk. And that's why this Budget is
very much a traditional Labor Budget. Very much in the groove, very much about
doing the right things now for Australia. And I just hate to think of the State of
Victoria with a federal Budget with $ 6 to $ 7 or $ 8 billion cut out of it. Watching
their recovery then plummet back into a recession and see the then secondary wave
of damage go through the place, and the secondary wave of despair and gloom.
We're getting out of it, the thing to do now is to come out of it, and don't belicve
that there are simple ideological solutions for the complex task of building a new
industrial socicty for ourselves. We can do it, but wc will only do it the hard way.
And that's all those changes we were talking about at the Best Practice Program 
this morning. All those efficiencies things, getting the workforce to work better,
bettcr management, better barmonisation, making it all come together. So, that's
what the Budget is about, it is a scrious attempt, I would like to say to you by
serious people, about seeing Australia through a difficult transition into a very
bright 1990s. A low inflationary environment, with low interest rates, high level
investment, a banking system which has learned its lessons about asset prices and
inflation, a stock of savings, and living in the fastest growing part of the world the
Asia Pacific, with a society all committed to the one goals. So, in the big club, the
club that matters most, Australia, in the Premiership we are after is for the high
income shares around the world in the Asia-Pacific. And not scrabbling down
there in the prelims after a low income share scrabbling with someone else about
the sort of goods we shouldn't bc producing anymore. T7hat's the Australia we want
to produce in, that's why the Budget is simply part of that wholc ethos of playing to
the traditions, the well establishcd traditions of this country.
Thank you
I/ Tld VO000N V'Q: tT Z6' 6flUSZ 3 



/ 74
TRANSCRIPT OF THZ PRIME~ MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINGt MP
BEST PRACTICZ DEMONSTRATION PROORAH
SHERATON TOWERS, MELBOURNE 24 AUGUST1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: 046 would say that when we have a wall attended mid
morning meeting where award for best practice, with
benchmarking against the world's boat, It is sometbing
which Australian business is pleasad to be in. Because
if there is, I think, any demonstration of the maturity
and coming of age of the now Australian economy, it is
gatherings ouch as this and evonts such as this.
It wasn't that many years ago when worse practice was
rewarded. if you are actually slick at getting into
Canberra, twisting Its arm up its back, getting more
border protection, 8 bit more Bubsidies, bounties, if
you are in the worse preatice program you're regarded as
one of the good slick people around town. Well now of
course those people are discredited and they left us an
industrial museum and it has fallen to the lot of the
new managers of Australia to give us something better.
One of the interesting thi~ ngs in all this is that when
comoanies -do well in Australia and they reach the
lgCal end point of their market share, where they are
only squabbling over half per cents and costing
themselves a lot to do it, the obvious thing to do is to
go and do what you do well somewhere else, go and grab
someone's market share, but not where you are running
against the outer edges of your own possibilities in 8
domestic market like Australia. This has happened of
course, when we removed exchange controls that whole
sort of pent-up, propensity, buoyancy, willingness on
the part of Australian business to get out there and
find other markets where they could do well occurred.
And of course our overeas investment went from about $ 4
billion in 1983 to around $ 65 to $ 70 billion today,
which is * a very large proportion of our international
debt. And It is through the operation of these
companies abroad that people and companies are importing
best practice back into Australia from the international
companies which they bought and operated around the
world. And so, you have got companies automatically
banch-marking between themselves and their foraign
:-31 
subsidiary as to the sort of practice which is being
undertaken, and the of fioiency levels which are the
standards of those businesses, and of course making both
the better for having been together by doing the things
that Australia does best abroad anid doing some of the
things which are done beet abroad and having them
brought back into Australia.
I mean it is all part of growing up. It is all part of
getting out of the cort of crazy restrigtions we had
upon us where you couldn't invest -abroad without some
clerk in the Reserve bank giving you a tick, and of
course most people never bothered. or in the sort of
regulated economy we had, where there was really not the
prem~ ium on eff ici-ency because of people drawing down the
economic red from protection and the other natural
protections which come from the non-traded goods sector
of the economy.
We have decided that we want to be in the leading edge
of the world and not in the rear edge. And that means
that we have to smarten ourselves up acroas the board
with our investment, our research and technology, our
Industrial relations practices, our work practices, our
management practices, our best practices. And so the
beat practice program is, as John said, I think a novel
way, a way in which we require companies who are
involved in it to demonstrate to other companies what
they have been able to do. So it is not just something
in which they have excelled privately, and it remains a
private matter for them, but where they are tharing with
others their success, and their innovation, and their
ingenuity and their willingness to make Australia better
and smarter.
This is, I think, a good program and therefore, it's
part of the fact that to become an international
economic society one hag got to do all these comipl. ex
things. They are not going to be done with single
policies, big bangs or consumption taxes or anything
also, they are going to be done the hard way. That is,
reforming industrial relations quletly, slowly,
sensibly, your management practicP, the way the
business operates, getting down costs, all the things
that go, all the smart things, the complex things which
go into that word efficiency and productivity.
We are going to be 4 more productive country, we are
already. But that word in itaelf implies fewer people
producing a given level of output. And if we don't want
a permanent pool of unemployment in this country we have
got to continue to expand output, so that we take more
people up for that given level of employment to each
unit of output and that means the whole climate has got
to be one which is cast towards beat practice and where
all the bits and pieces ofjjnvestmen, be it the
inflation rate, the interest rate, the taxc eystem, : 131 
depreciation, wages, profits. The rest has got to flow
naturally, as it has.
We have come long way already, in the early 1990e
there were very few manufacturing businesses which one
could speak of as being world claas busineesee. This is
not true today. Fortunately, the success of the whole
change, thet is the whole change, the external
orientation of Australia has changed all that. And the
Government itself likes to think it is pretty good ot
best practice to. We benchmark ourselvee against other
Governments around the world. We are, bar a decimal
point, the lowest taxed Country in the OECD. Japan is
below us by a decimal point. We have got one of the
lowest level of outlays to GDP of the OECD countries,
our public sectOr is one of smallest yet it delve
services of a very high standard. So, in terms of the
macro measures best practice this Government has taken,
beat practice on international Government scale on, as
seriously as I know many of you have on a commercial
scale. And we are continuing to make tremiendous changes
in the sort of regulatory regimes for which we ore
responsible, which will help invest practice to in
things like aviation, telecommunications, where we are
awfully good In the world league, banking and finance,
and in things like industrial relations, enterprise
bargaining, where we have really presided now over a
revolution in wage fixation in the last decade, where we
have seen more wage flexibility than perhaps any
comparable country, where the profit share in high, and
whether inflation unit labour costs are low, where
inflation is low, and now we are having this big shift
to enterprise agreements, enterprise bargaining, where
we have now got twice as many people in Australia
working under enterprise agreements, as for instance,
there are in New Zealand under employment contracts,
which we hear so much about, there are twice * s many
Australians working under enterprise agreements all
ready, and just last week Peter Cook and I have opened
discussions with the ACTU in a wa @ e effj. where now 2/ 3
to 3/ 4 of all Australians will have their wages adjusted
under enterprise bargaining and not under a centralised
wacqe fixina system, not under a national wage ease.
These are all I think significant things in this whole
quest for best practice and the same with training, retraining,
skilling, and we saw recently at the youth
meeting the announcement I was able to make of an
agreement with the Commonwealth and the States to put
together a new national vocational education system. I
mean it won't be too many years before we are up there
with best practices, as we already nra, with best
practice in relation to the tertiary sector, the
proportion of our kids going into tertiary institutionfs.
So, whether it be in shipping where we have achieved
crew levels comparable with other OECD countries, or in
the waterfront where we have Just doubled productivity,
0O/ 0" d 800ON' 2: 9T Z6'" nuBp7 : 131 
or In electricity where we ate now starting to create a
market for the first time by separating power generation
from distribution, or in railways where we are
developing a flew national freight highway, rail highway,
under an enterprise agreement. Again, where best
practica is going to be the focus. So, we have taken it
on and of course no more particularly than in the public
service, Peter ( Cook),, started nagotitationB a week or
two ago with the Public Service Union in relation to an
enterprise agreem~ ent, industrial agreement, enterprise
bargaining in the public service where we are seeking to
yield productivity gains, further productivity gains
from our own employees, in our own service. Just as you
are, those of you In the beat practice program in your
own companies.
So, this is in a sense this day isn't just another
manifestation, but an important manilfestation, of people
reaching for those high points, those pinnacles of
achievement which must be the norm for an economy in a
country that wants to do wel. l, that wants to employ its
people, want@ to have rising living standards, not
declining living standards, risling wages not declining
wages, rising profits not declining profits, all these
things one must do and we all know one must do to be in
the international league, and climb that international
league table of efficiency. So, I congratulate all
those associated with the program, from John Down who
has chaired it, and to those companies who have been
Interested enough to apply, and who have signed the
contractual arrangements with the Commonwealth to
demonatrate their best practice and who have received
Commonwealth financial assistance In so doing. But are
whom, on nearly all occasions, the companies themselves
spent much greater level of funding then that which is
paid to them by the Commonwealth.
I congratulate you, all of you, for being in it, for
trying. This Is what Australia must be about. This is
how the clever country becomes more clever, how we
become a smart sooiety doing the clever things well.
Thank you very much.
t7n./ t7rflA AOON2gi9 7--n-z: 73 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY APPROX 8: 00 PM
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
TO THE OLYMPIC TEAM DINNER SHERATON WENTWORTH, SYDNEY,
AUGUST 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
An honour to be here In such illustrious company -the
most successful Australian Olympic team-in thirty years.
Twenty seven medals. Fifty two medallists.
Any number of personal bests. High rankings in events
where Australians have never before excelled.
A performance which gives us grounds to believe that
we're entering another golden age of Australian sportand
the performance of the Rugby Union side In Capetown,
and the cricket team in Sri Lanka is further evidence.
I have to say that in those two cases, as in Barcelona,
there was some thing more than winning attachedto the_
per forman~ ce.
There was character.
In the last two months Australia's sportsmen and women
have been outstanding ambassadors for their country.
There have been ample measures of both brilliance and
grit. A terrific sense of purpose and, awareness of what the
spirit of sport is all about.
It's a truism that Australians love their sport.
. In fact-I think-it goes further then -that I think
Australians see in sport the things they value.
Like courage, comradeship competition. Winning.
We value winning when Kieran Perkins swam that
magnificent 1500 metres, Kathy watt, Matt Ryan, Clint
Robinson, the Equestrian Team, the Double Sculls, the
Qarsome Foursome when they won, Australians won too. 
4:. rHU9 1( b NO. 01 P .02/
2
We shared their triumph.
All thos e medallists did us 8 bit of good.
So did some of those terrific fourths like Michael
Murphy. And so did a lot of other great performances, including
some desperately unlucky ones like David Green's.
The point is, I think, that it is not the winning which
really moves us.
It beats losing, there's no doubt.
But what really moves us I think is the kelieñ that the
athlete embodies.
The belief we know you had to have to go so far.
We are moved by your faith in yourselves.
Your spirit.
The fact that you are Australian and you have this spirit
this world-conquering spirit moves us.
it's why we honour you tonight.
You have been great ambassadors. You have done us proud.
More than that, you have set us an example.
You remind us of the spirit in this country that made
it a great country, that will assure our future.
So I know I Bpeak for all Australians when I congratulate
you and thank you, and wish you the very best of luck
in everything you do.
SYDNEY AUGUST 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF P40 KITTYHAWK PUBLIC DISPLAY, AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL, CANBERRA 26 AUGUST
Dame Beryl Beaurepaire and members of the Council of the
Australian War Memorial, my Cabinet Colleague Ben
Humphreys and other parliamentary colleagues, veterans of
the Milne Bay campaign, representatives of the veterans
organisations, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you, Dame Beryl, for your warm welcome.
I am a great admirer of the Australian War Memorial it
is one of the great public institutions of Australia.
I'm very pleased that my first official function here
should take place on such an important anniversary, and
that I should be celebrating with you a marvellous
addition to the national collection.
There is a great romance attached to the Kittyhawk.
World War II invested them with certain almost humancharacteristics.
They were sturdy, reliable fighters.
Brave planes.
They earned that reputation in a number of theatres,
Milne Bay among them.
The one we are about to inspect is a pedigreed
representative of the breed it has a substantial and
documented history of service with the RAAF, including
service in the Battle of Milne Bay.
It was flown at Milne Bay by puster Brow who is with us
today. Later it was flown in New Guinea by-Wilf Arthur
whose exploits in it-earned him the DFC. Mr Arthur is
also here today.
This plane will put visitors in touch with one of
Australia's most important battles a battle which truly
helped to turn the tide against the Japanese advance and
secure victory in the battle for Australia.
All nations commemorate their war dead. But the
Australian War Memorial commemorates them quite uniquely.
1576 it
jrw
J% 
Here are recorded the names of all servicemen and women
who gave their lives for Australia.
To walk in the Memorial's courtyard is a sombre
experience yet it is one that I think every Australian
should make.
It is not an easy thing to comprehend the meaning of war
in Australia's history.
This Memorial testifies to enormous sacrifice. It also
testifies to a great tragedy.
It reminds us both of heroism and incredible folly.
There are 60,00 names on the first World War roll.
That is 60,000 young men and women who gave their lives.
But we can only begin to comprehend the loss to a young
nation when we know that they come from a force of just
300,000 and a population of just over 4 million.
The calamity of World War I can never be measured, but I
know that from its inception, and the great efforts of
its founders, Charles Bean and John Treloar, the
Australian War Memorial has helped us get it in
perspective. There is more than a list of names here.
The Memorial holds records which allow us to see these
young men and women in a personal light with the same
aspirations and hopes that we all share; with a love of
country from which we all can learn; with a hope for the
future that was denied to them, but which we have a duty
and a reason to maintain.
The Memorial contains the story of Australia at war the
story of the campaigns themselves, so vividly portrayed
in the galleries.
There are soldiers' uniforms here still encrusted with
the mud of the battlefields of France, still speaking to
us of the terrible winters that the first AIF endured.
The Museum also contains, I understand, such icons of the
national story as the boats used at Gallipoli to ferry
Australian troops ashore.
I gather that these boats and other large objects will
soon be accessible to the public at the storage and
display facility at Mitchell, for which, I am pleased to
say, funding was provided in the Budget.
I intend to see them one day. 1577 
3
This is truly a people's memorial.
Yet I think it can be reasonably said that the Australian
War Memorial bore the marks of its origins a Memorial
to the men and women of 1914-18 and there was not
sufficient attention paid to the Second World War and
subsequent wars.
It was not until 1971 that extensions were completed to
allow the Memorial to tell the story of those who served
in World War II.
I realise that because space had been limited for so long
there was not the same urgency in collecting as there had
been during and after World War I.
Ladies and gentlemen
I think you will know that I am keen to see that the
story of World War II, and in particular the Pacific War,
is told to Australians with the same intensity and
understanding that characterised our telling of the
legends of Gallipoli, France and Palestine.
For this reason I hope that we will be able to find the
means of helping the Memorial develop its Pacific War
Gallery. The 50th Anniversary of the key battles and campaigns of
the Pacific War has given us an opportunity to remind
Australians of the risk the nation faced in 1942, and the
debt they owe those men and women who defended it and I
mean both on the battlefield and of f it.
At Darwin and in New Guinea, Australians lost their lives
turning back the enemy.
The crucial battles of the Coral Sea and Midway, and of
Milne Bay and Kokoda made sure that Australia would not
be isolated and defenceless, but rather the crucial base
from which the Allies would drive back the Japanese.
Already this year it has been my privilege to take part
in ceremonies commemorating the battles at Darwin, the
Coral Sea, Kokoda and other places in New Guinea.
I count my visits to the memorials to Australian soldiers
in these places among the most moving experiences of my
public life.
I had hoped to visit Milne Bay but this proved to be
impossible it seems I would I have needed a Kittyhawk
to get there.
Milne Bay is perhaps the most significant battle of all.
1578 
Here, a combined operation of the three Australian
services resisted and repelled a powerful Japanese force,
inflicting on the Japanese army its first defeat on land
since Pearl Harbour.
The battle played a major part in thwarting Japanese
attempts to take Port Moresby.
Yet despite its importance in the defence of Australia,
despite the bravery and skill and sacrifice of the
Australians who fought there, it is a battle of which few
Australians have any knowledge.
The acquisition of this aircraft and the modest display
associated with it along with the dedication of the
Memorial's staff led by Brendan Kelson and Michael
McKernan will no doubt help to enlarge our
understanding of the Battle of Milne Bay, and through it
the battle for Australia.
It will also reclaim for those who fought there some of
the recognition they richly deserve.
Those of you who served and are present with us today may
not seek this honour, but it is yours.
Australia owes you a debt of gratitude. It owes those who
fell there a debt that can never be repaid.
I think we should all be grateful to the Memorial for
having the vision and the will to significantly improve
the way the story of Milne Bay will be told.
The experience of war lives on to haunt generations of
Australians who did not themselves take part. I know
this from my own family's experience.
By telling the story and paying due tribute, the
Australian War Memorial has played an indispensable role
in helping those who came after to understand.
In its way it makes us all part of the story, and that is
an essential comfort to any nation.
The Memorial has done Australia a great service.
So, Dame Beryl, I congratulate you, the Council and the
Staff. This aeroplane will help tell the story of the defence of
Australia in 1942.
It will remind us of the debt we owe to those who fought
and died.
And it will ensure that their names will live forever.
Thank you all for coming. 1 57 9 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FAREWELL RECEPTION FOR PROFESSOR SLATYER
26 AUGUST 1992
Professor and Mrs Slatyer, Ministerial Colleagues,
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you all for joining Annita and myself tonight, to
farewell Ralph Slatyer and afford him the recognition he
deserves as he steps down from the position of Chief
Scientist. I might say that for one so used to being among
practitioners of the dismal science, it's a pleasure to
be among exponents of the real thing.
In fact I've spent a decade attempting to push Australia
in the direction of innovation, manufacturing, creatingmaking
things. Using our brains.
It's always seemed to me that in the end this is the best
measure of how far we have come. How civilised we are.
Both in his role as Chairman of ASTEC from 1982-198.7 and
then as Chief Scientist since 1989, Ralph Slatyer has
been a pivotal figure in providing advice on-cee and
technology matters to the Government.
There have been enormous changes in this period.
Industrial R&amp; D in Australia has had one of the fastest
' rates ofi growth of all OECD countries, and attitudes in
the business community to technology and innovation are
changing rapidly.
The universities are now increasingly involved with the
employers of their students and the users of their
science and technology.
The Government research agencies have developed strong
links with indusiitry and other users of their research.
There is a new spirit of cooperation between researchers,
and with research users.
Ralph Slatyer has been a key player in all of this.
1580 
I might say that the Government itself has been extremely
active. The recently released White Paper on Science and
Technology, called Developing Au~ trali an Id-Cass A
Blupfroinr theI is eience of7 our commitment to
the crucial role which science and technology can and
must play in shaping the future of Australia.
our belief in this was further emphasised by the decision
in the Budget to make the 150 per cent tax concession for
research and development a permanent feature of the tax
system.
So too, the establishment of the Cooperative Research
Centres Program testifies to the Government's
determination to strengthen our science and technology
system and capture its benefits in Australia.
Ralph Slatyer, of course, was involved in the creation of
this program.
He has also established the Prime Minister's Science and
Engineering Council and guided it successfully through
the early years to become a major national forum.
All of his work has been characterised by imagination,
professionalism and pragmatism. He has a flair for
creating mechanisms that work in practice.
At the same time Ralph has made important philosophical
contributions to our thinking on the roles of public and
private institutions in building a technologically
innovative and internationally-oriented Australia.
He has been a capable leader and coordinator.
He has been, first and foremost, an Australian determined
to help his country build its place in the world.
For over twenty years he has given exemplary service to
Australian governments of different political
persuasions. At the national level he has also been a leader in
developing environmental policy and in formulating
practical programs for ecologically sustainable
development. He has managed the not inconsiderable feat of gaining the
respect of both the conservation movement and the major
resource based industries.
At the international level, he was President of two
important intergovernmental environmental programs where
Australia has been influential in determining their
character and effectiveness. 1581 
He was also President of the International Council of
Scientific Unions, as well as being involved in one of
its important non-governmental environmental programs.
To do all this in addition to his full time and part time
commitments in Australia, both to the Government and to
the Australian National University, is remarkable.
Not surprisingly, Ralph has high standing in the science
and technology community. His research career led to his
election at an early age to the Australian Academy of
Science, and then to the Royal Society of London and the
United States National Academy of Sciences.
He is one of a very small number of scientists who have
been elected to both these famous national academies.
In closing let me just say that I have mentioned only
some of the highlights of Ralph Slatyer's distinguished
career and its outstanding value to the government. I
know there is much more to be told.
Ralph, your work has brought great credit to yourself, to
the institutions with which you have been associated, and
to your country.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I
congratulate and thank you and extend to you and June
every best wish for the future.
1582 



TEL: 26. Au9.92 13: 20 No. 009 P. 01/ 04
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
MP, lAUNCH OF P40 KITI'YHAWK PUBLIC DISPLAY, AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL, CANBERRA, 26 AUGUST 1992
( Additions to prepared text)
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Ladies and gentlemen.
I think you will know that I am keen to see that the story of World War II, and in
particular the Pacific War, is told to Australians with thc same intensity and understanding
that characterised our telling of the legends of Gallipoli, France and Palestine.
For this reason I hope that we will be able to find the means of helping the Memorial
develop its Pacific War Galleyj.
And as Dame Beryl said, they arc now allocating $ 150,000 a year to the collection. And I
don't think it would unravel the Budget numbers if I were to say to you we'll double that. 



TEL 13: 20 No. 009026. Rug. 92
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF P40 KIITYIIAWK PUBLIC DISPLAY, AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL,, CANBERRA, 26 AUGUST 1992
UNVEILING CEREMONY
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Dame Beryl.
Well there are lots of symbols of any battle and there are many symbols of the battle for
Australia at Miluc Bay. But the Kittyhawk is a famous symbol and it's a great tribute to
the Memorial that you've been able to procure and secure this Kittyhawk and restore it,
one that's had its own associations with the battle and which will pay tributc to those who
flew Kittyhawks, and to the machine itself and its role in the Milne Bay campaign.
In the Battle for Milne Bay we really celebrate and remember the most highly successful
land battle in the battle for Australia. Because no doubt we have remembered, as we have
now, for most of this century those who served and the battles in the First World War. But
Austrabia was not threatened in the First World War, only in the Second World War, and
in the battle for Australia, a battle for the liberty of the people of this country, those who
served in Milne Bay should be appropriately remembered.
And the Memorial in bringing back, in recreating parts of the Pacific campaign in the
gallery behind us, and now with the Kittyhawk, serves the memory of those who fought
for Australia in the Second World War well, and balances up the presentation of the
Memorial and the remembrance of the First World War with the Second World War.
So it's a great pleasure for me to be here with those who actually flew this plane, and an
even greater pleasure to be asked to launch the exhibition, the exhibit of this famous
Kittyhawk. Thank you. P. .02/ 04 



I ~ PRIME MINISTERI
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
" IT'S TIME WH1TLAM GOVERNMENT DINNER"
RAND WICK RACECOURSE, 29 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Gough, Margaret, distinguished members of the Whitlam Government, supporters,
friends, one and all. Well this is a very lovely night for all of us who were members of
that Goverrnent, and a very important thing for our Party to be doing. It's a nice thing to
celebrate your successes and be proud of your achievements and it's an important part of
your history that you're doing it.
Fred talked about the true believers, we are the believers of Australian politics. We are the
people who believe, we make the system tick. But in celebrating this Goverfnent twenty
years ago, it was not just the election of another Government because we had our share
throughout the century, but we celebrated with the election of the Whitlam Government,
the coming out of Australia. Coming out of 25 years, a quarter of a century, of the torpor
of the Menzian age. That's what we really celebrated. And the re-sparking of Australian
nationalism, the re-sparking of Australian social experimentation, which was killed with
Gallipoli and Flanders at the end of the First World War. That's what we celebrate
tonight. We celebrate Labor coming of age again in 1972.
Of course none of this would have been possible without the leadership of the then darling
of the Fabian set, Fabius Maximus himself, not to be confused with Tiberius Telecom who
certainly had the odd run-in at the time, but he is the person who put Labor back together.
The two problems we faced in all of this century was in that great period, the 1890s, when
the Labor Party was put together in that terrible depression and drought, when we had the
Federation conventions when we put together the Federation, and that period of great
social experimentation where we led the world. All of that made Australia basically a 
Labor country until the First World War. And then the other great hurdle we faced was, of
course, the Cold War and the Cold War and the belief that many people had with the
collapse of robber baron capitalism in the United States in the ' 20s, that centrally planned
economies were the way forward, and our party -was divided on this very important issue
for a long time. And it was Gough who put the Labor Party back together, and this is his
great crowning achievement. He made Labor a relevant force again, when another part of
this century have disappeared, he grabbed us almost from the grave and brought us back
together. In truth he made Labor relevant again.
I am here tonight as the leader of the Labor Party, as the Prime Minister, as Bob was here
in the early 1980s and throughout the 1980s, we are here because of what Gough was able
to do in making Labor relative again. Gough understood that the ALP was like a bicycle,
it only stands up when you pedal; if you stop peddling it falls over, if you run out of ideas,
and you run out of push, and you run out of drive, it just sort of lays to one side. But the
thing is he understood the need to lift the national spirit.
And what's " Its Time" was about, it's when you read through the policy speech and the
caption, the records were in many respects quite tame when one compares it to today,
quite tame. But what it did in the epock of that terrible Menzoid, Menzian age, was lifting
the spirit of Australians. And if you were at the Blacktown Town Hall the hair was
standing up on the back of your neck because you know that you were in the presence of
something big. That's what Gough understood, lifting the national spirit, lifting the
national sentiment and exciting people. He taught us again that undiluted affection for
Australia, and a belief that the day might come when this country would not need the
emotional or institutional supports of old affections and old connections. That was what
he taught us, and that's what we started to understand back there in 1972. And that's why
there was so much hope and so much promise. Thiat's why we are able to carry on as we
were, as a Party, right through that period.
And so when we celebrate this Government, we celebrate the dreams of Fred Daly's
generation who came there at the end of the Second World War who have always such
difficult periods to deal with. Scullin arrived in office in the 1930s virtually days before
the collapse of the Depression, the stock market in 1929, Curtin arrived just a short time
before Pearl Harbour. We are always saddled with the tough things to do in this life. We
were denied the easy days of post war growth when people like Fred and others went to
the House, because in the ' 40s Fred was actually in our war time Government, but many
members came in ' 49 and by 1972 had just about given up. We nearly won in 69. Really
the Government of 1972 was mostly won in 1969 and then a couple of years later in' 72 we
pushed it over the line.
And what was put together was a tremendous program of social change and social policy,
*** which lead-Labor back to the-main stream of Australia, of the main stream views which
Australia had in the past, which it had given us the constitution, which had given us some
of the best social policy in the world, and which had taken us back there. 
And the fact of the matter is that, that great tradition which Gough and his Government
re-started has continued down through the period. And that is why I think it is a
delightful thing to be able to claim in your history, a continuum between the Labor
Governments, between the Whitlam Government, the Hawke Government and this
Government. This is a delightful thing to be able to do.
And all of the things which the Whitlam Government did, things like Medibank, we've
continued with Medicare. This is one of the great health systems around the world. With
pensions, indexation for pensions, which we have now brought to 25 per cent of average
weekly earnings where we sophisticated the whole of the aged care system. With Gough's
Schools Commission, which has now led to a continuation of these policies with now 7
kids in 10 completing secondary school, and now a new revolution in vocational
education, 40 per cent of kids going into university. We kept the whole policy going that
begun in 1972. In foreign policy, a peculiarly Australian foreign policy, which we now
make without reference to anybody else, thanks to that great period between 1972 and
1975. And even DURD, DURD is back with Better Cities. I don't know whether Tom's
here tonight, but the fact is at the time this was path breaking stuff and again with the
Better Cities we are back doing the same thing. With railways, Gough tried to take the
railways over and make the national system. There were only two clever States at the
time, Tasmania and South Australia, the rest said no. We are doing it all today, same
policies, same sort of Labor Party, same sort of people.
This Government adopted theWorld Heritage conventions, which has been so much a
basis for our environmental policy and all of our actions in Tasmania, or the wilderness
areas, or the wet tropics of Queensland, come relying upon that legislation. Or in
multiculturalism, which was again part of the vogue of the Whitlam Government bringing
Australians together, producing as we did an understanding between cultures and making
one society out of the many cultures of Australia. We are sticking to that, we are not
going to the miserable politics of Dr Hewson.
And in other great reforms like the family allowance supplement, which is one of the
world's leading family income support systems for low income families, or occupational
superannuation for the whole of the workforce, we have seen a traditional Labor
Government in the Whitlam Government, and a continuation of the tradition through the
current Labor Government from 1983 to 1992. And the fact is, Gough, I think we can say,
even though people say of us we're rationalists, no we're not rationalists, we're rational
we're not rationalists. We're not isms and we're not ists, we don't belong to the isms and
we don't belong to the ists. We are not Thatcherite, we are not Reaganite, and we are not
Rogernomic, we are Labor, we are traditional Labor.
We need to always rejoice in the things we have done, because we have got our troubles
and people now are finding the current recession difficult and people are looking
elsewhere for solutions to other Labor Parties in other places. We get told get about New
Zealand and the New Zealand Labor Party, and a few things worth saying. In 1983 we
had 6 million people in the Australian workforce, today we have got 7.6 million, that is 26
per cent bigger. Between 1983 and 1992 the workforce in New Zealand actually got 
smaller. And that is the difference between Rogernomics and traditional Labor
economics. And also, not just in that respect, the country is twice as large as its product
ever was.
The fact is, I think we can say Gough, that in the things which you did, started, that your
Ministers took pride in, and the policies you built, these were the foundation stones for the
Hawke Government in 1983 and the Government which I have the privilege to lead now
at this time. We kept them going. We had those dismal years with Malcolm Fraser, but of
course we now understand that compared to John Hewson, Malcolm -was a comparatively
good guy.
It is an interesting thing isn't it? In the 1980s which finished off communism and finished
off monetarism, the parties which have the comprehension and support worldwide now
are the So-cial Democratic Parties. The half hearted, Gordon Gecko Wall Street view of
the world that basically greed is good and survival of the fittest. And its the productive
economy, the efficient economy with the nice social policy grafted on, with a proper
safety net, access to health, access to housing, access to education, all of these things are
basically where societies are going to go and where we have taken Australia.
Now when you look at today's Liberal Party it does believe in isms and ists as we do not
where they've been raised literally on capitalist ideology. We used to say about Malcolm,
Mick and I when we were in the Parliament's Assembly, we would go out there on the
attack every night, we used to accuse Malcolm of just about being a capitalist raider and
all the rest. The truth is he was just a warm old regular. He was. Malcolm was really just
a trifle. Now we have got a leader of the Opposition who makes Malcolm look like a
Bolshie, who believes in all of that wall street eth. His view is that he wants the social
impoverishment of Australia so that everyone who rises out of it will be like him, that is
self made, rising from the ashes of the impoverishment which has produced a better class
of person, a better entrepreneurial type. His spirit is of course the spirit of the 1980s, of
the worst excesses of the 1980s. He is very much a product of the place he is from, it is
Thatcherismn ten years on.
So if your spirit ever flags, if ever you have got any self doubt, if any self doubt creeps
into your hearts and minds, or if you ever wondered whether it is all worth it, just read one
of John Hewson's latest speeches and you will understand, it is. You will understand that
we have got now a conservative, a radical conservative who is going to try and wipe away
a century of social change, a century of industrial progress, a century of social policy and
try to take Australia back to some level of social impoverishment where only basically the
fittest survive. This is what he is about. Never in the last 25 years, in my time in politics,
has there been a greater opportunity for Labor to show what it is made of, and to make a
difference to them that we believe, in essence, economies that can produce the goods, one
that can reduce employment, one it can produce wealth. But also we believe in having
the right to a hospital bed if you are sick, the right to a school and a university if you are a
poor kid, the right to support if you're aged. All these things we believe in, because we
are a tradition. 
That's why we come along here tonight. We've got our political difficulties, we know
that. But we are the people who make the Australian history. We are the ones who
nominate the heroes, we anoint the heroes of Australia, we set the ethos of Australia our
Party, our Labor Party. And we are here, we have got our troubles but we are not sad, we
are happy with ourselves, we sleep well at night, we know we always try to do what is
good and what is best. We are into good work and good things for altruistic reasons. And
we are as we are now because other good people did other good things, in our case
years ago. And those Ministers who are here tonight, that I had the privilege of serving
with for just three weeks Mick said he would have given a fortune just to be in there for
three days but to all of those who blazed the trail and took the blow torch on the belly
from the Conservatives, we owe them a debt of gratitude. It is a nice thing for us to
remember them, remember them well, appreciate them, take them to our heart and say
thank you.
And that is what we are doing Gough, we are saying thank you to your Ministers, and we
arc saying thank you to you. We are saying thank you to you because you did take us out
of the Conservative torpor. You did relight the fire of Australian nationalism You taught
neo-Australian's to be something different, to be something to be proud of, an identity of
our own and for that of course we owe you eternal gratitude. And this Government will
do all it can to keep faith with those great ideals. So it is with the utmost of pleasure that I
introduce you, although you need no introduction to this audience, as the person who put
Labor back together, who made Labor relative again, and gave us a chance to show our
social and economic paces of the ' 80s and ' 90s and to make Australia in our image, the
image of a caring party, of a caring society, but one which is productive enough to hold its
head up to the world in clothing, feeding and housing people. We owe you a great debt
and I am sure all of us here tonight appreciate what you have done, you and Margaret,
who fought beside you for all those years and put up with you all those years. We owe
you a great debt of gratitude and it is a nice thing that we have come together to remember
you, to appreciate you and to applaud you.
ENDS 



S TEL: 31. Aug. 92 10: 42 No .001 P. 01/ i
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING MI', TO
THlE INTERNATIONAL INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS ASSOCIATION
NINTH WORLD CONGRESS, SYDNEY, 31 AUGUST 1992
A NEW CHARTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN AUSTRALIA
It's appropriate indeed that Australia is ablc to host this ninth congress of industrial
relations experts, because we have quite an intcresting story to tell you about where
we have come from in our industrial relations, where we are now, and where wc are
going.. As you know, the way a country runs its industrial relations, the way the interests of
employees and employers are reconciled, the way in which a country handles
change in the workplace, tell you a great deal about that country.
The industrial relalionship is the key one in the working lives of most people. t can
be a great strength or a great weakness.
For well over a century Australia has attracted the interest and curiosity of
practitioners and theorists of industrial relations. In the great constitutional debates
of the 1890' s our founding fathers gave the proposed Commonwvealth a power to
settle interstate industrial disputes by conciliation and arbitration. When we
became a nation in 1901 one of the first things we did was to set up a
Commonwealth tribunal which could exercise this powver to settle disputes a
power which rapidly became one of setting wa~ ges and conditions directly or by
example for most Australian employees.
It was a system which served Australia quite well I think, but the news I have to
deliver today to those of our visitors who still think Australian industrial relations is
run this way, is that it is finished. Not only is the old system finished, but we are
rapidly phasing out its replacement, and have now begun to do things in a new way. 
EL: 31. Aug. 92 10: 42 No. 001 P. 02/ 1l'
2
When we arrived in office in 1983 the old system was clearly on its last legs.
Inflation was running at 11.5 pcr cent. We were exhausted by industrial warfare.
The profit sharc had been squeezed down. Manufacturing was being obliterated.
Unemployment was still rising, and of course thc economy was in thc trough of a
recession. All this was happening behind high tariff barriers and a fixed exchange rate, with a
current account deficit in the early eighties nearly twice the size as a proportion of
GDP it is today, and the starting point deficit we inhcrited for our first budget
heading towards 5 per cent of GDP.
So it was a rough time.
The Arbitration Commission was doing its best but it had just about run out of
possibilities. Every principle had got a run at one time or another basic wage,
total wage, relativitics, work valuc, absorption, non absorptions, flow ons, no flow
ons, indexation, no indexation, minimums and maximums, industry decisions and
national decisions.
Every principle, except the simplc and straightforward principle of working
together to find outcomes which left us all better off.
Every procedure, except the procedure of finding a national consensus, arrived at
with the full participation, the full authority and prestige of the national government
as well as the industrial parties.
The only thing we had going for us was that the trade unions and employers had
reluctantly come to see that it couldn't go on the way it had.
We also had a very enlightened central leadership in the union movement, and a
Prime Minister whose entire suite of talents developed during a long and eventful
career were ideally fittcd to the task of conducting a national summit to reconcile
the waring industrial parties.
So we entered an Accord with the national federation of trade unions, which in this
country is called the ACTU.
In one way or another the Accord has been essential to the favourable outcomes we
were able to make over then'ext dfecade.
TEL 
TEL: 3
Over the eighties the Accord agreements were frequently changed and renegotiated,
because the world changed rapidly around us, and there was good will on both sides
that allowed us to keep the agreement flexible.
By the end of the eightics we had agrccd on a principle of keeping wage
movements competitive with our trading partners. We had also agreed on the
principle of what we called a " social wage".
By this we mean that where the government puts in health care, family assistance,
quality education, income support for the disadvantaged and so forth, these too
should be considered part of the Accord compact part of the deal between the
Australian government and Australian cmployees.
This idea of the " social wage" is the key to understanding the way our Accord
works. While we focused wage movements on a central determination of the full bench of
the Australian Industrial Relations Commission, all the industrial parties the
unions, the government, the employers and thc Commission rapidly went about
the job of preparing the ground for far bigger changes to come.
We pressed for the amalgamation of unions. In the last six years we have halved
the number of federally registered unions. We pressed for the simplification and
renovation of awards, so that today there are fewer categories, fewer demarcation
disputes, fewer gradations. We urged unions to use a single bargaining unit in
negotiations, so that even where there was more than one union, all unions would
consent to one agreemcent. We encouraged a review of minimum rates, so that the
relationships between the minimum wages of different skills levels and so forth
were looked at again and brought up to date.
While that was going on in the industrial system, we were also changing the
structure of our economy.
Remember in 1983 we had a fixed exchange rate, high tariffs, high inflation, low
profits and a recent history of warfare in industry. But by the late eighties and early
nineties things were very different.
We had had years of experience with a floating dollar. We had deregulated finance.
We had put the government business enterprises on a commercial footing, so they
had to make commercial decisions about pay increases. We had begun to reduce
industry protection, and we had announced that protection would be reduced
through the nineties, so the pressure would remain on for increasing efficiency and
TELJ: A8-1. 9 10: 42 No. COO1-T. 2J 
TEL 4
competitiveness. We had seen that we had to internationalise our economy to
preserve and enhance our living standards, and we could only successfully
internationalise if we became more competitive.
You might say that the whole climate and culture changed.
We began to see results.
By thc latcecighties we had restored the profit share. We had increased
emplomentby one fifth the fastest cmployment growth in the OECD. We had
began to change the industrial composition, so that manufacturing output was more
than a third greater at the beginning of the nineties than it had been when we came
to office.
Wc also had evidence that we were beginning to successfully internationalise.
Because of very moderate wage growth our competitiveness against other countries
had increased by one tenth._ Exports had doubled, and manufacturing and service
exports had tripled. More and more of our exports were going to Asian markets,
locking us in to the fastest growing region of the world.
And while all that was going on, industrial disputes for which this country was
once notorious dwindled away. Last year we had the lowest number of disputes
for thirty years.
We did all this while also extending universal health care, child care, and funding a
great explosion in education opportunities. And we did it while bringing both
government spending and taxes down, so that we ended up with one of the lowest
ratio of both spending and taxcs to GDP in the whole OECD.
These were all very big changes, so big that we are only now beginning to realise
what has happened. As even one of our critics conceded on the weekend it has
actually happened. He wrote that it sounds like a lot of political puff, but the funny
thing is that it has actually happened. It's actually there. Exports really are at 23
per cent of GDP. Just shy of a quarter of everything we produce in this country is
now sold abroad. We really have tripled manufacturing and service exports. We
really havc had our greatest exporting successes in recent years with elaborately
transformed manufactures like motor vehicles, boats, electrical equipment and
industrial machinery. It's all there, it's all real, and if we don't throw it way it will
continue and get better. TEL: 1~ 03: 142. flNuo. gU. U912 '-U' 4/ 11 
TEL: 31. Aug. 92 10: 42 NcvUU1 F-. Ut' 171
These were the successful results, but more importantly for the way Australia
works was the fact that we had by the beginning of' thc nineties accumulated nearly
a decade's experience with the Accord. We trusted each other. The ACThJ has
always delivered on its commitments. We found that the Accord stood up not only
in hard times, but also in good times. In the early eighties boom money wages
increased 20 per cent. When we went through a boom in the late eighties money
wages increased by less than a third of that. We came out of the recession of
1982/ 83 with inflation at 11.5 per cent. We are coming out of recession this time
with inflation under 2 per cent.
All this meant we were ready for another change.
We had always recognised that we could not indefinitely focus all wage movements
in a uniform movement. We had always recognised that the price of bringing
inflation down and employment up through adjusting wages mainly in a single
national decision would be some loss of flexibility which we would later wish to
recover. So a few years ago we began putting in place a transition to a much more
flexible system, under which the vast majority of decisions over wages and working
practices would bc made at the workplace level, often within an industry
framework. Four years ago we amended the law under which the AJRC operates to
allow thc certification of agreements. In a speech in Melbourne in 1989, 1
foreshadowed the switch, and in our submissions to the national wage case in 1990
and 1991 we argued for the introduction of workplace bargaining based on
productivity increases. The AIRC queried us at first but late last year it cleared the
obstacle, and this year we have amended the act to encourage the making of
workplace bargains throughout the country.
So now we arc quite firmly entering a new era.
In the last couple of years we have had more change in the workplace than in
decades before. We have a couple of hundred agreements registered already, and
there are many more coming forward. We have now got some very good examples
of where we want the whole system to go agreements made by Sheraton, Toyota,
GMH Holden, Email, Concrete Constructions and Southern Aluminium, to mention
a few. All told we have many more people here working under registered
enterprise agreements than under registered employment contracts in the New
Zealand. We will about double that number when we bring the Australian Public
Service into workplace bargains, and the Minister for Industrial Relations Peter
Cook has already opened negotiations to do just that. 
TEL:--31. flug. 92 10: 42 No. UU1 I'-UO/ 11
6
By this timc next year wc will have half the workforce under workplace bargains,
and within a few years it will be the characteristic, the usual, the normal way in
which our industrial relations arc conducted.
Bargaining is the way, but arching over it we have an agreement with the ACTIJ
that wage increases will be consistent with keeping our inflation rate comparable
with our trading partners. This is a very important commitment, which entrenches
our very low inflation rate, and our competitiveness. It's an agreement we can rely
on one with teeth. The union movement has the ability to control the timing and
extcnt of claims. And we as a government have already said that our commitment
to superannuation increases over the decade, and to general minimum wage
inceases from time to time, would bc reconsidered if wages growth started to
outrun the level compatible with low inflation.
Frankly, I think we could run into big trouble if we press ahead with workplace
bargaining without an agreement on inflation.
Those who think workplace bargaining can be carried out without an agreement on
restraining inflation are, I think, naive.
Not only would we lose our very low inflation, but in the attempt to get it back
government then has to depend on high interest rates to counter inflationary wage
increases. This inevitably leads to higher unemployment.
In this new system there remains an important role for the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission in setting minimum rates in awards, and in so doing
providing a safety net below which employees cannot fall. It will also have an
important role in helping the parties to reach enterprise or industry agreements, in
vetting single cnterprise agreements to make sure the employees have not been
disadvantaged, and in vetting agreements which go beyond a single enterprise to
make sure they are based on genuine productivity enhancements and relate to an
industry rather than an to a craft or occupation.
As the Commission reviews its guiding principles this year, we will be putting to it
that it should adopt this role.
So we are entering a whole new chapter in the long story of industrial relations in
Australia. But sometime before May next year we will also have to make a choice.
A choice of great consequence for our future. 
T3EL1:. Ruy. 92 10: 42 No. 001 P. 07/ 11
7
1 have to get a little trenchant here, a little partisan, but I know you people in the
industrial relations world are quite comfortable with a spirited debate.
You have enough cxperience to know that industrial relations goes right to the heart
of what a country is about.
This decision will rnot be about whether we switch to a system where employers
and employees and their unions reach bargains in their workplace or industry.
That is something we are already doing.
It is not a dccision about whether wage changes should bc based on productivity
movements, and on the mutual exploitation of productivity gains arising from
changes in work practices.
Again, that is something we are already doing.
The real choice we must make in this country is between continuing a cooperative
approach which has brought important, tangible and unquestionable benefits, or
forcing employers and their employees into an industrial war from which neither
would gain.
The choice is whether we keep low inflation or throw it away.
Whether we have an Accord or not.
Whether we have a safety net for the poorly paid or not.
Whcther people are forced off current awards without having a say or not.
Whether they can count on their leave entitlements and their pay packet or not.
Whether we have a quick and casy means of enforcing agreements or not.
Whether we have ati umpire to make sure workplace agreements are fair and that
people are not coerccd into bad deals or not.
Whether employees are guaranteed rising superannuation contributions made by
employers on their behalf through this decade or not.
Whether we should accept a government responsibility to train the young and
retrain adults or not. TEL 
T3E1L : Rug. IO 4 2 N 0 0 1F UT5 I
8
Whether peoplc genuinely secking work should have incomne sport if they need it
for as long as they need it or not.
Whether we should press ahead with first order reforms like increasing productivity
at the workplace and enhancing the quality of our workforce, or whether we should
instead go the way of tenth order bogus reforms, like a consumption tax.
These are the choices, and today I want to state quite unequivocally where my
government stands.
I want to offer a charter for the new era in industrial relations.
In this charter I will make these undertakings on behalf of the Australian
govcrnment. We undertake to maintain the inflation agreement with the ACTU, so that inflation
in this country never again gets out of line with inflation in our trading partners, and
the products of Australian industry remain competitive in world markets.
We undertake to keep a safety net under the low paid and the poorly organised.
We undertake to make sure workplace agreements are fair.
We undertake to enforce agreements with simple procedures.
We undertake not to force employees off awards.
We undertake to allow employees to be covered by their unions.
We undertake to train the young and retrain adults, to enhance our skills and the
quality of our workforce.
We undertake to build secure and comfortable retirements for Australian
employees, and to build Australian saving, by increasing the superannuation
guarantee throughout this decade.
We undertake to provide an unquestioned right to income support to people who
are genuinely seeking work, and to provide training and restraining programs for all
who can benefit from them.
TEL 
TEL: 31. FAug. 92 10: 42 No. OU1 -U' 1
9
We undertake to not introduce a consumption tax, and wc undertake to fulfill our
commitment to dramatically reduce the marginal tax rate on the income of most
employees. And we undertake to take care of people to help working families with good child
care, goad education and quality health care.
What this charter comes down to is this.
We will not belittle Australians in their working lives.
We will not take away their rights in the factories shops and offices where they
spend at least a third and often well over half of their waking hours.
We will not cancel their say about how their work is organised and how it is
rewarded. We will not prcpare for the 2 1st century by reinvoking thc rules and relationships
of the 19th century.
In our pursuit of economic efficiency, of greater output, we will not lose sight of
the fact that we want greater output, greater efficiency, only as a means of
improving the quality of our lives not at the expense of the quality of our lives,
No doubt many of you who arrived over the weekend have had a chance to look
around our lovely harbour here, and see some of the splcndours of waterfront
Sydney. In a little while you'll be seeing a video of Sydney, which will show you more of
the glamorous bits.
But if you really want to see what this country is about, how we really live and
what we really aspire to if you want to understand why the choice we are going to
make will so important to this country I suggest you get on a train to a suburb like
Bankstown. Bankstown is where my family comes from, where I grew up, where I've spent
most of my adult ycars. I represent Bankstown in Parliament. 
T: 31. Rug9.92 1O: 42 No. UUI F-7I1JTP--
If you go therc you'll see it is very big suburb of simple family homcs, most with a
garden. You'll see people of Anglo and Trish descent like my family, but these days
you'll also see people from Italy and Greece, China and Vietnam, Turkey and
Lebanon, all getting on reasonably well. You wont see spectacular sights like the
harbour, but you will see churches and community centres, hospitals and clinics,
public swimming pools and playing fields.
This is suburban Australia, which is where most Australians live, but it is not
wealthy or privileged or clitist.
It's a good life out there for most peoplc, with good houses, good schools and good
medical care and access to good colleges for kids who want to go on. Thcre is child
care for working families, and quality treatment for everyone in public hospitals.
Thcre is more unemployment there now than we arc prepared to accept, but we are
rapidly expanding training schemes for unemployed youngsters, and retraining
schemes for unemployed adults, and we are funding projects in the local
community which can employ people quickly, while the economic expansion now
underway comes through to provide long term jobs.
It's safe by the standards most cities, and it's a neighbourhood where people still
look out for one another.
It's a world which has changed a lot over the last decade new factories being
built, old ones being closed.
Children moving off into new occupations in the -service industries, which their
parents would not have dreamed of. Much more pressure to compete and be
successful at school and at college or university. Much more pressure to match the
best the world can produce.
It's been a tough decade in many respects, one in which the economy has imposed
many new demands.
But part of the deal has always been that working people in places like Bankstown
have some control in their working lives, some predictability, some assurance that
their pay packets and conditions will be protected.
Some assurance that they and their families can rely on good health care, good
education and safe neighbourhoods.
These things are all part of what I said earlier was our " social wage".
TEL 
TEL: 11
They are all part of the compact the Australian government has made with
Australian employees.
As I say Bankstown is not a place for spectacular scenery, but what we have out
there are things we value very highly, things we are prcparcd to work hard for and
keep for our children.
Things we will not lightly throw away.
Things Australians have worked hard for, and which this government will fight to
protect. They are things the charter I have announced today is designed to safeguard.
351. Hug. 32 1U: 4z2 NO. UUI r. ii/ ii 



TEL: 1. Sep. 92 14: 12 No. 009 P. 01/ 03
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LUNCH IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER SITIVENI RABUKA OF FIJI
CANBERRA, 1 SEPTEMBER 1992
Prime Minister, Mrs Rabuka, Foreign Minister Bole, Your
Excellencies, distinguished guests.
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you, Prime
minister, on your first visit to Australia as Prime
Minister. Mrs Rabuka, I am also delighted to welcome you.
The friendship between our two countries is a tradition.
It is a friendship of trust and cooperation.
The formal relationship goes back to 1964 when
Australia's first post was established in Suva. This
became our High Commission upon your independence in
1970.
Our commercial and business connections go back much
further, to the last decades of the nineteenth century
when we were all. British colonies.
As a close neighbour, over the years we have watched your
development as an independent nation and major player in
South Pacific affairs.
Strong ties have evolved between us in so many areas.
They have stood the test of time, and the test of
politics and the test of rugby.
Prime Minister we followed Fiji's recent elections with
interest and we were impressed with your conciliato'ry
statements after your appointment.
Your Prime Ministership marks a new beginning in Fiji's
political life, and with it the new hope that accompanies
a renewal of representative and responsible government. 
TEL: 1 . Sep .92 14 : 12 NO.-009 -P. 02/ 03-
2
It also marks the beginning of a new phase in our
relations. Relations between Australia and Fiji have been fully
normalised following our meeting in Honiara last July.
The final step in the process was our agreement to resume
defence links.
Australia looks forward to working with you once more to
strengthen the security of our region.
Security requires not only defence preparedness and
cooperation, but also internal security and domestic
stability.
We are greatly encouraged by the assurances you have
given that you are resolved to maintain dialogue with 811
communities in Fiji, and to further expand opportunities
and political participation.
Just as we welcome your commitment to national
reconciliation, we are impressed by your pursuit of
economic and trade reform.
We In Australia have been engaged in this process for a
decade. The effort to make Australia a more efficient and
competitive economy is not without its costs.
But the effort had to be made and we are now seeing
some of the benefits.
The Australian economy has been transformed: it is more
flexible, more open to the world, and much more oriented
to the Asia-PacifiC region where our future substantially
lies. Prime minister, in the last three years we have witnessed
a transformation in international affairs unequalled
since the end of World War 11.
Most nations are coming to realise that cooperation,
trust and closer integration provide the only sure road
to peace and prosperity.
Events in the Balkans, the Middle East and the Horn of
Africa confirm this by their tragic negative example.
Fiji has made an outstanding contribution to the cause of
international peace over many years and in many centres
of civil and international conflict.
Fijians have served witii distinction in peace-keeping
operations in Lebanon, Afghanistan and Pakistan, Namibia,
the Sinai and Iraq. 
TEL: 1. sep.' 92 14: 12 No. OU9 Id-. 6/ U~
3
On several occasions, Australian and Fijian troops and
personnel have served side by side.
In the United Nations and in other forumsf Fiji has
contributed as a responsible member of the international
community. In the Asia-Pacific region too, there is an opportunity
to constructively contribute to development and
prosperity.
We can only do so, however, in partnership.
After our discussions in Honiara and again this morning,
Prime Minister, I know that our relationship is renewed
on a basis of equality and respect.
In the years ahead it will be strengthened in such areas
as trade, development assistance and defence.
In whatever ways are practical, Australia is ready to
help Fiji achieve balanced, sustainable economic
development.
We will continue to cooperate in such multilateral bodies
as the South Pacific Forum, the South Pacific Commission
and United Nations.
Mr Prime Minister, let me say again how pleased I am to
welcome you and your party to Australia.
I trust that what remains of your stay will be pleasant
and productive.
I now invite Senator Robert Hill, representing the Leader
of the Opposition, to Join me in this welcome.
Thank you.
CANBERRA 1 September 1992 



PRIINMEI S6E
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP
EMPLOYER OF THE YEAR AWARDS, 7 SEPTEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I em very pleased to be here for the presentation of the
Prime Minister's Employer of the Year Awards. Thank~ you
all for coming.
You will often hear from our side of politics the term
" 1social net" by which we mean the protection of those
who for any reason need protection or assistance, who
live and work at a disadvantage.
We think the " social net" is a measure of how civilised
we are.
I think the term is sometimes misunderstood.
It is not merely a social backstop. It is not socially
inactive or passive.
Increasingly in the last decade, Australians have
developed creative programs, which are valuable both to
the individual and society at large.
And I think we have come to recognise in Australia that
such programs are m~ ore than a measure of our progress
towards a good society they actively propel us along
that path.
They give us all a bit more strength.
We are here today to congratulate employers who have
given new lob opportunities to people with disabilities.
People who have been given these opportunities speak of
the enormous boost to their confidence and self-esteem,
the sense of independence and self-reliance they gain
things which are basic to all of us.
We're here to congratulate employers who have made this
possible but we also owe them our thanks. z&gt; tp -j' 6 10 -Uj Imu F V I, V_, 
TEL: (. bep., jz i,; UZ NO. uu' r. uLIuj
2
Because in doing these things, it seems to me, we j.
grow in self-esteem, and confidence, and self-reliance.
We make Australia a better place to live when we do them.
Ladies and gentlemen
1992 marks the end of the United Nations International
Decade of disabled pe~ rsons,' so it is appropriate, I
think, to briefly" outlfiie how the Commonwealth Government
has been living up to its responsibilities.
In 1987 we took an historic first step towards overcoming
the barriers faced by Australians with disabilities, with
the introduction of theDisabilityServices Act.
The Act has provided both a significant catalyst for
change and a set of principles and objectives to strive
for. it took the needs of people with disablities out of the
realms of protective charity and into those of social
policy. It made segregation in accomodation and employment a
thing of the past.
The Disability Services Act established two new
employment models:
competitive employment and training agencies which
enable people with disabilities to earn a full wage
and
supported employment services for those people who
require additional training and support.
I'm pleased to say that many of the employers who have
been nominated for these awards'have received assistance
from services funded under the Act.
The introduction late last year of theDisabilityReform.
Package extends our initiative to provide adequate
assistance for those who are unable to compete in the
labour market, while also providing opportunities and
encouragement for those who have potential for
employment. Ladies and gentlemen
Today I am proud to advise you that the Disability
Di~ scrimnration Bill has passed through the House of
Representatives.. Under the legislat. on, people with disabilities who
experience discrimination in employment will be able to
make a complaint to the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission. 
I LL 3
The Disability Discrimination Bill will complement
existing State laws in the area of physical, intellectual
and psychiatric disability, and extend to people with
disabilities similar rights and opportunities as are
enjoyed by Australians generally.
I am also pleased to say that, despite the tight fiscal
environment? in this year's Budget we announced a package
of assistance to address the additional costs of
disability. We have come a long way in this Decade of Disabled
Persons. But new challenges emerge.
We need to provide support for people commensurate
with their needs.
We need to address more comprehensively people with
psychiatric disabilities people who in the past
have suffered from very considerable neglect.
We need to generate employment and activity
opportunities for people currently in sheltered
workshops. We need to facilitate the successful transition of
young people with disabilities from school into the
workforce or further training.
The Government is committed to ensuring that young people
with disabilities obtain their share of access to the
employment and training places announced in the
Government's Youth Statement, Young Australians.
There are of course no easy or quick solutions but, in
view of what has been achieved so far, I am confident
that imagination and sustained cooperative effort can
take us a long way.
Our success has proved the value of cooperation between
the Commonwealth Government and its departments, State
governments, organisations representing people with
disabilities, service providers, employers and unions.
I am pleased that many of these bodies are represented
here and I welcome them all.
In particular, I want to thank Ian Spicer and Martin
Ferguson. Their presence acknowledges the work which employers and
unions have been doing jointly ani1 individually to raise
the awareness of their members about the capacities and
the largely untapped potential of people with
disabilities. &gt; ep ' JZ III U I %. IV I 
TEL 4
Ladies and Gentlemen
Today we can celebrate the achievements of many hundreds
of Australians who are turning our ideal into a reality.
Australia's achievements in the area of disability
legislation, programs and financial assistance have
placed us in the forefront of international development
in this area.
Australia received recognition and praise at the
Independence ' 92 Congress in Vancouver last year.
As I have said on more than one occasion in recent
months, these difficult economic times we have been
through, and the economic challenges we face, do not
constitute a reason for discounting our social
achievements or our social goals.
Ladies and Gentlemen
Let me thank on your behalf the selection panel who face
the difficult task of choosing the finalists from shortlists
from each State and Territory and the Comxnownwealth
and who also insisted on examining all the entrants, not
only those who were short-listed.
Finally, let me say something about the employers who
have been nominated for these awards.
Among the significant features of the nominations were
the full award wages and conditions under which
people are employed.
the willingness of employers to modify the workplace
the level of integration into the workplace of
employees with a disability, and
the expanding of job profiles of workers to allow
them the training and supervision necessary to
perform more complex tasks in the organisations.
A wide variety of occupations and industries are
The success stories include a customer service
operator, an apprentice upholsterer, a fast food kitchenhand,
a horticultural employee, and office work in
architectural and engineering firms to name just a few.
Ladles and Gentlemen
On behalf of everyone here I want to congratulate all the
employers nominated for these awards. TEL Sep 92 15: Ut) NO . UU3 r. u4/ uz) 
I LL: ñ. iii I'L
9
It might well be said, beyond the recognition we afford
them today, the most satisfying return on their efforts
lies in the words of some of those people they have
helped. For instance, one man with a severe physical disability
has said: " I feel proud of myself. Since becoming financially
independent, I have been able to help other people,"
Another said: " before, when I wasn't working I was more
frightened to go out but now I am more secure and
self-confident."
And a young man with an intellectual disability has
remarked on how much better the experience of working is
compared to social security:
" People still have the right to have a Job, he said,
to do things like other people. With 8 job you can
plan things you want to do with your life instead of
relying on other people."
Ladies and Gentlemen-
I now ask my colleague the Minister for Health, Housing
and Community Services, Mr Brian Howe, to Call upon the
State and Commonwealth winners to come forward and
receive their awards. 



/ 0
EMBARGOED: 6pm, 12 September 1992
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON V. 3. KEATING, MP
CHIFLEY MEMORIAL LECTrURE, 12 SEPTEMBER 1992
It is a privilege to be asked to speak to you tonight in
honour of one of the very great men of Australian Labor
one of the great men of Australian history.
It is a particular privilege to speak here in Bathurst,
the town with which the name Ben Chit ley will forever be
identified. It is a privilege to come after him, and it is with a
sense of some humility that I find myself standing here
in the town where an author of our ambitions lived.
Labor's ambitions. Australia's ambitions.
For me this occasion is the more momentous because Just
now we Australians face a decade in which the fate of our
ambitions hangs in the balance.
Ladies and gentlemen
Let me preface this address by saying something very
simple. I believe that Australia is a Country of extraordinary
achievements and equally extraordinary potential.
I believe Australians are people of rare quality.
And I believe that in the next few years, despite the
difficulties and the unc~ rtainties, Australia will
triumph. I feel the need to say this to counter the doomsayers on
the other side of politics who seem determined to
belittle both our achievements and our prospects.
That's why I feel the nead to say it at a time when wQ
have both a need and a right to feel confident, it is, to
say the least strange to hear our altern.. tive leaders
call Australians " lazy" and " embarrassing".*
That's why I feel the need to say it. 
74 2
And I know I am right whben I say it.
I will tell you why.
I have watched this last decade as Australia grasped the
nettle as no other developed country did.
I have watched Australians radically transform their
industrial culture, vastly increase their productivity
and pull the country up to levels of competitiveness
unimaginable a decade ago.
Internationally competitive levels.
I have seen them accept the necessity for structural
change. That is what has convinced me that we will succeed.
SU. cs is what convinces mne.
Never have we worked harder and made more progress
towards the reali-Sation Of our ambitions than we have in
the last decade.
Never have we had such an opportunity to reap the rewards
and deliver them to future generations than we have in
the next decade.
And never has all this work and all this hope been so
threatened as it is now.
I am talking about our ambitions for an enlarged and
enlightened social democracy.
An Australia in which energy and opportunity flourish,
where faith in oursslves and our country abounds, and the
nation's capacity to care for a11 its citizens is
paramount. It seems to me that if the last is not true the first two
must also be false.
These, Ben Chifley said, were the things worth fighting
for. The primacy of social justice, social cohesion,
equal opportunity the fair go.
They seem to me to be immutable facts of our nature.
Nothing has moved them in 100 years.
War, depression, booms and busts, outbursts of imperial
jingoism, cold war, cultural invasions of various kinds,
have all at times challenged these beliefs: but they hL~ ve
always re-emerged often in the shape of men like Ben
Chifley. 
The longer I stay in public life, the more Australians I
meet, the more I am convinced that the values of this
country were written by the people, by working people.
And that is their strength.
That is why they won't be sold. Those people who
presently want to change them will find implacable
resistance. As a Labor Government, we believe that so long as we
honour those principles, and push on towards our social
democratic goals, even in the face of this recession and
the damage it has caused, Australians will stay with us.
Whenever the duties of his office allowed him, Ben
Chifley used to drive up here from Canberra.
Modern Prime Ministers might envy him both the contact
with the natural landscape and the chance it gave for
reflection. If a man was ever going to see a Light on the Hill this
was the way to do it.
As he drove along and the sun set over the western plains
the " vision splendid of Australia Unlimited" must have
seemed as good as real.
Many things have changed. The Australia Chifley knew was
a vastly different country.
But moro than four decados on, Son Chifley's vision
remains, to a remarkable extent, our own.
He was a nation builder.
As we are nation builders.
His great projects in the national interest, like the
Snowy Mountains Scheme, are our One Nation: our $ 500
million National Standard Gauge Rail Highway linking
Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth, and
linking ports, rail and roads; our $ 2 billion dollar
development of the nation's roads: our reforms to
aviation: our National Electricity Grid.
The immigration policy developed in Chifley's time the
most profound social undertaking in our history is
continued in the multicultural policies developed in
ours, the most successful policies of their kind anywhere
in the world.
Chifley was a social reformer.
AS we are social reformers. 
His reforms to the health system and social security, are
our Medicare, and our broad network of social programs
developed in the past decade which are at least the equal
of the most advanced nations on earth.
Ban Chifley believed there was a role for government.
So do we we assert it.
His car industry is our car industry.
Much more modern, changing but the same one.
Ban Chifley saw an Australia which was too dependent on
its primary products, too dependent on Britain for its
trade, too short of capital and skills.
Like us, he believed we had to diversify our industry,
look to new markets for our products, raise our capital
and skills base.
We have done these things like no government before us.
Were he here now, in 1992, the Superannuation Guarantee,
the creation of the Australian National Training
Authority, the enormous growth in universities and
secondary education retention rates, would all be music
to his ears.
So too would be the rapid growth in the last decade of
our manufacturing exports which, for the first time in
our history, now exceed the volume of our exports of
minerals and primary produce.
Ben Chifley would be pleased to see that we are making
things for the world to buy, for he knew that this was a
great measure of our progress.
Chifley believed in the principle of gathering all our
strength and all our resources towards a common national
purpose. He had served in that wartime government which, through
cooperation with business and the unions, and through
calling on the best feelings of Australians, set and
achieved national goals.
One Nation is in that tradition.
The Accord is in that tradition.
The lowest number of strike~ s in thirty years is in that
tradition. 
In that tradition we have called on Australians to adopt
the principle of partnership between the various tiers
of government, between businass and unions and
communities so that all Australians may participate and
all their energies go toward the common national cause.
Our guiding philosophy is social democratic, by which I
mean democracy of the broadest kind: the maximization of
rights and liberties, the extension of both individual
opportunity and social justice.
In this we are right. Look at the world. The successful
countries are those which have followed this path.
The successful economies have been free market economies:
the successful societies have been those which have
combined this with democratic freedoms and sophisticated
integrated csniaI programs.
They have invested in their own ciuItura. 1 development.
They have cushioned the impact of economic change by not
losing sight of their responsibility to people.
Communism has failed. Less spectacular but no less
emphatic has been the failure of monetarism and laissez
faire economics: under all its appellations
Thatcherite, Reagan and Rogernomic.
It's no accident perhaps that they have both gone down
the same historical chute.
Both have a strain of fanaticism. Both are regressive
and both regress to nineteenth century pseudo-scientific
ideals. Both have failed and if the Liberal Party thinks that
it will succeed in the 1990s in the hands of a Social
Darwinist with new batteries they are wrong.
Desperately wrong. Again.
And we might ask ourselves why it is that the past has
such a magnetic attraction for our conservatives.
Why it is in their nature to frequently advance to the
rear. Why Bob Menzies was drawn to the British Empire long
after it had turned up its toes, and John Howard in turn
is drawn to Menzies and the torpor, wastod
opportunities and withering of our culture in the Menzies
era. 
Recognising that Menzies was a bit of a socialist by his
own radical right standards, John Hewson finds he must go
even further back for his ideals to the economic and
social thinking of early industrial capitalism albeit
re-constituted and disgorged in the textbooks of the
business schools of the late seventies.
Why is he attracted to these models which caused such
damage to the fabric of the societies in which they were
applied?
Why, for instance, in a society with one of the most
sophisticated social security systems in the world, does
he want to introduce measures characteristic of societies
in decay?
Why does he say that if we reach back to help the
underprivileged they will rdrag Lis down?
Why, in the last decade of the twentieth century does he
utter the sentiments of the first half of the nineteenth?
Why, if not because he holds ordinary Australians in
contempt?
Why does he paint the efforts of Australians as feeble?
Why do they embarrass him? Why does he paint our
progress as the opposite of progress?
Why does he attack successful Australian businesses as if
they were failures?
Why, as Australians march bravely toward the future does
Dr Hewson point back toward a wasteland and shout
There. Go therel?
Why, if not because he has no vision, only ideology?
Why, if not because he is fanatical?
I have always believed that the Labor Party and Labor
Governments should keep their shoulders against the door.
Reform is what we are here for.
But we are for change anid continuity.
We press forward, but we take society with us.
We build, but we don't destroy.
In the last decade we Australians have learned something
about the art of gathering our resources, about
cooperation, partnership, working together. Principles
which have been fundamental to the success of other
countries, and fundamental to the successas we have had. 
In this decade I think we must take those principles
further. I think that we owe it to this and succeeding generations
of Australians to see that an identity entirely our own
has a chance to flourish.
To see that we give these generations the opportunity to
choose those institutions and symbols which reflect their
sentiments and their reality, and not those of a bygone
era. To see that faith in this Australia this liberal,
democratic, tolerant, diverse, independent Australia
has a chance to grow.
I believe we would be derelict in our duty to the future
if we did not give the Australians of this post-imperial,
multicultural stage in our history the same opportunity
as those of a century ago.
I believe it would energise us, I believe it would give
us new faith and inspiration, I believe it would
guarantee the life of our best traditions and
institutions.
And I think we should have the courage to open the debate
on the institutions and symbols of our nationhood.
As I have said, many of the things we have done Ben
Chifley would have hoped to do.
But we have done more than that we've done things in
social, industrial and economic policy beyond the compass
of his imagination.
We have developed policies to benefit Australian women
which have put Australia back in the vanguard of
international progress where we used to be in the days
when Australia was regarded as perhaps the most socially
advanced nation in the world.
Labor has put increasing opportunity and choice for women
back in the centre of social reform.
For example, since 1983, of the 1.5 million new jobs
created 64 per cent or about two thirds have been filled
by women.
And Labor has supported them.
In the last few years our equal pay strategy has narrowed
the gap between men's and women's earnings.
On average women now earn 83 cents for every dollar
earned by men a marked improvement on the 67 cents when
we came to power. 
Our affirmative action policies are encouraging employers
to increase women's job opportunities.
Labor has supported women through a fivefold increasa in
the number of child care pieces; through improved access
to superannuation; improved access to education;
increased income Support for families; special programs
addressing women's health needs.
Labor has legislated to protect women against
discrimination. In fact, the United Nations Commission on the Status of
Women declared this year that Australia leads the world
in the implementation of programs to eliminate
discrimination against women.
We will build on these achievements we always build.
Our opponents want to undo them they always want to
undo thoem.
They will abolish the Affirmative Action Agency and the
Equal Pay Unit.
Through their consumption tax they will tax the household
budget for which women are generally responsible. it is
a tax on food, clothing and pharmaceuticals just for a
start. They will tax child care, and they make no commitment to
maintaining fee relief, nor to expanding the number of
places. And under the Coalition's enterprise bargaining system,
women in the workforce can expect their earnings to
erode. Without the protection of the Tndustrial Relations
Commission, which our workplace bargaining system
guarantees, women workers will see their pay relative to
men reduced to the levels existing when we came to
office. That is what happens in the United States, where a
decentralised wages system has kept women's earnings to
less than 70 cents for every dollar earned by men.
The Coalition will reduce support for women. They will
take away eligibility for their family allowance from
100,000 families. Stop paying wives' pensions where the
spouses of disability support pensioners are under
Take away the sole parents' pension when the youngest
child turns 12. 
I could say a great deal more about the differences
between Labor and the Coalition. They are as the last
few weeks have clearly demonstrated quite profound.
Week by week over the next few months you will see the
differences grow clearer in every field of economic and
social policy.
Dr Hewson's Fightback, is, after all, a comprehensive
document. The most comprehensive thing ever devised, he
says. It is the Bible of his brave new world.
Nothing escapes it with the possible exception of aged
care which doesn't get a mention.
I will refer to only a couple of areas tonight.
They didn't miss health.
Medicare a quality, affordable, universal system will
be pushed towards the American model which offers care to
only 80 per cent of the population at 50 per cent greater
cost. They will cut the rebate from 85% to 75% and they will
abolish bulk billing except for those with health cards.
Speaking of benefits, the Coalition promises to cut
unemployment benefits after nine months; cut employment
programs; privatise the CES; introduce longer waiting
periods for assistance; and pay young people $ 3 or $ 3.50
an hour for work.
Unemployment is the greatest social problems of our time.
It haunted Chif ley, as it did all those who lived through
the Great Depression.
The high levelu uf unemployment we afe now experiencing
are anathema to a party whose creed has always been full
employment. The disappointment is all the greater because we had done
so phenomenally well to grow 1.5 million new jobs in the
1980S. It is entirely unacceptable that a tenth of the work
force should basically bear all the burden of structural
change and the recession.
The principal aim of all our efforts in the past six
months has been to reduce un~. mployment, to get
Australians who have fallen out of the system back into
it. That is why this year we will spend S1.1 billion on
labour market programs. Why we've spent one per cent of
GDP or $ 4 billion to stimulate the economy and boost
employment. 
It's why we held the national summit on youth
unemployment, out of which came a universally applauded
package of employment and training programs for Young
Australians. It's why we established this year, in an educational
revolution, the Australian National Training Authority
to lift the quality and status of technical and further
education to the highest level: the level it must be if
Australians are to have the skills they will need for the
well-paid and interesting jobs, and if modern Australia
industry is to have the skilled workforce it will need.
That unemployment is also why we are determined on a path
of economic growth.
we must have growth. It's the only way we can sensibly
re-structure and~ create jobs.
To survive today as a well-employed nation we have to
trade. To trade we have to be productive.
To be productive means more product from fewer people.
The remedy to this redundancy can only be mnr
production. Our aim then is two-fold greater efficiency and greater
production. Both depend, we say, on mutual understandings on
national agreement about the direction of national
income. Growth of the order we require can only be achieved in a
framework in which business, labour and the Government
agree on these directions.
To an extent that would astonish Ben Chifley who lived in
the long era of habitual conflict, that framework has
been established.
It is generally agreed in Australia now that we can't
have hard-won growth frittered away in senseless price
and wage rounds.
You can't do it without the lower interest rates and low
inflation which an incomes policy alone can harmoniously
provide. Equally we can't have efficiency in a culture of
conflict. 
The speed with which this understanding has come to
management and unions alike has surprised even those who
promoted the idea.
The speed of the revolution in work practices has
surprised everyone.
The speed with which our export of elaborately
transformed manufactures has grown, even through the
recession, has surprised them too.
It is why I say that I believe in our future. I believe
in the capacity of the Australian people. I believe in
the path we are taking.
We have done the fundamental things, the brave thi ngs,
and the Australian people have responded bravely.
We have given Australia a chance to grow.
And Australians have seized it.
A decade ago, as we came out of recession we had double
digit inflation. Today we have entrenched our competitive
advantage with one of the lowest inflation rates in the
industrial world.
A decade ago our work and managerial practice was
notoriously bad. Today Best Practice is not just a
catchword, but increasingly a reality and its helping
us to export in ways we never thought possible. In 1992
Australia is exporting motor vehicle engines to Japan.
Both our manufactured exports and service exports have
tripled over the past decade.
A decade ago we imported more goods and services than we
exported. Today we export more than we import.
And increasingly we export goods with high levels of
value adding like motor vehicles atnd motor vehicle
parts, computers, scientific equipment, industrial
machinery, telecommunicati ons equipment.
These goods recorded growth of 216 per cent since 1983
twice the growth of mineral exports, nearly six times the
growth of rural exports.
In that period motor vehicle exports have grown from M2
million to $ 414 million.
Office machines and computers from $ 19 million to $ 41S
million. Industrial machinery from $ 235 million to S' 199 million. 
To name a few. And the greater part of the growth has
been in the past two or three years 57 per cent growth
between 1988 and 1991.
Most of the exports been into Asia where so much
potential for Australia lies.
We are making progress on all the important front&amp;
including the wharves where productivity has doubled.
We are developing a food processing industry, estimated
to be worth $ 7 billion by the end of the decade.
There are opportunities for similarly huge development of
our construction industry, our finance and tourism
industries.-These are the reasons why I say that even in these tough
times there is great reason for hope and confidence.
And why I say it is Australians who give us reason for
that confidence for these achievements are due to their
work, their skills, their imagination, their belief in
Australia. In recent days you may have noticed that the Opposition,
which for so long has been saying we are the antithesis
of everything they stand for, have begun to say that on
certain key issues there is very little separating us.
Well, as John Dlawkins reminded them the other day,
imitation is the sincerest form of flattery.
But it's a very poor imitation.
It shouldn't fool anyone.
They're doing the chameleon on tariffs but ask the car
industry if they're fooled. Ask the sugar industry.
There is a fundamental difference on tariffs.
Our starting point is that there shomuld be a car
industry. That there should be a sugar industry.
There's is simply " restructure or perish".
There's is to quote Mr McLachlan, " if we are wrong that
will be a tragedy."
Like I said tell that to the working people of
Adelaide, Geelong and Melbourne.
There's a also fundamental difference on the most basic
relationship in the economy industrial relationS.
Already we have 300 registered enterprise agreements. 
By early next year we will have half the workforce
covered. But we also have and this is the great difference the
Industrial Relations Commission setting minimum rates in
awards, and so providing a safety net through which
employees cannot fall.
There is a basic difference on education. It's expressed
most eloquently in these simple figures under the
Coalition, if you want to send your children, or
yourself, to university it's going to cost you $ 24,000
for an arts degree up to $ 150,000 for medicine.
There are basic differences on health policy, women's
policy, environment policy, policy on arts and cultural
development. There is a profound difference about what sort of
community and nation Australia can be.
It is a difference in philosophy we start from
different beginnings and seek different ends.
We start with the Australian people and they will get us
there. Really, no one ever put it better than Ben Chiflep.
" I try to think of the labour movement, not as putting an
extra sixpence in someone's pocket, or making somebody
Prime Minister or Premier, but as a movement bringing
something better to the people, better standarde of
living, greater happiness to the mass of the people. we
have a great objective the light on the hill which we
aim to reach by working for the betterment of mankind."
That is the base, the sentiment from which we begin.
But our ambitions are now greater and so are our
achievements. The light on the hill does not symbolise where we are
going any more. We are past that stage.
It does not symbolise where we have been. We look
forward, not back.
it symbolises why we have these ambitions, these goals
for the Deople, for the nation.
Thank you. 



TEL: 15 c. ep. 92 15: 19 No. Ci2 F. C. 1
13
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGO: AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 15 SEPTEMBER 1992
This is the full text of the Press Club address.
Because of time constraints the Prime Minister will
deliver an edited version.
When Dr Hewson addressed you here at the Press Club on
September 25 last year, he said this:
" The fact is, of course, that nobody has actually really
tried rational economics properly".
The implications of these words were not clear then.
The zealot in Dr Hewson had not entirely emerged.
Neither had Fichbag-k
But we've seen both now.
We've seen the launch of Fightback and several direct
hits scored against it.
But it has become clear that for all the holes which have
appeared, Fightback has not been allowed to go entirely
under. It cannot sink just yet, because in a very real sense
Fightback is just another word for Dr Hewson.
I think that may be why he takes every criticism of his
policies as personal abuse.
It is a case of " I am the Word and the Word is
Fightback". The Coalition can't sink Fightback without sinking Dr
Newson. So, unless the Coalition suddenly bites the bullet and
sinks its leader, Fightback is going to be still bobbing
around at the next election. 
TIEL. S: ep 9 15 : 19 No .012 3.
2
Fightback is the alternative Policy package, the
alternative ideology, the alternative Australia.
It is only now that Australians are realising what the
full implications of Dr Hewson's Fightback are.
Of course a great many Australians have never accepted
the idea of the consumption tax at the centre of
Fightback. And it's true that a lot of business people have been
uneasy for a long while.
His own party has been uneasy.
The scrutiny we've subjected it to in the last six months
has made it, as I said, a pretty lifeless object.
But it's ticking. As long as the doctor's around it's
alive.
And I think in the last couple of months more and more
people have begun to wake up to the threat of the thing.
The nation I believe is coming to the rather chilling
realisation that Dr flewson has no intention of changing
his ways.
That he is utterly committed to all the policy
prescriptions of Fightback.
This is not a party platform in the conventional sense.
These are not broad objectives but detailed articles of
faith and collectively they will mean the most radical
uprooting of the Australian economy and society in our
history. Dr Hewson is not talking about building on what has been
achieved over a century, or even on those higher orders
of competition, production and social unity we have
developed in the last decade.
He's talking about doing it from Year One tearing it
down and starting again.
That's what I mean about the implications of those words
of his last year " nobody has really tried rational
economics properly".
Not Thatcher, not Reagan, not Fraser, not Roger Douglas.
None of them went far enough.
What does " properly" mean if not a more pure, a more
extreme version of what they did?
What does " tried" mean if not experimented?
TEL 
IEL Sep .92 15 : 19 No .012 P .03/.
3
Experiments with a theory. Experiments with society.
With people's lives. Experiments with industries.
if these experiments fail, too bad.
By the word " properly" Dr Hewson meant economic Darwinism
the survival of the fittest. Or the luckiest.
This m~ eans that the main role for government is to ensure
that the " price signals" are correct. Governments should
withdraw. But governing a nation is not about withdrawing from the
important decisions the nation must address; it is-,,
fundamentally about knowing how to act to bring about
genuine, lasting change.
Dr Hewson claims that his Fightback package will change
the Australian economy and Australian society for the
better. This cannot in any way be true.
At its heart Fightback is essentially a switch in the tax
base from income to expenditure, and a clumsy, regressive
one at that.
It's a tax switch which lifts the tax burden on low to
middle income earners to benefit higher income earners.
it claims to reduce the tax burden on employment by
abolishing payroll tax but then substitutes for payroll
tax a much-he-avie-rtax on employment. And that of course
is a much larger Goods and Services Tax on the value
added by labour at each step in the productive chain.
But Fightback is about more than a tax switch.
it also contains policies on tariffs, industrial
relations, cuts in government outlays and health amongst
other things.
Zero tariffs is simply a textbook objective that is not
grounded in the real world or the real problems faced
by particular industries.
It is naive and destructive.
The Liberals -industrial relations pfoli ' cy is under attack
from large and small companies aike, from one industry
group to another. All see it as confrontationist, and
uncomprehending or workplace realities.
Dr Hewson proposes the destruction of Medicare. the one
comprehensive and simple health system Australia has had.
And why? For no better reason than to improve the
incomes of medical practitioners, specialists, private
hospitals and the private health insurance industry.
TEL 
TEL 4
A significant proportion of the population would again be
under-insured. A significant proportion would again find
that they could not afford health services.
In quite unequivocal terms, Fightback is bad news for
Australia. The entire economy put at risk to deliver one political
objective a 30 cent marginal income tax rate for most
taxpayers. Yet the Government will introduce the same 30 cent rate
but no consumption tax.
Now let us look in more detail at Dr Hewson'* " tax
switch". THE MAGIC PUDDING
At the centre of the Liberal's Fightback is the switch in
taxation away from income to reliance on a goods and
services tax. This exercise involves shuf fling
billion in the name of assisting business at considerable
cost and disruption.
Fightback claims that business will be better off and
that every household will be better off.
Dr Hewsofl wants us to imagine that business can take its
slice without reducing the amount available to
households. It's a magic pudding policy!
Dr Hewson claimns that taxes on business would be cut by
billion.
But the revenue collected from the GST cannot be used
both to improve the prof itability5TbtiFusinesses to the
tune of $ 20 billion, and to pass on the benefits to
consumers in the form of lower prices.
Without the extra profitablity where is the benefit to
business? Without the lower prices where is the benefit
to consumers?
If business were to enjoy the $ 20 billion, the inflation
effect would not be 5 to 6 per cent, but much closer to
the full 15 per cent.
WINNERS AND LOSERSl,
A moment's thought should convince anyone that
rearranging taxes cannot make everybody better of f.
But it can make for winners and losers. 15 Sep .92 15 : 19 No .012 F* .04: 1. 
T: 15 iep 1 15 : 19 No. 01 2 P .05/ 1
And with Dr HewSon's GST there would be a massive
redistribution of income away from average families to
the wealthy.
Treasury has shown that 70 per cent of households would
be made worse of f to fund large gains for the rich.
For example, a family with children and both partners
working and earning $ 25,000 each would be up to $ 25 a
week worse of f. on the other hand, if that fam~ ily's
combined income were over $ 90,000, they would find
themselves up to $ 105 a week, or up to $ 5,460 a year,
better of f.
Fair go, Hewson-style. Incentive, Hewson-style.
MACROECONOMIC EFECTS
It is claimed that the introduction of the GST at the
expense of other forms of taxation would improve
incentives to work, to save and to export.
But there is no evidence for this. People don't work
longer and harder simply because their consumption rather
than their income is taxed. Changes to taxes have only
marginal effects on overall saving behaviour. And,
because the exchange rate is free to adjust, there is no
evidence to support the view that exports would lift.
The effects are simply too small to measure.
And certainly too small to warrant all the costs and
disruption to Industry and the community that would come
from a GST.
This is exactly what was found by Chris Murphy, the
economist who was asked by Dr Hewson to do the modelling
for Pightback. on the crucial assumption that workers do
not seek wage increases to compensate for the price
effects of the GST, Murphy's results show that a switch
from income tax to the GST has small effects on output,
the current account and employment. In fact, for the
first five years, he found that production would actually
fall and unemployment rise.
Professor John Freebairn from Monash University has
argued that a switch from a broadly based payroll tax
system to a GST would have a minimal impact on the
economy. Treasury's analysis of the major elements of Fightback,
and again on the assumption that the compensation package
was adequate, show the overall impact on the economy to
be very small. TEL 
TEL 6
The basic message coming from these studies is that there
is likely to be very little impact on employment, or
output or the balance of payments from the money
shuffling exercise.
a macroeconomics exercise, it simply doesn't rate.
Crucially, however, the GST would have a profound
negative impact on the economy if it disrupts prices and
wages. If firms used the GST as an excuse for raising
prices by more than the direct effect of the taxes, or if
employees refused to accept full discounting of their
wages for the effect of the GST on prices, then the
economy would be severely damaged.
But why would workers not seek compensation for higher
prices? After all, the great bulk of workers ls under Dr
Kewson's proposed compensation package. Of course they
will try to retrieve their position in the field.
And if this happens, Chris Murphy's results show that GDP
would fall by 4 per cent in the first 5 years. Prices
would be sharply up. The unemployment rate would be 2
percentage points higher!
When Dr Hewson Is pressed on the damaging effects of the
GST, his retort is that Fightback is more than the OST,
it's also about industrial relations, eliminating all
tariffs, microeconomic reform, health and so on.
INnDUsTAL CON4FLICT
Everyone agrees that we need to improve the
responsiveness of the workplace. Indeed, this Labor
Government has worked with employers and unions to
achieve just this. The results have been coming through
with agreements like those at Sheraton, Email, Toyota,
Concrete Constructions and so on.
In the media recently, we have seen how such agreements
have been reached in many successful businesses through a
spirit of cooperation. These stories have 81s0 touched
on the real fears that many businesspeople and workers
have about the opposition's approach to industrial
relations. The Coalition has an ideological aversion to the
cooperative approach now being generally applied to get
the best from our workplaces. The Coalition's textbook
offers the Darwinian prescription.
More Strength to the strong.
For there is no doubt that those in a strong bargaining
position would benefit from the free for all.
15 .113ep -9.2 1' 19 No .012 P OE--
T1EL5: Sep .92 15 : 19 No .0121 P .07,' It.
7
But most would lose.
The safety net for low income earners would be ripped
away. Those without long-established and firm links with the
labour force would lose out.
Women would number heavily among the losers. And young
people. Business would lose from a renewal of the discord and
uncertainty that was crippling industry a decade ago.
Australia would lose.
INLATQli
This Labor government has created industrial harmony and
low inflation through policies of cooperation.
Under Coalition policies, the risk of excessive wage
demands and higher inflation would return with any
strengthening in the labour market.
And the only instrument that the Coalition has to
maintain low inflation would be tight monetary policy,
higher interest rates. Australia would be condemned to a
long period of very high unemployment.
And we should reflect on this at the same time as he
introduces the GST price hike, Dr Hewson would abandon
the i ncomes policy which has so effectively reduced
inflation. IMPACT ON BUSINESS
The opposition says that jobs will be created because
Fightback is pro-business.
But are industrial conflict, high interest rates or
higher inflation pro-business?
Fightback is a massive and disruptive accounting exercise
for little worthwhile purpose.
According to the estimates in Fightback, the GST would
bring in $ 27 billion.
Although Fightback involves quite a few minor changes,
this money in essence is used for four purposes which add
up to $ 26 billion:
SFirst, compensation for the impact of the GST on
pensions, fami~ ly allowances and the States amounts to
about $ 4 billion. TEL 
TEL a
1Second, the CST replaces wholesale sales taxes at a
cost of $ 9 billion.
1Third, payroll taxes are abolished at 8 cost of $ 6
billion.
SFinally, petrol excise is abolished at a cost of $ 7
billion.
Essentially we have a new tax to be paid by business to
replace some existing taxes.
This is Dr Hewson's great bargain.
He likes to focus on the seven taxes that would be
removed to sweeten the pill.
But let us look briefly 8t the rationale for these.
Four of the taxes the training gua ranitee levy, the coal
-export levy, customs duE-es-, and the-tax on lIump sum
superannuation would only have a limited impact on
revenues and, indeed, on costs to business.
The remaining three are more significant elements of our
tax system. However, the supposed advantages of the OST
are illusory.
First, the wholesale sales tax. No tax is perfect, and
this one isn't. But the WST has distinct advantages over
the GST:
1Wholesale sales tax is levied at different rates for
different items which means that the great bulk of
basic necessities fresh fruit and vegetables, meat,
clothes, electricity bills, and so on are tax exempt.
1Compliance costs for the WST are low with very few
businesses required to pay.
Dr Hewson also says he will remove the excise on petrol.
But this is a sham because it leaves a very large hole in
road funding which will have to be made up elsewhere.
The National Road Transport Commission ( NRTC) has
estimated that the cost of running Australian roads is
around $ 4.3 billion while the GST applied to petrol will
only raise about $ 750 million. This leaves an amount
equivalent to 18 cents per litre of petrol that has to be
raised from Australian motorists.
So where will It come from?
A tax on kilometres travelled would be akin to the petrol
excise without providing any incentives for fuel
efficiency. 15 :-ep .92 15 19 No .012) P I 
TEL 9
Higher registration charges would have to be ve high
and extend to passenger cars.
All in all, the abolition of petrol excise is a poor
deal. It Is in Fightback largely as 8 sop to the National
Party. Even here, the farmers who already get the Diesel
Fuel Rebate get a lousy deal because they don't pay
payroll tax and they will be slugged twice by the GST
once as collectors and once as consumers.
Finally, the payroll tax levied by the States. This is
the proposal that probably attracts the most interest
from business. But, as Professor Freebairn has pointed
out, there is little difference between payroll tax and a
tax on the value that is added to products by labour.
The economic effect of the payroll tax is very like a
uniform GST and substituting one for the other will
contribute very little even if the inevitable problems
with the States could be resolved.
In summary, replacing some existing taxes with a GST is a
costly accounting exercise the nation can't afford.
And small business would pay dearly.
They typically do not benefit from the removal of current
taxes because of the relatively high thresholds.
But they would have to keep records to comply with the
GST. Overseas studies have found similar taxes to be
very regressive in that compliance costs can be over 250
times greater for small business than large business in
relative terms.
At present small business doesn't even pay most of the
taxes that Fightback promises to abolish:
I According to ABS statistics, there are currently
832,000 businesses in Australia. Most of these are
small businesses and almost all will have to fill out
their 09T forms.
I~ But of these, over 700,000 do not pay payroll tax.
I And only 20,000 are required to pay the WST while
perhaps twice this number will be in the WST system in
practice.
800,000 small businesses are destined to become the new
tax collectors for Dr Hewson.
To paraphrase a tax expert from New Zealand, they can
forget about Sunday afternoons with the family.
MICROFCONOMIr REFORM T: 15. SOep. 15: 1'? No Al12 
TEL
Dr Hewson also likes to argue that business will benefit
from other aspects of Fightback.
Like the conflict in his blueprint for industrial
relations. Like the application of his survival-of-the-fittest
philosophy to the car inldustry.
Indeed, like much of Fightback, just what Dr Hewson
intends on micro reform is poorly spelt out.
For " illustrative" purposes, Fightback sets out the
benefits that may flow from reforms examined by the
Industry Commission.
But what are these reforms?
They fall into two groups, reforms where this Labor
government has already made significant progress, and is
continuing to implement change, or reforms that are
primarily the responsibility of the States.
According to the industry Commission's list, reforms to
rail transport would have the single biggest impact on
GDP at 1.5 per cent. These reforms in part involve the
national freight system which is currently being
transformed into a National Rail Highway as announced in
One Nation. The rest of the IC's proposals centre on
suburban rail which, according to the IC analysis, would
be made more efficient with different pricing policies.
Would Dr Hewson take over this area of State
responsibility? Would he increase suburban rail fares by the 150 per cent
that the proposals imply?
The measure on the IC's list with the second largest
impact is assistance to the rural and manufacturing
sectors.
most of the benefits to be had here will flow from the
Government's measured reductions in protection,
reductions that will leave vibrant industries at the end
of the process.
Dr Hewson's crude approach to the car industry, to the
TCF sector or to sugar would in fact see less production
in Australia, not more.
in aviation, the waterfront, electricity and so on it is
this Government that has built the cooperation of the
parties involved so that genuine progress is achieved.
15 sep 92 1c-: 19 NL) 12 P 10/ 1 
Business is understandably sceptical that the benefits
claimed in Fightbeck can be achieved and have every right
to be apprehensive about the confronitationist approach
being advocated by Dr Hewson.
Quite simply, Dr Hewson's claims on the benefits of his
microeconomic reforms evaporate under scrutiny. They are
like his claim of 2 million jobs to be Created. This
claim was never modelled in Fightback and under
questioning it too diminished to a " guesstimate".
I said that the GST is principally about replacing a
number of existing taxes with a new one.
There are also the income tax cuts of $ 12 billion. These
are more than accounted for by bracket creep, the
increase in the company tax rate and, mainly, the cuts to
outlays. These cuts cannu~ ot and will not be funded by the GST. As
the tabulation earlier shows, $ 26 billion of the $ 27
billion proceeds of the GST are spent abolishing other
taxes and for the base compensation package. The $ 12
billion of tax cuts will have to be funded by cuts in
Government spending cuts that will decimate social
policy. The Treasurer and Minister for Finance have pointed out
there is a huge hole in Fightbeck's figuring to the tune
of $ 6 billion in the year of implementation.
it is a hole which removes most of the benefits Fightback
is supposed to provide.
The expenditure cuts that Fightback proposes deserve the
highest scrutiny.
Of course, many are not spelt out in any detail but rely
on inroads into fraud, inefficiencies and waste.
This is a noble objective indeed, it should be part of
any good administration's operations but to suggest
that billions of dollars can be found from such measures
after the years of cutting into outlays is totally
incredible.
what this emphasis does demonstrate is that the savings
in Fightback are shonky. In truth, if Dr Hewson is to
make the real savings upon which Fightback depends, he
will have to cut, into real programs.
SOCTAL, SECURITY 
12
However, there are a number of areas where substantial
cuts into programs are proposed up-front. These cuts,
ostensibly designed to stop people rorting the social
security system, would in fact seriously weaken its
integrity. Government has to be vigilant against those who attempt
to take advantage of the system and, indeed, through
increased resources for review teams and the like, we
have developed one of the most targeted systems in the
world. The fact that a few may secure benefits they are not
entitled to does not justify measures which seriously
hurt those in genuine need.
Benefits have been increased substantially for those in
need. For example, pensions have been increased by over 15 per
cent in real terms under this Government after falling by
2 per cent under the previous Coalition Government.
Unemployment benefits have been increased by over 25 per
cent under Labor after falling by almost 20 per cent
under the Coalition.
At the same time we have greatly improved the focus of
expenditure. At the ANU. Deborah Mitchell has found that while
expenditure on social security in Australia as a share of
GDP was the lowest of the ten OECD countries she
examined, it was very successful in achieving its
objective of alleviating poverty.
Fightback's contempt for the low paid and the dependent
ignores such conclusions.
It fails to recognise that, compared with other
countries, we spend a relatively modest amount on income
support. It fails to recognise the success in targeting that has
been achieved delivering substantial benefits for a
modest national outcome.
And most importantly, it does not recognise the damage
the expenditure cuts it advocates would do to the system.
The feature of many of the cuts to outlays is that they
would hurt groups in society which are least able to
avoid them.
Fightback would find $ 745 million by Cutting benefits to
the unemployed. TEL 15 Se p 9 2 15 1 N L-1 C, 12 F 12 I 
T: 15 Se 15 : 19 No 012 FP. 1 3: 1
13
It would stop the sole parent pension when the youngest
child reaches 12.
it claims to find $ 127 million from cutting access to
disability pensions.
It would increase the pension age for women to 65. Many
of these women have had no opportunity to accumulate
super or other forms of retirement income and it œ 8
totally unfair to suddenly introduce this measure.
EQUITY CONSIDFRATTONSq
All this simply reinforces the regressive nature of the
GST. Prices overall will rise by 5 to 6 per cent; but the
prices of those goods and services that are necessities
for everyday living for the less well-off in the
community will rise by much more.
The great majority of OECD countries with GSTs or VATs
have multi-rate systems precisely to allow food,
essential services and the like to be taxed more lightly.
Even John Major recently ruled out extending their VAT to
zero-rated items of gas, electricity, food, and
children's clothes and footwear.
Dr Hewson is too pure for that. Dr Hewson is going to
try rational economics properly.
But increasingly, Dr Hewson is coming under pressure to
exempt more items.
Education services are supposed to be zero-rated, but
what constitutes an education service? What books are
zero-rated and which ones attract the OST? What
constitutes a GST-free school lunch?
Medical bills are to be zero-rated, but does this extend
to wheel-chairs and sunscreens?
The building, tourism and financial Industries all have
legitimate concerns with their treatment under the GST.
it is a system riddled with inequities.
The key difference is that under wholesale taxes, we are
able to effectively quarantine the great bulk of
necessities fresh fruit and vegetables, electricity
bills, clothes, and so on.
The Liberals are not prepared to see a similar targeting
under the GST because it would interfere with the ideal
model in the accountant's mind.
TEL 
TEL 14
And the result is that it is precisely the necessities
that would face the largest hike in prices.
The price on milk up 9.61;
Fresh fruit up 10.1%;
Electricity bills up 10.7%;
Large hikes in rates, postal and telephone charges up
8.1t. Ladies arnd gentlemen
I haven't today covered all aspects of Fightback by any
means. Even though policies are frequently poorly
specified, it touches a wide range of issues.
And for so many of these issues, Fightback represents an
enormous step backwards.
Nowhere more dramatically than In policies affecting
Woman. Both parties talk about opportunities and fairness for
women, but only Labor has the policies and the track
record. Labor introduced sex discrimination and affirmative
action legislation. Labor has increased the number of
child care places five-fold and provided generous fee
relief. 60% of the 1.5 million jobs created since 1983
have gone to women. Labor has supported a wages system
that saw women's average wages increase from 67 cents to
83 cents for every dollar earned by men.
The Coalition cannot make the same commitments to
promoting equality for women. Its enterprise bargaining
system would certainly see a decline in their wages.
where our aim is to give women a choice about whether or
not to join the paid labour force, Dr Hewson would force
many women to work.
Older women would be forced to stay at their jobs longer
because of Dr Hewson' a rapid phase-in of an equal pension
age for women and men.
Mothers would also be big losers under Dr Hewson ' s
policies. The cost of child care would rise because it
would be subject to the GST. 10000 women would no
longer get their Family Allowances. Managing the
household budget would be made infinitely more difficult
as the necessities of life increase in price with the
GST. 1 t, e P I I Nu i i 
TEL: I e YUi IrL F
With Fightbeck, the agenda would be pushed back on the
environment, on young Australians, on education and
training, on policies relating to our ethnic communities
and to Aboriginals, on science, on sports, and the arts.
These are issues which require detailed responses in
their own right and my Ministers and I wvill be addressing
them in detail in the near future.
HiEALTZH I would like to finish on health policy because it ia
perhaps this issue that epitomises the blind application
of the ideology that underpins Fightback.
Australia currently uses about 8 per cent of its
resources on health. This is close to the OECD average
and well below the figure in the United States of 12.8
per cent.
With these resources, we are able to provide a first rate
health system.
-Medicare provides quality care based on the principles of
ef-ficiency and access for all Australians.
As with any large system it benefits from the sort of
periodic review and refinement that we undertook most
recently in the Budget.
It is a system that works and works well.
The Opposition's policies would effectively destroy
Medicare. The replacement would be expensive and
iniquitous, an alternative introduced in the name of
choice and market efficiencies.
The provision of health care is not like any other good
or service in Dr Hewson's economic rationalist model.
The unrestrained market will not provide effective health
services for everyone while keeping costs contained.
In fact, Fightback would see costs soar.
It would largely hand over responsibility for setting
health costs to the AMA. Dr Hewson said as much
explicitly to the AMA at its Council.
It would do this by firstly removing incentives for
doctors to bulk-bill by restricting bulk-billing to
health-card holders only.
At present, about 70 per cent of GP services are bulkbilled
at 85 per cent of the Medicare schedule, a
practice that is cost effective for the doctor and the
system as a whole. 
TEL: 15. Sep .9 15 : 19 N,. 1C12 P. 16
16
Moreover, Fightback would allow gap insurance for costs
up to 85 per cent of, not the Medicare schedule, but the
AMA schedule, the schedule set by the doctors themselves!
GPs would have little incentive other than to charge the
great majority of their patients the AMA fee and, because
the current AMA schedule is some 20 30 per cent above
the Medicare schedule, patients would be obliged to take
out private insurance to avoid hefty payments at every
trip to the doctor.
Without insurance, patients would be paying about half of
their medical bills. And these would be the people who
are currently benefiting from free health through bulkbilling.
Treasury has estimated that the overall impact on
household health bills would be an increase of 22.6 per
cent. The higher costs would affect everyone, but the hardest
hit would be those least able to afford it.
Dr Hewson would provide some tax credits for private
health insurance, but the amount being offered would be
less than half basic medical insurance Costs, let alone
supplementary cover or gap insurance.
Many would simply not be able to privately insure
themselves and their families.
Two classes of patients would result with doctors
returning to the days of taking on charity cases.
Fightback's health policies would see us move towards the
expensive US system where 35 million Americans have no
insurance or access to services.
And why does Fightback contemplate the change? Not to
improve national efficiency. Not to improve social
equity. Not to improve quality of medical services.
The change proposed by Dr Hewson stems from his
insistence that market forces be imposed on our medical
system. Bulk-billing is ideological anathema.
The doctors, the pathologists, the radiologists, the
private hospitals all stand to benefit. The low paid,
the frequent users of the system, including women and the
elderly, lose. The notion that a good society is
measured by the degree to which all are provided with
care and the necessities of life is abandoned.
Nowhere are the obsessions of Dr Hewson plainer. Nowhere
is Fightback more obviously regressive.
This is " rational" economics " properly" applied, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINGO, MP
INAUGURAL FORUM OF THE COALITION OF AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATING
ORGANISATIONS OF WOMEN ( CAPOWI)
It was with great pleasure that I accepted your invitation
to participate in today's seminar.
I have some important announcements to make concerning the
subject of this seminar, Australia's landmark antidiscrimination
legislation, the Sax Discrimination Act.
I will also announce changes to our Affirmative Action
legiglation. It would be hard to think of a better occasion to make these
announcements than the first event organised by Australia's
first coalition of women's organisations, called
appropriately enough CAPOW!
I am informed that CAPOW! aims to Increase communication and
cooperation between Australia's leading women's
organisations. Some twenty national women's organisations have indicated a
wil. lingness to participate in the coalition when issues
arise that concern their memberships.
This is an important new development in the political
evolution of women's groups in this country and r wish the
coalition every success.
I am very happy to be associated with your first public
event. I understand that six organisations participated in
arranging today's forum, among them such long-standing 
2
groups as the Women's Electoral Lobby, the-Australian
~ e~ raft oBn sinss nd roessional Wom-en and the YWCA.-
-Wendy Fatin, who assists me on Status of Women matters, was
a founding member of WEL, and I know she was also involved
In the formation of another of today's sponsors, the
National Foundation for Australian Women.
The remaining two groups involved today are the ' Australian
_ WomeA'sHeLalt h __ Net -work and the National Woman's Housing
Caucus, both examples of newer bodies representing community
interests important to women.
These are all groups with whom the Government has worked
closely, both through the Office of the Status of -Women in
my department, or through their periodic membership of the
-National-Women'sConsultative Council.
This partnership between women's organisations and the
Government is important.
It's important to us because we value your opinions and
your advice.
It's important to us because you help us communicate with
women in the community, and because your policy skills and
political hard work have contributed greatly to Australia's
proud record in advancing the status of women.
I hope it's important to you as well.
I trust that you value the access this Government has
accorded women's organisations in its policy making process,
including representation at such important national
gatherings as the 1985 Tax Summit and the recent Youth
Summit, as well as your involvement in various advisory and
consultative bodies.
This partnership between women and government has evolved
during the ten years of this Government.
It is our way Labor's way of working with
org anisat ions.
It involves mutual trust and mutual respect and a genuine
sharing of views.
We don't always agree with one another, but at least we
listen and we talk. It is a means of moving forward,
together, towards our shared goals. 
our partnership with you over the past decade has produced
an unprecedented program of reform.
integral to that program was the Sex Discrimination Act and
the Affirmative Action legislation but before I move on to
fay announcements in that area, I would like to take the
opportunity you have given me today to share with you some
of my own observations on the changing status of women.
I am sometimes accused of being " urcntutd when it
comes to the subject of women!
Well perhaps in the past there was some truth to that, but I
can assure you that no father of daughters these days can
stay unreconstructed for long and I have three daughters!
I watch them growing up and I worry for them sometimes, as I
know tho world can still be rough on women.
That alone would be sufficient motivation to do everything
in my power to make the world a better place for women.
But in fact my learning process started even before my girls
came along.
I have sisters too, and when I reflect back on when we were
growing up I realise that I had advantages that were denied
to them.
I see now that that was unfair.
I have learned, too, from the subsequent lives of some of
the girls I went to school with. One in particular had a
very hard time when her husband left her stranded with three
little kids.
I've also learned from women I have met in my capacity as a
politician representing a suburban electorate west of
Sydney. But I've done more than listen and learn I've acted.
The media would have you thinking that I'm living testament
to the joke that compares Australian men with Treasury bonds
the difference being that Treasury bonds eventually
mature! Well, as Treasurer, I did more than wait for bonds to
mature! I am proud of what I was able to do of benefit to women. 
As Susan Ryan _( who is here today) will tell you, I'm sure, I
gave her support in the Cabinet room for the policies she
brought forward including the sex discrimination
legislation.
My colleagues and I made sure we found the funds for
programs like child-care a program which, I don't have to
tell this audience, has expanded almost five-fold since
Labor was elected.
The one program where I did get directly involved and of
which I am immensely proud is the Child Support Agency.
I was instrumental in placing that Agency within the
Australian Taxation Office which, I can tell you, was not
exactly rapt in the idea back in 1988 when I proposed it.
But they accepted the idea in the end and now can take the
credit for overseeing one of the most effective methods in
the worl of collecting child support from non-custodial
parents. Since the Agency was established, we have gone from
collecting maintenance payments from only 30 per cent of
non-custodial parents to 70 per cent.
And few things have given me greater pleasure in government
than to see justice brought to these shirkers and for the
women and children they left behind to be able to improve
their standard of living through payments they are fully
entitled to receive.
During the past nine years there has been an Increase of
million jobs, current unemployment levels notwithstanding.
Women got 64 per cent of those jobs.
Bill Kelty and I arranged for supplementary payments to go
to low-paid workers the vast majority of whom are women,
and the Minimum Rates Adjustment progress which saw childcare
workers and others receive hefty and deserved
increases. I backed the portability of award superannuation which saw
women,, many for the first time in their working lives, able
to save for their retirement and not be totally dependent on
a husband's super.
And there have been other innovative actions. 
For instance, I appointed Anna Booth as the first woman
member of the board of the Commonwealth Bank and Hylda Rolfe
to chair the Prices Surveff-fance Authoriity.
As Prime Minister I have reminded Ministers of the
importance of appointing appropriately qualified women to
major boards and authorities.
Women now make up around 20 per cent of statutory and nonstatutory
appointments.
This is not a high number but it is an improvement on the
1988 f igrure of only 12 per cent.
We can do better than this and we will.
I was very pleased a few weeks ago when my colleague the
Treasurer, John Dawkins, announced the historic appointment
of Janet Holmes a Court to the board of the Reserve Bank.
Yet another milestone for women.
Under my Government, there will be many more.
I am proud to be part of a Government which has earned
Australia a reputation world-wide for its progressive
women's policies.
Several months ago, I had the pleasure of presenting
Australia's secondCE -DAW -Report to Mrs Mervat Tal la-wy,
chairwoman of the UN Committee on the El-imination of
Discrimination Against Women.
During that presentation, Mrs Tallawy told me she considered
Australia to be at the forefront of countries that had made
major improvements in the status of women.
Let me assure you today that my Government will continue
those progressive policies.
Even in the six months since I delivered the One Nation
statement we have been able to build on the achievements of
the 19809 and continue our programs of innovative change.
In addition to our major infrastructure reforms, In road and
in rail, in electricity and in aviation, we are continuing
our economic and social reforms.
The Superannuation Guarantee Levy, which will give lowincome
women for the first time access to retirement _ income. 
An extra 27,000 child-care places and an increase in fee
relief to reduce child-care costs for 135,000 families.
in health, major reforms to-Modicare, including $ 50 million
this financial year to reduce waiting lists, and a further
$ 1.23 billion over five years to improve access to public
hospitals. in women's health, a major new program was recently
finalised when 11l the States and Territories signed on.
As my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Health, Housing and Community Services, Brian Howe,
announced earlier this week, 5 million Australian women will
be covered by the cervical cancer program which will provide
screening via pap sm; earsi every two years for all women aged
between 18 and
We announced a S93 million package of support and assistance
for carers most of whom are women.
I know only too well how valuable is their compassionate
work in caring for elderly and disabled people.
And much much more.
Gone I hope forever are the days when women's
contribution to the economy, and to society as a whole,
could be ignored.
Gone as far as this government is concerned are the days
when women Is needs could be overlooked.
The transformation of women's lives over the past two
decades is one of the most dramatic social movements we as a
country have ever experienced.
Women have moved into the labour market in massive numbers.
From being just 33 per cent of the labour force in 1972,
women are now 42 per cent.
in 1972, 39 per cent of women were in the labour force.
Today 52 per cent are and Government projections suggest
that by the time we reach the next century, 61 per cent of
women will be in paid employment.
Around 40 per cent of adults in the workforce have dependent
children, and 45 per cent of women whose youngest child is
aged under four are in paid employment. 
women are entitled to economic independence and the figures
I have just quoted suggest large numbers of women are eager
to achieve it.
There are many rewards to being in the labour force, besides
earning an income and gaining an identity beyond one's
family roles.
But there are many stresses Involved in trying to reconcile
our working and family lives.
Women shoulder most of this burden, or should I call it a
" double burden", because women tend to be the ones who have
the unpaid job of managing the time-tables of family members
and who run family finances in addition to their paid job
outside the home.
But increasingly men are being cailed on to share these
responsibilities and this is a good thing. But I know
from my own experience the strains this can put on people.
As a Government we recognise the burdens on workers with
We ratified ILO Convention 156 in 1990 and we are currently
developing our policy responses to strongly promote the
implementation of this convention.
In particular, we will be encouraging employers to make
work-places more " family friendly" so that our private and
public lives can mesh more harmoniously than is often the
case today.
These kinds of stresses are not the only problems women face
in the workplace.
There is also sex discrimination. Being overlooked for
promotion. Sexual harassment. Barriers sometimes overt
and ugly, sometmsqieubl and even invisible that
stand in the way of women participating fully in the
economy. As a Government we are absolutely committed to identifying
and removing such barriers where we are able, or to
providing remedies to women to take action where that is the
appropriate recourse.
Pre-eminent in the latter category is the Sex Discrimination
Act and the Affirmative Action Act. 
These two pieces of legislation stand as one of Labor's
greatest achievements.
When the Sex Discrimination Act was enacted in 1984 it
became tangible evidence of our commitment to advancing
women's equality.
The Affirmative Action legislation, proclaimed in October
1986, was a world wide first in providing a legislative
framework to assist companies to identify and remove
barriers to equal opportunities for women in employment.
These laws served as a benchmark o f our determination to do
all we could as a Government to retrench attitudes and
practices that discriminate against women.
They provided legal remedies for women to use against those
who would deny them equal opportunities, and they ensured
that special programs for women to counter discrimination,
or recognise women's special needs, would be available and
lawful.
As a GovernmTent we are proud to have crafted such an
important reform.
And let me take a moment to pay tribute to Susan Ryan.
I'm sure Susan won't mind if I describe her as the " big
sister of the Sex Discrimination Act".
After all, as an Opposition Senator she first introduced
similar legislation as a private members bill in 1981 and
later, as a Cabinet Minister, made sure this legislation was
an early priority of the first Hawke Government.
The legislation has worked.
Women have used it to seek justice and redress.
It has helped change attitudes towards discrimination and
has made us understand how widespread and unacceptable
sexual harassment is.
But like most laws, these need to be scrutinised from time
to time to ensure that they are in tune with current
realities.
We have been given the opportunity to revisit this
legislation with the report of the Lavarch Committee on
equal opportunity and equal status for women in Australia. 
That report, entitled Half Way to Eaa. contains seventynine
recommendations,'-many of which deal with the operation
of these two law.
I expect to be able to respond to the report as a whole
later this year, but today I went to announce the
Government's response to those recommendations which refer
directly to that legislation.
Our full response is set out in considerable detail in the
statement which I have released today.
Copies are available to all present at today's seminar.
Since some of the responses are somewhat technical, I will
not mention themi all here but simply concentrate on those we
judge to be the most significant.
The Government has decided it will amend the Sex
Discrimination Act in the following ways:
6 by extending the Act to cover federal industrial awards
and certified workplace agreements made after the date of
the amending legislation.
This means individuals will be able to complain to the
Sex Discrimination Commissioner about the discriminatory
operation of awards and certified workplace agreements
and she will be able to refer the complaint to the
Industrial Relations Commission which will be required to
vary the award unless there is a compelling public
interest reason not to.
0 by prohibiting dismissal on the grounds of family
responsibilities. by strengthening the sexual harassment provisions of the
Act.
We will remove the need for a complainant to demonstrate
disadvantage; it will be sufficient for the complainant to
have felt offended, humiliated or intimidated by the
behaviour in question and that It was reasonable to have
felt that way.
We will make sexual harassment of students by other
students, and staff members by students unlawful, extending
the present provision which covers only the harassment of
students by staff. 
We will extend the operation of the sexual harassment
provisions to the provision of goods and services and to
other areas where discrimination is unlawful under the Act,
for instance to unions, club., employment agencies and
bodies deciding employment qualifications.
Women will gain greatly from this strengthening of the Act.
Imte as lanlords cannot harass tenantsfr, xmpe
We will further amend the Act:
* by allowing complaints of victimisation to be dealt with
by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner by conciliation.
Previously, people who complained of victimisation had to go
to the Federal Court and argue their case all over again to
seek redress; this Is an expensive and daunting procedure
and the Government was concerned that it may have deterred
women from making justifiable complaints.
* by ensuring that determinations of the Human Rights and
Egmal Opportunity Commission are registrb-e in the
Federal Court when they are made.
In the absence of an appeal, the determination becomes
enforceable as an order of the Federal Court, thus
increasing the effectiveness of determinations of the Sex
Discrimination Commissioner which at present are not binding
in responding to the Lavarch Report and following a
statutory review by _ my -colleagthuee Minister for
Industrial Relations, Peter Cook, we have also agreed to
significant amendments to our Affirmative Action legislation
in order to strengthen its effectiveness.
We have decided to adopt a policy of contract compliance,
whereby all Government departments will ensure that
recipients of Government contracts and industry assistance
have met their obligations under the Affirmative Action
-legislation. My colleague the Minister for Administrative Services,* Nick
Bolkus, has already announced that his Department would not
purchase goods or services from suppliers who do not comply
with the Affirmative Action legislation.
Other departments will follow suit as soon as the
operational details are worked out. 
We have also decided to extend the operation of the Act to
cover voluntary bodies employing 100 or more paid employees.
This will bring an estimated 60,000 additional employees
under the Act and will mainly affect the largest charities,
independent schools and the Catholic school system.
It is the Government's intention that these amendments to
the Sex Discrimination Act and the Affirmative Action ( Equal
Employment Opportunity for Women) Act will be passed before
the end of this year.
The Government has classified them as " essential for
passage" during this sitting of the Parliament.
We want to ensure these important and necessary reforms are
implemented as quickly as possible.
Our response to the Lavarch Report has been framed with
care. We wanted to be able to reply to the Report as quickly as
possible, but we also needed to be sure that the legislation
would be improved by any changes.
With some of the recommendations, we felt that more time was
needed to consider and consult before agreeing to amend the
legiselation. For instance, the Government is aware of the concern by some
women's groups that S. 33 of the Act be amended to ensure
that special measures to promote equal opportunity for women
are not unlawful.
We also know that many of you are worried about the test for
indirect discrimination.
Both of these are complex and difficult matters.
I note that you are holding workshops on each of them this
afternoon. I do ask that you convey your recommendations to
my Office or to the Office of the Status of Women because
these are among a number of Lavarch recommendations which
the Government has decided to accept in principle but wanted
more time to consider.
I have asked my colleague the Attorney-General, Michael
Duffy, who was responsible for framing the amendments to the
Sex Discrimination Act, to come back to the Government in
February next year with definitive responses on those
recommendations. 
There are two exception.
we as a Government felt we needed a longer period of time to
consider the implications of removing the permanent
exemption of the Australian Defence Forces in respect of
women in combat.
My colleague the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel,
Gordon Bilney, has agreed to re-examine that exclusion and
its legislativa basis after he receives the results of a
review of women employed in combat-related positions later
this year.
Similarly, it was the Goverrnent's view that the
implications of the exemption present enjoyed by religious
schools needed to be thoroughly examined, and widely
consulted, before a decision was taken.
In both these cases, the Government has agreed to reconsider
the recommendations in September 1993.
To sum up, the overall response I have been able to provide
today is comprehensive and very specific.
I have tried to avoid becoming too technical while providing
you with a flavour of the extent of our response.
I am satisfied we have been able to respond positively to
the vast majority of the recommendations and that where we
are not able to act immediately, we have signalled our
intention to do so after adequate investigation and
consultation. Finally, let me commend Michael Lavarch and the Government
members of the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs for their thorough and
constructive report.
They have led us through a complex set of issues with
clarity and vision.
But I'm sorry I can't say the same for the Opposition
members of that Committee who presented a dissenting report.
They took the view that some of the recommendations for
changing the legislation would have " the consequences of
diminishing rather than enhancing the equal opportunity and
the equal status of Australian women"! 
Well, let me say that this is just one more area where the
Government and the Opposition are poles apart.
We recognise and want to eradicate inequality, injustice and
unfairness. They want to create new hierarchies, new division., new
tensions and new antagonisms in our society.
We want to work in partnership with the important Australian
groups. We want to consult with and listen to women's organisationa,
business, trade unions, welfare groups, environmental
groups, young people.
Our one nation is predicated on reconciling the various and
differing elements of Australian society.
We want fewer tensions.
We want less aggression and violence.
We want to close the distances in our nation, be they
between cities, between sectors or between sexes.
We want accord and harmony.
These are our common goal.
We as a Government and, I am confident in saying, you as
members of women's organisations, are dedicated to improving
our society, to making it a fairer and nicer place.
I was criticised earlier this week by the press for devoting
my entire speech at the National Press Club to a critique of
Fightback!
But my main business at the Press Club was to analyse the
opposition's policy because I hold such strong views on the
damage that Fightbanki would do to this country were it ever
to be put into practice.
I hope you will forgive me for saying so in this forum but I
believe I would not be doing my job if I were not to alert
Australians to the fate that I am convinced awaits them if
Dr Hewson and his band of wreckers were ever to get their
hands on the levers of Government.
__ fjqhtback! is a damaging and destructive doctrine. 
It is especially unfair to women.
The Opposition is trying to peddle the fantasy that our
proposed tax cuts are of no benefit to women.
Low income earners, many of whom are women, would not
benefit from our policy, they allege.
well, let me set the record straight.
It is Fightback! and the CST that women should fear
Fightback! will tax the purse and compensate the wallet.
Give male earners an income tax cut while their wives are
slugged with a 15 per cent GST on every item of food and
clothing required by the household.
Is this the Coalition's idea of fairness? To leave women to
bear the brunt of the tax?
Under the Coalition's enterprise bargaining system, women's
wages are likely to fall back to the low levels of twenty
years ago when women earned on average only 67 cents for
every dollar earned by men.
Under Labor's centralised wage-fixing system, the earnings
gap between women and men has been reduced.
A recent ILO study noted Australia's record, showing that
award rates of pay for full-time, adult non-managerial woman
are now 90.1 per cent of the earnings of their male
counterparts, leaving aside overtime.
By extending the Sex Discrimination Act to industrial awards
and certified workplace agreements, as I announced earlier,
we are demonstrating the strength of our commitment to a
fair, award-based industrial relations system.
The barbaric survival of the fittest ( and the strongest)
policies of Dr Hewson would force women workers off awards
and into individual employment contracts where their wages
and conditions could be substantially reduced.
make no mistake about who would suffer most under Fightback!
women.
Child-care will be more expensive because of the OST.
More than 100,000 women would lose their Family Allowances. 
Health care would once again become an entitlement of the
wealthy. The Coalition would close down the Affirmative Action
Agency, slash the resources of the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission and, thus, the Sex Discrimination
Commioaioner, and generally reduce the role of government in
promoting fairness and opportunity for all Australians.
But most of all it would deny us our vision and our
determination to make Australia a better and a more
equitable society.
Imagine an Australia where women could pursue their dreams
and their ambitions, unfettered by discrimination, no longer
harassed or deterred by man-made barriers.
An Australia where women were not " half-way to equal" but
where we all lived in peace, harmony and equality.
I can imagine such a place.
It's where I want to live; it's where I want my daughters to
live. it is 8 place we can achieve by working together, the way we
do now.
I give you my solemn undertaking today that I will work
hard, do my bit to help us get there.
Together, in partnership, I am convinced we can make it.
CANBERRA 19 September 1992 


22 September 1992
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address you today on this my first visit to Japan as Prime Minister of Australia.
We - Japan and Australia - &nbsp;are friends and partners of longstanding.
Our economic destinies have been strategically linked for a generation.
Your industrial growth in the fifties, sixties and seventies and our development of minerals and energy went hand in hand.
But today I want to talk about the new generation: in Australia, in Japan, in Asia and the Pacific.
Most of you, I imagine, are familiar with the Australia of iron ore and bauxite mines, of sheep and cattle stations and of the vast outback.
The Australia of empty spaces, of nature largely unspoiled. Of sunny beaches, of clean water, of spacious homes with their own gardens.
The Australia of equal opportunity, of social equality.
The Australia which is a reliable and stable supplier of resources for Japanese industry. The Australia also of high tariffs on manufacturing, of powerful and combative unions, of administered wages, crippling strikes, sleepy corporations and steadily high inflation.
The Australia with inefficient wharves, highly regulated transport and telecommunications industries, and high taxes.
The Australia content to sell commodities to Japan, while it looked for its political and intellectual leadership to the United Kingdom and the United Today I want to tell you about a different Australia. The new Australia. The real Australia.
Still the Australia of sunny beaches, clean water and spacious homes and gardens.
Still the Australia where social equality is as important to us as it is to you.
Still a reliable and stable supplier of resources for Japanese industry
But also the country which last year recorded its lowest number of strikes for thirty years.
A country which has a low inflation rate, matching your own.
A country which has more than doubled exports over the last nine years, and now exports nearly onc quarter of its total product.
A country which has tripled services exports and manufactured exports in the last nine years, and whose exports of manufactured products now exceed the value of exports from the rural sector.
We now sell more manufactured products abroad than metal ores and minerals, or tourism and coal.
We now sell more to the ASEAN countries than to either the United States or the EC.
We now send nearly two thirds of our exports to East Asia, and last year sold more elaborately transformed manufactures in North East Asia than wool.
We still sell beef and wool, iron ore and bauxite to Japan.
And we have expanded our resource exports with liquefied natural gas and steaming coal.
But we now also sell wine and cheese and meat pies to Japan. Nearly one tenth of the processed food consumed in Japan comes from Australia.
We sell motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines to Japan.
And computer software..
An Australian company is selling environmental software for your mining industry.
Another sells computer aided software engineering tools.
Australian companies are selling to Japan prefabricated homes bionic ears for the profoundly deaf, sound systems, high quality aluminium wheels, and boats.
Australian manufactured exports to Japan have grown ten fold over the last decade &nbsp;- and we plan to continue to increase them.
And last year service exports to Japan were worth as much as our wool and iron ore exports put together.
We welcome Japanese tourists half a million last year, and many more expected this year.
But we also train Japanese pilots in Australia. We educate Japanese students at our colleges and universities nearly three thousand this year. We-supply medical services to Japanese in Australia.
This is the new Australia. The Australia that spent the 1980s restructuring its industies, and which continues to restructure today.
In the last decade we have opened our markets to the world.
We cut taxes and cut government spending to give us one of the leanest public sectors in the OECD. Indeed our rate of tax to GDP is virtually the same as yours.
We reached an Accord with the trade unions which saw wage restraint so effective that our competitfiveness improved ten per cent over the decade.
&nbsp;In the last year or so we have begun another phase of economic reform.
&nbsp;We have moved away from the centralised fixing of wages.
We have decided to make most wage settlements by negotiation, and at the enterprise leve). We are now completing enterprise bargains at such a rapid rate that we expect more than half the workfore tobcoere bythe middle of next year.
We have decided to encourage the pace of recovery by public investment in our roads and rail system to give us for the first time a national rail freight highway and national road highways equal to some of the best in the world.
We have greatly expanded training and retraining programs for the young, for the unemployed, and for all Australians who want to chance their skills through their working lives,
We are selling off government businesses, and introducing competition into previously controlled industries.
We have deregulated &nbsp;aviation, as well as banking and foreign investment.
We have brought competition into telecommunications.
We have reformed our ports and wharves. Crew levels on coastal shipping are now down to the OECD average. We have halved the stevedoring workforce and doubled productivity.
And in perhaps the greatest; of their structural changes, we have engendered in our workforce a commitment to productivity, competitiveness and quality.
There have been setbacks and hardship. Recession and restructuring have caused unacceptably high levels of unemployment. This year we have invested a great deal in measures to alleviate the human consequences of unemployment. We have also radically overhauled our national vocational training system to meet the demand for skills in a modern economy.
But we recognise that ultimately the solution is growth. More productivity, more competitiveness, more growth.
Australians understand these things. The experience of the last decade has made us remarkably literate in economics.
At the same time we have experienced what might be called a spiritual revolution. There is a heightened -sense of independence among Australians which reflects, I think, the aspirations which come from the change I have been talking about.
I think Australians are increasingly saying if we arc to have this change, let there be no doubt about who we are changing &nbsp;for. And, equally, if we are to be part of the region, let there be &nbsp;no ambivalence about who we are.
Change breeds change.
The change in our perception of what has to be done, has changed our perception of what can be done. The changes we have made suggest &nbsp;- and very often demand &nbsp;- more changes.
The horizon has broadened for Australians. The future is taking on a new and more exciting shape. And increasingly the shape is Asia.
I know you will understand mc when I talk about change, because Japan is a country where the people have accepted change almost as a constant of their lives.
You will know that there are stresses and that people require continuities as well. They need a degree of cultural certainty. cl Australian Government recognise the need to maintain our culture as we change our economic system - the more boldly we advance into the future, the more we need to keep the ties that bind us to our past and to each other.
Our culture derives in part from the many countries of the old world in which Australians have their origins. We are a multicultural society.. We see that as both a necessity and a strength.
But Australia's culture also springs from its 150-year old democratic traditions, from its unique history, with its paradoxical mix of frontier myth and urban reality, and from the equally unique landscape and climate. The land, the great spaces of Australia, and the sense of freedom they encourage, occupy a central pace in Australian minds.
We believe that we will change more effectively and more rapidly if we do not leave the people behind, our best traditions behind. And I think in this we have been vindicated.
The informal, egalitarian style of Australian life is unlikely to change much. Australians wil~ most certainly continue to demand decent social services, decent comfortable housing, and all their traditional freedoms.
And the government most certainly will provide them.
But we have discovered it is equally in our natures to consult and cooperate, and that these practices have great rewards in business and industry.
We're also learning; that our old frontier instincts for compromise and innovation can help us to work much more cleverly, and to innovate and invent, on the new economic frontier.
We've learned that those social services we have developed have a potential market overseas, that our skills in managing multiculturalism have a market and that cultural diversity has the potential to link us to international business networks.
We've also learnt that our experience with the land and climate has produced knowledge as well as products that we can sell overseas.
And the cleanness of our air and water and the beauty of our landscape has taught us that conservation is not only good for our environment but also for our tourism industry and ou agriculture, And for our economy.
So Australia will go on being Australian multicultural, international but Australian.
We will also go on changing as we have in the past decade, and I should hope at an accelerated rate.
Our goal in the next three years is to raise our bench marks. In resources and primary industry, but also in shipping and transport, in food processing and value adding in manufacturing, in energy production and transmission, in banking and &nbsp;financial services.
So Australia is changing~ and will continue to change, even though I think the image of the old Australia, the protected and unadventurous Australia, is still widely held by our friends overseas, including in Japan.
Perhaps even some of you here today &nbsp;- some of you who are now very senior in your own careers, and who had some direct experience of Australia earlier on in middle management &nbsp;- still think of Australia as it was earlier in your own career.
In the same way Japan has changed, but is often misinterpreted abroad as the Japan of the fifities, sixties and seventies.
T'he new Japan is a nation that encourages imports as well as exports.
A country which still protects farming industries more than wc believe it should, but which has made great strides in liberalising its markets for beef, coal, government contracting, and telecommunications.
A country where MITI is still important, but by no means the all powerful institution of the sixties and seventies.
A country which is still tops in motor vehicles and some consumer electronics but which is contracting the share of its steel, shipbuilding, chemical and heavy industries, in favour of lighter, clever products.
A country which is relocating much of its heavy industry offshore.
A country where the services sector continues to expand its share of output, and the manufacturing sector continues to reduce its share.
A country with a vibrant and exciting fashion industry, exporting to markets in the United States and Europe.
A country where leisure is becoming morc important, where young people especially young women are less inclined to accept the old ways.
A country now concerned as much about the environment as about growth.
And a country which after five decades of economic success is beginning to ask itself what its role in the world should be, and whom it can count on.
In a way, Australia and Japan have changed together. We began selling you iron ore in the sixties when Malaysia and India began to falter as your suppliers.
We supplied some of the sinews of Japanese growth in heavy industry in the sixties and seventies.
Later wc supplied bauxite for your smelters as the aluminium industry expanded, and coal to make steel and fuel your furnaces.
When we were the quarry, you were the factory.
As your economy has grown more diverse and sophisticated, so too has ours.
We have both changed a great deal in the last decade, in ways not always understood outside.
Today the prosperity of both us is highly dependent on world trade, and on the strength of economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region.
Both of us are allies of the United States, friends of Europe.
Neither of us is a member of closely integrated economic blocs.
Both of us have in recent years expanded the share of trade we have with our Asian neighbours, hut both of us continue to have important and irreplaceable trade with Europe and United States as do most Asian trading economies.
Both of us are wondering quite how the two blocs of the European Community. and NAFTA will develop whether they will enhance the growth of the worlds prosperity, or diminish it.
Both of us need to think about where we are going in the years ahead, and how we are going to get there.
That is principally the purpose of my visit. I think as old friends and successful partners of long standing we should have dialogues. I think there is much to be gained from working together.
Today I want to offer a few thoughts on how Australia sees things evolving over the next few years.
We think there are many possibilities to pursue in addition to the Uruguay Round. of GATT, but that the success of the Uruguay Round help's all of &nbsp;them.
If the Uruguay Round succeeds, we can build on it.
If it fails, the need for new thinking will be all the more urgent.
Our reading is that the differences now separating the European Community and the United States on the key questions of agricultural trade are minor compared to the extent of agreement. Yet it is these differences which are holding up agreement not only in agriculture, but in the entire round itself.
We urge Europe and the United States to recognise the gravity of their global responsibilities, their responsibilities to generations to come, and to get on with the job of sorting out their remaining differences.
If they do resolve their differences then I think Japan will have to ponder very seriously whether it would wish to stand in the way of a comprehensive agreement covering agriculture. Japan has gained as much as any nation from an open world trading system, and has more to lose than most from its collapse.
But even with a resolution of the Uruguay Round, we have no doubt that the politics of world trade are driving us in the dirction of regional, sub-regional and bilateral arrangements.
Europe is irrevocably on a path to closer economic integration of the existing EC members, and the inclusion of more and more European countries.
And from being an idea, a hope, a threat NAFTA has overnight become a reality. There are great uncertainties here, and in uncertain times we need our friends. In your thinking about the future you should at least bear this mind:
Australia is a friend you can count on.
There are over a hundred thousand Australians students learning Japanese right now. There are more students learning Japanese in Australia than in any country in the world outside of Japan. We have more Japanese language students than do Canada, the UK or the United States put together. So you can count on that friendship continuing, and growing stronger in the next generation.
We support a more active Japanese role in international and regional affairs.
We support Japan's permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council as a way of better reflecting changed international circumstances.
We have valued your partnership in the creation of APEC and in bringing peace to Cambodia. We have worked hard together to stop the spread of nuclear weapons in the region.
And on this key issue of the future direction of the world trading economy, let me say that Australia shares with Japan a fundamental interest in the maintenance of an open non-discriminatory, multilateral, trading system.
If, because of the actions of others, the multilateral system starts to weaken, Australia's core interests lie in maintaining the most favourable possible environment for our bilateral trade relationships with Japan and the other economies of East Asia.
In particular Australia would see no overall gain from entering into any trading pact which discriminates against Japan, or which in one way or another is directed against Japan. You arc our most important export market by far.
Nearly one third of our exports go to Japan. Your prosperity is essential to our prosperity.
Arrangements which disadvantage your trade disadvantage ours.
I didn't mean that we won't continue bilaterally and with other nations to press for greater trade openings to Japan. We will continue to complain about restrictions on agricultural imports. But I do mean that we are firmly opposed to multilateral or bilateral trade arrangements designed to hinder Japan s trade with the world.


Tuesday&nbsp;22 September&nbsp;1992
I am delighted to have this opportunity to appear before the Japan National&nbsp;Press Club.
This is the second time I have addressed this distinguished forum. I held a press&nbsp;conference here in 1986 during the first of three visits I made to Japan as&nbsp;Australian Treasurer.
In my opening remarks today, I should like to offer some observations from an&nbsp;Australian perspective on the process of far-reaching change now occurring in&nbsp;the Asia-Pacific region.
I shall also explain how I see thc Australia-Japan relationship fitting into this&nbsp;wider context.
The timing of my visit to Japan is most opportune, considering the character of&nbsp;the strategic and international economic policy issues now facing Australia,&nbsp;Japan and our regional partners.
The centre-piece of my program here in Tokyo is, of course, the extensivediscussions I had yesterday afternoon and last evening with Prime MinisterMiyazawa. My talks with Mr Miyazawa complement very nicely discussions I had earlierthis year with two other key regional leaders President Bush of the UnitedStates and President Soeharto of Indonesia.
As you know, President Bush visited Japan after his visit to Australia lastJanuary, and Presidcnt Socharto will visit Japan next week.
Prime Minister Miyazawa also made an important visit to Washington last July.&nbsp;An active process of heads-of-government diplomacy is entirely appropriate&nbsp;given the increasing degree of fluidity which now confronts us in regionalaffairs. The end of the Cold War has brought about a revolutionary era in international&nbsp;relations. The most dramatic changes are those we are witnessing in Europe, and&nbsp;throughout the former Soviet Union.
But it is also important to acknowledge that, in the Asia-Pacific region, we&nbsp;have entered a period of transition which presents regional governments with&nbsp;major policy challenges.
In strategic terms, the outlook is generally favourable, albeit loss predictable&nbsp;than it has been.
Althoush Russia retains formidablc military assets, its pasture towards the&nbsp;region is now much more benign than in any period wc have known throughout&nbsp;the post-war period.
The Australian and Japanese Governments both welcome an improved&nbsp;diplomatic environment on and surrounding the Korean Peninsula&nbsp;the normalisation of Russia-China relations&nbsp;an improvement in China-Vietnam relations&nbsp;and the opportunity we now have despite all the recent difficulties to&nbsp;he) thepeoleof Cambodia begin a process of national reconciliation&nbsp;an~ rehbilittion.
Against the background of these positive developments, I discussed with Prime&nbsp;Minister Miyazawa two important subjects.
First, we reaffirmed the view of our Governments that long -term strategic&nbsp;engagement in the Western Pacific by the United States is fndamental to the&nbsp;maintenancc of a&nbsp;stablc sccurity environment.-&nbsp;We agreed that Australia's and Japan's separate alliances with the United States&nbsp;each make a significant contribution to wider regional stability.&nbsp;
Secondly, Prime Minister Miy azawa explaincd to me Japan's aspirations to playa more active international role particularly in the Asia-Pacific region.Australia welcomes a more active Japanese role in international and regionalaffairs. We see that as a natural feature of an evolving regional scenc, wherc thecountries of the Western Pacific translate economic dynamism into increasingcollective weight in world affairs.We are confident that Japan's international role will develop constructively, andin ways that receive increasing legitimacy from both the Japanesc public andother countries in the region.I told the Prime Ministcr that Australia welcomes Japan's willingness toparticipate in United Nations peace-kceping activities.The Australian Government is pleased that Australian and Japanese militaryand civilian personncl will be working together in theUnitedNationsTransitional Authority in Cambodia.We should like this to be a model of the ways Australia and Japan can, wherefeasible, join forces diplomatically to help resolve regional disputes.These matters of foreign policy are important.9O/ ZOd ST0' ON L Z~ 6 daS :-11331
Generally they reflect a continuation of our existing policies.I think that so long as we can be reasonably confident of a favourable strategicoutlook, the single most demanding international question facing regionalgovernments is trade policy.It is now a high-policy matter of first priority.We all have a lot at stake in this issue.It so directly affects our future prosperity.Put simply, regional governments need to decide what nature of tradealignments and arrangements we want to operate in the Asia-Pacific region aswe move towards the twenty-first century.I know some commentators belicve that the multilateral trading system couldeasily degenerate into three competitive blocs comprising the EC, the Americasand an East Asian group led by Japan.The progressive globalisation of trade and investment flows militates, I think,against an outcome of this kind.It is also instructive to note that, for all the intensity of economic interchangewithin East Asia, the United States is still the biggest export market for mostEast Asian economics including Japan, South Kbrea and Taiwan.But, even with a successful outcome of the Uruguay Round of multinationaltrade negotiations, there could well still be-an increasing endency towardsbilateral, subregional, and regional trade arrangements.The North American Free Trade Agrment linking the United States, Canadaand -Mexico is n iib iitii-nga rcat iy.The United States is interested in concluding bilateral free trade arrangementswith countries in Latin America and clscwhere.In South-East Asia, the ASEAN countries are committed to establish their ownfree trade arrangement.What should Australia and Japan make of these developments?In my discussions with Prime Minister Mi yazawa, we reaffirmed the crucialinterest that Australia and Japan share in the maintenance of an open, nondiscriminatory,multilateral trade system.Both our Governments accord high priority to an early and successful outcomeof the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.We accept that free trade agreements have the potential to bring benefits to boththeir members and external trading partners.
But we emphasised the view recorded in our joint press statement that sucharrangements should be open, consistent with GAIT, and contribute toexpansion of the world economy without hurting the interests of third countries.&nbsp;I attach importance to this seemingly straightforward coincidence of view &nbsp;because it means, in practice, that we should not encourage subgroups in the&nbsp;Asia-Pacific region which acquire an inward-looking or exclusive character.Prime Minister Miyazawa and I also underlined our support for Asia-Pacific&nbsp;Economic Cooperation ( APEC) as an essential mechanism for promoting openregionalism. We welcome the commitment made at the recent Bangkok Ministerial meetingto promote APEC's trade-liberalising role.
One of the most interesting policy challenges now facing the region is decidingwhat can and should be done to ensure that international and regionalinstitutions better reflect the growing weight of the Asia-Paci fR region inworld affairs.
I personally think that APEC has great potential in this regard.The organisation not only embraces the main economic linkages betccn theWestern Pacific and North America.
It also provides a benign framework in which the world's two largest nationaleconomies the United States and Japan can harmonise their approaches toregional economic issues.
The notion that there should be periodic heads-of-government meetings basedon APEC membership is a good one.
Such meetings would fill a conspicuous gap in regional relations.They would also invest APEC with greater political weight and status.I have been encouraged by the reactions so far to this proposal, including fromPrime Minister Miyazawa.
I believe it is a proposal which, if advanced carefully over the medium term andwith thorough consultations on the specific details, will bring a beneficialcohcrence to the region.
I should also say something about Australia's credentials for playing an activerole in the future affairs of the Asia-Pacific region.One of the points I want to stress is that Australia's bilateral relationship withJapan is a key element in the network of economic interdependence which hasbrought such benefits to the Western Pacific.Last year, Australia-Japan two-way trade was worth almost 20 billion USdollars. Japan has been Australia's largest trading partner for many years.In 1991, Australia was Japan's sixth largest trading partner, and third largestsource of imports.
The relationship is mature and longstanding.In the 1960s and 1970s, Australia came to occupy a key position as a supplier toJapan of industrial raw materials and cnergy.
Japan's decision to source its raw material inputs from the most commerciallycompetitive foreign suppliers was one of strategic importance for both ourcountries. Australia developed a close relationship with Japan's steel-making and powergeneratingindustries which themselves played a central role in Japan'sremarkable indUStri21 expansion.
And Australia's economic development benefited greatly as a result.These days the economic relationship has diversified well beyond thetraditional trade in farm products and minerals and energy.Later today, before a senior business audiene, I shall explain Australia'sachievements in making our economy more competitive and internationallyoriented, and our determination to go much further with this process.Australia now exports a pproximately 23 per cent of its total output comparedwith 14 per cent in 1983.
A shift to exports of 9 per cent of GDP is truly a landmark change.As part of this transition, we are now the tenth biggest supplier of manufacturesto Japan ahead of Canada, Hong Kong and all o[ ft he AS EAN countrics.The economic relationship with Japan has also shown exciting growth inrelativcly new areas such as tourism, supplying LNG, and Australian exports ofhigh-technology items suh as computer software and medical equipment.
A well--establiqhed economic relationship has provided a secure basis for theAustralian and Japanese Governments to develop an active dialogue on a widerange of international and regional issues of shared concern.Japan's position as the leading country in the Western Pacific region is beyondchallenge.
Australia's credentials in the region largely derive from its institutional stability,its sole tenancy of a continent, the strength of its economic relations withreginal neihours, most notably Japan. and many of the developing countriesofEst Asia.
Australia has demonstrated -the contributions it can make to regional diplomacyon issues such as Cambodia and the establishment of APEC.Within Australia itself there is increasing interest and confidence in our nationalidentity, an increasing willingness to confront the new challenges we face as anation, and increasing understanding that many of those challenges aresubstantially related to our placc in the Asia-Pacific region.Much more than ever before, Australians are now conscious of their place in theAsia-Pacific.
In this, our view of the region, Japan has a central position.It is apginst this background that I have come to Japan to develop an even closerworking relationship with Prime Minister Miyazawa and his Govermecnt.I am most satisfied with the quality and substance of our discussions yesterday.&nbsp;
T'hey have helped Australia psition itself to make optimum responses to the&nbsp;pro fund changes now unfolding in the region.&nbsp;Having made these opening remarks, I am happy to respond to your questions.&nbsp;



TEL o
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIM HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE NAGOYA CONStlATE
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Welcome to the opening of the Austral ian Consulate in
Nagoya. The Consulate is a result of our decision to increase " on
the ground" resources in the regional economies of Japan.
By the end of 1992, in addition to Tokyo, Australia will
have representation in Sapporo, Sendal, Osaka, Fukuoka
and here in Nagoya.
This new office demonstrates the significance the
Australian Government accords the Chubu region as a
Xeystone for the development of the Australia-Japan
relationship. It is a very close relationship, built primarily in those
decades when Australia supplied much of the raw material
for J ' industrial expansion.
Our destini n the modern era have been inextricably
linked.
The partnership is continuing to grow and diversify.
We remain suppliers of raw materials and primary prqiuc,
but the composition of-our ex-p6rt-s is changing.
For the l8st four years Australia has been the tenth
largest supplier of manufactured goods to Japan well
ahead of many other industrialised countries.
We are determined that this trend towards manufactures_
will continue.
We are determined to do business with the world on a much
broader basis than before.
we are determined on our integration in theAija. PA= iic
region the most important part of the world, aa we see
it. 24. Sep. 92 10: 46 No. 005 P. 01/ 02 
ILL: 4. S~ p92 10: 46 No. 005 P. 0
2
Japan is central to this view of ours, and will remain
so-
Strong strategic alliances have already been rorged
between Chubu and Australia,
There is no better example than Toyota, which has
recently decided to build a new -6if-pIant in Victoria, to
invest ñ in a parts warehouse and distribution centre, and
establish a training centre in New South Wales.
We are well aware of Chubu. region's pre-eminence In
advanced technologies, such as industrial ceramics, and
we look forward to stronger exchanges in such areas.
This Consulate will help that process. it will be
staffed by a bilingual Austral an and Japanese team with
extensive business and cultural experience In bath
countries, We are sure that with their efforts we can expand our
relationship in unprecedented ways.*
Ladies arnd gentlemen, our economic relationship Is
dependent on the depth of-65ir cultural understanding.
significant cultural links between Chubu region and
Australia already exist, particularly through the Sister
city and Sister Port relationships.
Mayor Nishio has, I know, visited Australia, and Governor
Suzuki has made two visits.
There have been many cultural exchanges, including, I
understand, the presentation of koalas, ) ookaburras and
eucalyptus trees to the city of Nagoya.
Like the Japanese people, we are very fond of our native
fauna and flora they are symbolic of the unique
splendour of our natural environment.
This Consulate is also symbolic of our desire to deepan
our relationship with Japan, and Chubu in particular.
Fond as we are of koalas, we are fond of business too.
And culture. Very fond of them.
And fond of Nagoya and the Chubu region.
so I ask you to join re in celebrating the opening of
Australia's Nagoya Consulate and our friendship and our
mutual aspirations which it will symnbolise and serve.
Thankc you
NAGOYA 23 September 1992 



TEL: 24. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 03/ 05
PRIME MINISTER
REMARK$~ BY 7THE PRCIME M4INISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DINNER HOSTED BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE,
MR GOli CHO1N TONG
Mr Prime Minister, distinguished guests.
Thank you very much for this generous reception.
F'or Auotralian Prime Ministers cominlg to Singapore has
alwaYe been a pleasure though it must be said that these
days it LB invariably business that we do.
The pleasure uonies fropi doing business with people who I've
always thought shared with Australians a certain personal
style. Some people say that we're both inclined to be a bit blunt
which I will accept on the condition that it doesn't imply
we're not sharp.
I would prerar to think that we're candid direct. We both
like to get to the heart of the matter.
Getting to the heart of the matter is what this visit of
mine to Singapore and Japan and Cambodia is all about.
I want to talk directl~ y to leaders in the region which
matters most to Australia.
As kyou and I both know, Prime Minister, these days we are
Seeking an wers to very large question*
ab Qut the future of the world trading sys tern
about Lhe institutional arrangements we need to cteate
in this part of the world
about thlk security consequences which flow from the and
of the cold war 
TEL: 24. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 04/ 05
2
The frankness and frequency of the dialogue between
Singapore and Australia sets a good pattern for what needs
to develop more broadly in the region.
Prime Minister
No people are more conscious than Singaporeans that
economies are dynamic and constant change is required if a
country is to keep up with the pace.
The evidence of how well you know that is all around us here
in Singapore.
Australians are developing the same awareness with a speed
which muy ourpriuu yvu.
The last decade has been a great educators a deregulated,
less protected, much more outward looking economy, like
necessity itself, is a great edutiaor.
Being very much more engaged with the dynamic economies of
Asia has the same effect.
Not that our engagement in Asia is new.
The presence here in February of 1,000 Australian war
veterans and their families to take part in thecommemoration
of the 50th anniversary of the fall of
Singapore was a solemn and significant reminder of that.
But the form and extent of engagement has changed. More
accurately, it is changing. Radically changing.
Our two way trade with Singapore grew by 18 per cent last
year, to $ 4.2 billion,
You are our fourth largest export market, our sixth largest
trading partner.
The operative word is " partner's that 18 what we seek in
Asia partnerships.
It is why I am here.
One of the themes of the Business Seminar which I will be
addressing tomorrow is " strategic linkages'. We are seeking
ways in which business in Australia and Singapore can work
together, bltef ally and in the wider region.
As we found during our discussions this a[ fernoon, Prime
Minister, it is a good theme for this visit, and for our
Droader relationhship. 
24. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 05/ 05
3
My visit tomorrow with Defence Minister Yeo to HMAS
Brisbane, which has been exercising with ships of the
Singapore Navy and other partners in the Five Power Defence
Arrangements is a reminder that we have important defence
ties.. The fact that 3000 Singaporeans aro studying in Australia
and, indeed, I understand four members of your C4binet
studied there is further evidence that our relationship
extends beyond pure trade.
But trade is the foundation of it; 80 long as we do all that
Is necessary for business to flourish, we can be confident
that the relationship between Australia and Singapore will
deepen and expand.
I am very confident about our relationship, Prime Minister.
I am very confident about the future.
I thank you for your hospitality tonight and for your
equally generous remarks and I propose a toast.
To you, Prime Minister, and Mrs Goh.
To the prosperity and well-being of the people of Singapore.
And to the friendship between our two countries.
SINGAPORE TEL
24 $ optember 1492 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HOLEPROOF FACTORY OPENING, MELBOURNE
29 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
T'hank you very much John, Phillip, Allen, John and Robert, and ladies and
gentleman. It is a great pleasure to be here today John, for this opening of what
you say is probably the largest investment of its kind in the industry, certainly in
the State of Victoria, probably in Australia. And it is a celebration of true
entrepreneurship and true management, the entrepreneurship we used to know and
associate that word with, rather then paper shuffling which happened at the end of
the ' 80s, but the entrepreneurship to identified business, to say we can succeed in
it, we will be in it and we will be good at it. And the management which brings
the people, the design engineers, but most importantly the staff, the workers
together in a compact of pride and productivity to make it all work.
And I think that is the new era of Australia, that's the era that John Button and I
hoped for when we made those historic decisions back in the early 1980s to peel
away. exchange controls, to float the Australian dollar and to see the tariff levels of
Australia decline to produce a new wave of new industries. And we are pleased to
be able to say that has happened and is happening, and the term that your chairman
used, -international benchmarking is something which would have been basically a
foreign phrase a decade ago because nobody would have believed that many
Australian companies could actually benchmark themselves with the best of
international practice, which is happening today.
And so to see in this industry one of the most competitive in the world and
particularly one where there has been a high labour content in countries where
there has been cheap labour costs is a very tough industry to compete in. But it has 
been competed, competition has been competed with, and in competition we are
seeing the devel6p-ment of quite sophisticated machines and production processes
combined with obviously an enthusiastic labour force to produce a very productive
and competitive process. And I was again very impressed by the technology
which was so unique that the media were not invited to photograph it or to
demonstrate how it works, processes developed by Pacific Dunlop with some of
the best high tech engineering and electronic engineering firms of Australia.
This is a great tribute indeed again to the entrepreneurship of -Pacific Dunlop and
the interest of the production people in producing such a competitive product and
being able to do it so well. Now it is not often as you know I am always bagged
for my suits, you know that but it is not often I walk around with a product of the
factory on, but I have the Holeproof undies on today I can assure you. And I don't
like those little skinny briefs, I like the full ones, I like a bit of room. And when I
saw them going around today, one lady there was packing them and I thought well
I will just grab half a dozen of those because they will get me through the rest of
the year. But the fact is, and I have probably got the socks on as well, in the TCF
apparel stakes I am probably ranking quite well today. In saying so can say I am
very pleased to be so.
Now we are presiding in Australia over a very great change and I think that it is a
unique change, a great partnership between the Government and business, and
John was very kind enough to acknowledge John Button's efforts as the Minister
for Manufacturing Industry for a decade. This must make John just about the
longest serving Minister in this area of policy in the world, certainly in the OECD.
It is a great thing to see something from beginning to fruition, a cultural change of
the variety which John has presided over and which we are seeing in Australia.
Nine years ago in 1982 we exported 14 per cent of the total production of
Australia, today that figure is 23 per cent, that's nine per cent of GDP, nine per cent
of the total production, the difference. Today that is worth $ 36 000 million of
exports that we didn't have back there in 1982. And one can just imagine what our
trade and international debt, our trade deficit would be like, if in fact we didn't
have that $ 36 billion of exports that has occurred over the nine years, growth in
exports. And it is a great story for Australia because we are now exporting more
manufactured products than we export rural products or mining products and of
course a large part of the exports, a significant part, is coming from apparel and
clothing exports of which actually grew at an annual rate of 36 per cent between
1985 and 1991-' 92 when export earnings reached $ 122 million. And in the same
period textile yarn and fabric exports had an average growth rate of 23 per cent.
In other words not only are we making it at home but we are also making it
abroad. And it is that making it abroad which think is one of the things which
really does please all of us, that we are not just able to do it here, we can do it
elsewhere. 
Now John Gough mentioned the Textile Clothing and Footwear Development_
Authority, and the Authority is playing a wide ranging role in trying to re-
-establish key sectors of the TCF industries across Australia, but most particularly
in Victoria and they have had a role I understand in the development also of this
new facility, and they have across the whole industry in companies like Hilton,
King Gee, Yakka, Jamison Austechs, Tontine, and we are also giving assistance to
wool tops processing, a plant to be built at Geelong by BWK a project which will
add 35 per cent in the value of Australian wool. In other words we will be
exporting 35 per cent more value instead of simply exporting the raw product.
These are all phenomenal changes and they are happening across industry. This
morning I had the pleasure to join the Premier in visiting Williamstown Dockyard
to see the commissioning of the second frigate which the Navy told me is to a
higher standard than their American counterparts. A much higher standard, on its
sea trials, no faults, a much higher standard on a very highly sophisticated thing.
In the same way that higher technology is again in this plant here. So we are
seeing it across industry and that is the reason why there is so much hope for
manufacturing in Australia and so much hope around the world.
Now just spent a week in Japan and I have seen industry there, but there is
nothing that I don't think in certain sectors that the Japanese can do that we can't
do, or that we can't do things cooperatively. But in what's become a world class
business for Australia, Pacific Dunlop has gone out to the world and has
businesses around the Asia-Pacific area, are developing products which were first
developed here.
So John could I say again congratulations to the company, it has been a marvellous
result, but I think it just proves this point about the partnership between
Government and business, and we have had a debate about tariffs in this country
and while we all believe that we have got to get the tariffs down to levels which
give the consumer a better price and have more productivity, we still believe, we
have got to say we want industries. We just don't want to throw them to the wall,
to let simply imports take the hindmost. And that's why it has always been a fine
judgement about where these tariff levels stop, where the levels actually finish.
And in apparel by the year 2000 it will be around 25 per cent, it won't be around
zero. Which means this business will continue, and I doubt very much it would
continue at zero, as I doubt most other businesses which have got a limited
production run can compete with the huge production runs of countries in the
northern hemisphere. So as always some sense and some judgement and some
understanding of the business needs to be brought to bear by Governments in
determining where tariff levels fall, that's what John Button had the burden of
doing a couple of years ago, and I would like to say we see it as a partnership
between Government and business and if what we are seeing today here is
partnership it speaks volumes for the concept of partnership and getting along.
And the most important partnership is of course a partnership between the
management and the staff, the employees. If there is any lesson to be learned from 
4
Japan or any of the newly industrialising countries, it is wherever you see pride in
the product and pride in the value of what one is doing, you see a productive
business and that is part of management's wisdom and part of the goodwill and
wisdom of the staff.
That is obviously here, I congratulate you for it, I salute you for it, but most
particularly it is with very great pleasure indeed that I congratulate Pacific Dunlop
and declare this most modem marvellous plant officially open.
Thank you. 



TEL. O: ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 01/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ACOSS CONGRESS, CANBERRA 1 OCTOBER 1992
Thank you for the invitation to open your Annual
Congress. I very much appreciate the opportunity to
address a major meeting of representatives of the
communit ywel fare sector.
The theme of this Congress Is ' Social justice in
_ Australia_-the way forward', drid that -is ' what I want to
talk about today.
How we go forward. How we continue to raise the level of
social justice in Australia.
And I can say " continue". Our plans for the next decade,
build on the last one the one in which we transformed
social policy in Australia.
I'm talking about sOcial security, health, housing, child
care, aged care, education, training the areas critical
to Australians' quality of life and opportunities.
of course there is more to do and each year we do more.
As I have said more than once this year, the final
measure of bow successful a nation we are will always be
how well'we care for ech other.
I think we can say with some pride that we have done well
over the decade of Labor.
And I think we can say with confidence that you will see
the progress continue.
You will see more programs and better delivery, more
building blocks of improvement. You will see the social
net made more secure, and the realm of opportunity
extended. Social justice remains at the centre of our approach to
the business and task of governing.
TEL 
TEL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 02/ 10
2
of course we say there is a role for Government and we
reckon it's a very strange philosophy to think that the
art of government is to find, not the means of
engagement, but the means of withdrawal from the life of
the nation.
We think that is quite perverse.
I have always believed that Labor Governments should keep
their shoulder to the door. We should always be pushing.
If you want to be the government of Australia, you have
to want to build things. And know how to build them.
The first principle, we say, is taking the people with
you. We learnt that in the eighties.
We consult with people and interest groups, such as those
represented here today. We act in partnership.
For a decade now this Government has used the principle
of consensus to achieve change, and to ease the passage
of change.
But it has been consensus with purpose and direction.
The Government hias -seen -what has had to be done and
worked with people to bring this about.
it has worked. Consensus does not slow reform it
facilitates it. It exposes the Government to wider
views, helps us see the way through. It alerts us to the
complexities inherent in all social situations.
We get better programs as a result.
The Labor Government believes that-.. social policy and
economic policy are inextricably linked. The point of
economic policy is to lift people up, not to push them
down. when this Government introduced a market ' econom~ y, when it
opened us up to the world, implemented programs of
microeconomic reform every step we took towards a more
Competitive Australia was a step towards a fairer
Australia. We have made hard economic decisions through the last
decade. No one would say that we have never put a foot
wrong but the essential changes, the ones that will
guarantee us a chance in the contemporary world, and
especially in this region have been made.
They are the same changes, of course, that in the long
run will give our young people a future, and the rest of
us security in work and in retirement. 
TL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 03/ 10
3
They are the changes which gave us the growth in national
wealth and the job growth of 1.5 million. Without those
changes a lot of the social policy we have implemented
and a lot of the programs we now contemplate would simply
not be feasible.
what we have done on the economic front, we've done for a
social purpose. For us, economic policy will always be
the servant of a greater goal greater opportunity,
greater care, greater social justice.
This is the recipe for successful countries.
The successful countries of today are the Social
democracies. Not the centrally planned economies. Not
the monetarist experiments.
The successful countries are those which recognise the
complexities of modern society and the clear, though
subtle and often difficult, role for government in
helping to make them work in the interests of the people.
The proper object is to find the right mix to Create an
efficient economy and a comprehensive social policy. The
proper starting point is the realisation that the two are
inextricably connected. Quite simply you can't have one
without the other.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The great aim for all governments now is employment and
proigowh You can't have one without hithro
those either.
We recognise our responsibilities to those who have borne
great hardship in the recession and in the process of
economic reform. It is wrong that they should bear the
burden of change alone.
Care, support and re-training for these people are
Integral parts of economic change, and the greatest
challenge to the advancement of social justice in
Australia. My first priorities as Prime Minister have been to assist
the unemployed and generate jobs and growth.
We began with Oj1e-NatUi. Tile One Nation Statement
included funding for major capital works to create jobs
and projects of permanent benefit to the nation. We
increased income support for families and expanded labour
market programs to assist the unemployed.
Following consultations with young people, community
organisations, business and unions, we extended our
efforts with theNational Employmnt and Training Plan
forYoung__' eople._ 
T1EL.: O ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 04/ 10
4
And I would like to acknowledge now my appreciation of
the discussions we had with organisations like ACOSS, the
Brotherhood of St Laurence, the Catholic Socialwelfare
Comtmission, and the Australian Youth Policy and Action
Coalition, all of whiich contributed to the development of
thEfe Government's initiatives for young people.
Assisting the unemployed was also the cornerstone of this
year's Budget. The Budget provided an additional $ 1.2
billion over four years for training, jobs and
investment.
we introduced a new 10081 infrastructure program,
providing employment and beneficial community projects
for regions hardest hit by unemployment. We improved and
increased our labour market programs.
A number of groups, including ACOSS, have supported
linking training programs with wage subsidies to improve
Job seekers' chances of finding work.
The Government has taken up this idea, f irst with the
offer of accredited training and wage subsidies for all
long term unemployed young people, and then in the Budget
with a program linking training arnd wage subsidies for
adults. TheJO8SKILLS program which has been so suc cessful was
also expanded. Overall, expenditure on labour market
programs has been increased in real terms by 86 per cent
this year compared with 1991-92.
But a government's responsibilities go well beyond
responding to urgent situations.
A lot of government is, or should be, about quietly
running things making the changes which improve the
quality of people's lives. Government is often about
good housekeeping and nurturing.
This is one of the satisfying things in governing for the
long haul you get to see government programs not just
established but developed and improved. You get to build
on the blocks you have laid.
A good example of what I'm talking about can be seen in
the development of theFamily Allowance Supplement or FAS
program. I'm convinced that FAS is one of the most successful
income support programs in the world for 3low income
families. It offers high levels of payment, additional
support for those in private rental accommodation and
subsidised health care.
TEL 
TEL.: O ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002
Since we have been in government, payments for low income
families have increased in real terms by 43 per cent for
families with two children under 13 years, and 87 per
cent for those with two children aged 13-15 years.
FAS is a program to be proud of.
But from January next year we will improve it even more.
Family Allowance Supplement, additional pension/ benefit
for children and family allowance will be integrated.
This low-key change will make the system simpler and
easier for families to understand. It will give about
37,000 families additional inczome. It will reduce
poverty traps. The payments will also be paid to the
main carer of the children, who is usually the mother.
These are not headline-grabbing changes. They are good
housekeeping changes which will make the lives of a great
many Australians better.
The FAS changes illustrate that often the way forward in
social justice is, as I said, by quietly building on the
successes of the past.
Sometimes,. also, the way forward comes about through
addressing problems that, ironically, have only surfaced
because of the successes of past policies.
An example of this is the Child Support Agency.
I strongly supported the establishment of the Child
Support Agency. It redressed a major wrong that the
burden of family breakdown was being overwhelmingly borne
by the custodial parent, usually the mother.
Before the Agency was set up in 1988 only 24 per cent of
custodial parents received child support. The average
level of maintenance was $ 26 per child per week.
The Child Support Agency is currently collecting 70 per
cent of the amount-on its books. And under the child
support formula, the average level per child is now $ 48 a
week. But with all this success came a problem that is,
there is an initial eight week delay in the Agency making
the first child support payments.
There are some very good reasons for the delay, including
the fairly lengthy process of determining the level of
payment and finding the non-custodial parent. But
understandably for parents dependent on the money, any
delay is very difficult.
TEL 
TEL.: O ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 06/ 10
6
It is interesting that the pressure to improve the system
comes mainly from parents who would not have experienced
the old maintenance system.
For parents who suffered under the old system, the Child
Support Agency can seem like a miracle. The other day I
heard that the Child Support Agency has caught up with a
father who had not paid support for his children for
eight years. For custodial parents in cases like this,
the Agency is more successful than they could have ever
hopod. But it is no good telling parents who are now facing a
delay in receiving their first payment, that in the days
before the Child Support Agency they would have been
lucky to get the most paltry amount on an irregular
basis. They just want a system that works. And this is what we
have to keep working to deliver the best.
I'm pleased to say that in this year's Budget the
Government announced that it would change the
arrangements so that custodial parents will receive their
first child support payment two to three weeks earlier.
And we will continue to work to improve the program.
So successes can lead to new problems and new solutions
to them. This is one way the social justice agenda moves
forward.
The work we have done this year on vocational education,
which will continue over the next few years, is another
example of this point.
Education has been one of our successes as a government.
when we came to office, only 36 per cent of kids finished
school. Today, 70 per cent do. A revolution in a
decade. we helped this revolution along with AUSTtJDY and ABSTUDY
which provide financial assistance foFsen1ii-67csecon-da-ry
students in low Income families. We have increased this
assistance and 50 per cent more secondary school students
receive it now than in 1987.
Again success has lead to other problems. Having stayed
to the end of high school, these kids now want a tertiary
education. But the system is not yet fully equipped to
take them the next education step, despite the 50 per
cent increase in Commonwealth funding for higher
education places between 1983 and 1994.
We now need to tackle our vocational education and
training systems to prepare young people for a life of
skilled and interesting work, a world of work which
requires training and retraining over a working life.
TEL 
T1E. LO: ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 07/ 10
7
The new Australianl National Training Authority is a major
step forward in creating a genuinely national system to
deliver high quality training programs that better meet
the needs and priorities of both students and industry.
But we don't just respond to problems.
we review policy regularly. We want to be sure we are up
to date, responsive, responsible.
Since coming to office in 1983, we have done just this.
We have undertaken major reviews of aged care; social
security; retirement income; programs of support for
people with disabilities; and, more recently, health and
housing and the major review of government policies in
response to the IfoyEA-qommi ss ion. into Aborigirnal Deaths
_ in Cu4~ soy.
Such reviews can lead to fundamental changes to programs.
For example: the shift to support for elderly people to stay at
home through the introduction of the Home and
Community Care Program
the transformation of the unemployment benefit
system into an active program of assistance
and the creation of a new community housing program.
These reviews also provide an excellent vehicle to
consult with groups such as yourselves.
The recent National Health 5trategy is a good example of
this process. The Government Introduced Medicare in 1984
in response to the previous Government's policies which
left nearly 2 million people without health insurance.
_, mpedicarqeprovides a universal, equitable and efficient
system of health care for all Australians.
it is difficult to understand why the Opposition would
want to replace such a system with a policy which would
force people to take out private insurance such as in the
United States.
The Opposition policy would greatly increase the cost of
health care. it would hand over responsibility for
setting health costs to the AMA: to quote their own words
" Basically, our policy requires doctors to set their
own fees".
The Opposition's health policies would increase the total
cost of health care in Australia by over $ 2 billion a
year. The overall impact on household health bills would
be an increase of 23 per cent or $ 1000 a year for a
family with two children.
TEL 
TEL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 08/ 10
8
The Government's approach through the National Health
Strategy is to build on the strengths of Medicare and
ensure it is in good shape to take us into the next
century. Medicare will become more than just a health
financing system; it will become a comprehensive health
care system.
The Government has an agenda of reform to cover
Australia's health needs, including improved access to
public hospitals; better integration of the health and
aged care networks; and implementation of aNational
Mental Health-Policy.-
I have talked today about different ways of taking the
social justice agenda further.
We respond to the urgent problems like unemployment. But
we don't just wait for emergencies to act, we also look
for opportunities to make our programs stronger and
better.
And we don't rest on our laurels; we respond to the
challenges that our successes can give rise to.
Finally, we do not shun open and constructive fundamental
review of our programs, to ensure they are right to meet
the changing demographic, social and economic landscape
of Australia.
We have taken the view that social justice is at the core
of governing, and we have governed for the long haul.
The rewards come steadily and it is to those who most
need and deserve them that they flow.
It is not an approach predicated on the belief that there
is no role for government except to clear the way for the
market. It is not a residuallst approach which believes
social justice is about giving cold charity to the poor.
Dr Hewson's approach is dramatically different.
Dr Hewson does not talk about building on the strengths
of the Family Allowance Supplement. He talks about using
the social security system to compensate people for the
introduction of a highly regressive goods and services
tax. Dr Hewson does not talk about tackling the challenges of
the success of the Child Support Agency. He talks about.
privatising it, removing the one thing that ensures the
very success of the agency: its location in the Tax
Office. 
TEL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 09/ 10
Dr Hewsofl does not talk about advancing the social
justice agenda. He talks about getting out of the
business of governing for social change, selling off
public housing, tearing down the public health system.
Reducing. Limiting. Privatisinig. Wrecking.
The Hewson model of government is to get out of the
business of government. In his own words, it is about
less government.
Integral to this approach is the division of society into
the ' deserving' and the ' undeserving'; into those who can
legitimately claim government assistance and those who
will be shunned.
Two Nations instead of our one Nation.
Dr Hewson says he is all about giving Australians choice,
all about the government getting out of the way and
leaving people to it.
But can we call choice, abolishing unemployment benefit
for people after nine months and throwing them to the
wolves? Can we call choice, forcing sole parents into the
workforce when their youngest child reaches 12?
Can we call choice, giving young people a voucher for
training and telling them to get their own training
course? Can we call choice, selling off public housing and
leaving the elderly, Aboriginals and people with
disabilities to find their own way in the private rental
market? Dr Hewson doesn't understand about choice.
Real choice is not about stripping back support and
abandoning people to their own devices. Choice is about
people being able to take advantage of opportunities. At
times this will mean assisting people to the starting
line; at times it will be about running the race
alongside, helping out; and at times it will mean
intervening when the race is being run unfairly.
This is what governing for social justice is about it
is about being in partnership with people throughout
their lives and providing the support necessary to enable
them to make the choices and take advantage of the
opportunities. With this approach to government, we are committed to a
comprehensive social security system and to maintaining
the level of payments through indexation. 
TEL: l. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 10/ 1
we are committed to expanding the provision of quality,
affordable Child care for parents at home and in the
workforce. We are committed to a fair and equitable health system
and to tackling the problem of waiting lists in public
hospitals. we are committed to continuing to expand opportunities
for women, in education, in employment, in every area of
our national life.
we are committed to better housing options for people,
and to moving to more effective assistance for people in
private rental.
We are committed to giving older people opportunities for
an independent and dignified life.
We are committed to building a truly national vocational
education and training system.
We are committed to advancing social justice for
Australians. I think we should be very proud of our achievements. But
we know the process of reform is never over.
We go forward by adding one achievement to the next. We
do not dwell on the past, but strive to understand and
influence the future. 



TEL: 4. Jun. 93 9: 02 No. 002 P. 02
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, 1NP
AUSTRALIAN VIETNAM FORCES NATIONAL MEMORIAL DEDICATION
CEREMONY I welcome you all to Canberra. I know that many of you
have come hundreds of miles. And many years. Too many
years. Today is a great day in the life of our country.
This memorial will forever honour the Australians who
fought and died in Vietnam. It honours all those who
served.
We honour them for the same reason we honour those
previous generations of Australians who served in wars on
foreign soil.
For their sacrifice. For their faith.
These Australians believed in their country as those
earlier generations did. They believed in democracy and
freedom, and by defending it in Vietnam they believed
they were defending it everywhere.
They believed in duty.
They were brave.
Those whose names are entombed in this memorial paid the
ultimate price for their belief in Australia.
It is true that no war divided Australia like the Vietnam
War. It is true that often we remember those years more
for the protests at home than for the fighting abroad.
The years of Vietnam corresponded with a great social and
political upheaval in Australia. The war was itself one
of the catalysts of change.
There is no doubt that in all the turmoil we lost sight
of the reality of Vietnam. We lost sight of those who
did the fighting, and the waiting. And by doing that we
made their reality worse. 
TEL: 4. Jun. 93 9: 02 No. 002 P. 03
2
For all the drama in the streets, and parliaments and
public halls, the real war was, as always, on the
battlefields where young men and women died.
The real tragedy was in their suffering and death and, as
ever, in the loss which lives on in the hearts and minds
of those who loved them.
We cannot make good this hurt any more than we can undo
the war itself.
But, by this memorial, we can make good the memory.
It is the symbolic resting place of the 504 who died. It
means that at last they will join the exalted ranks of
Australians who died in other wars.
It is a memorial to all the men and women who served in
Vietnam. it is a memorial for all those for whom the war has meant
suffering and lose. All those whose experience of
Vietnam still haunts them. All those here today.
We should recognise, therefore, that it is a memorial for
all Australians; because, as a nation, we should all bear
the burden.
It is a great memorial.
I hope it will be taken as a symbol of the,-nation's
gratitude. I hope that it will remind us of our own duty, and that
this and future generations will find in themselves the
Same love of Australia, and the same faith in our future.
And I hope it will remind us always that we live in a
great country dedicated to freedom and peace.
Thank you.
CANBERRA 3 October 1992 



M.
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, MP, OPENING OF PRATT INDUSTRIES' NEW DE-INKING
AND PAPER RECYCLING MILL, MELBOURNE, 9 OCTOBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
I think it is true to say that we arc in a new culture and that culture changed in the
1980s, the culture of protection, seeing Australia ringed with a fence of tariffs, a
managed -exchange rate, cxcbange controls, a constipated financial market, there's
no way a business like this would havc been funded with them through the 1980s
without financial deregulation, but we are -seeing the great shift to a more supple,
fluid economy whcrc manufacturing is becoming the order of the day.
This is the first year in our history where manufactured exportsM have equalled rural
and mining exports. This is a great change for Australia, a great change from our
culture as an importing country, and as I said, John Button and 1, a week ago were
opening a plant, the Holeproof plant of Pacific Dunlop's. You might have heard
about my underpants on thc way through. But the thing was, here was another
busincss whcre Australians have decided to do something technologically clever
and produce a product which is compctitive and which will feed into the Australian
retailing industry and which will import replace. And not so many months before
that I had the honour again with Mr Toyoda to turn the first sod of the plant, an
$ 800 million investmcnt in a new motor vehicle plant which will be the ncw
denominator of the Australian motor vehicle industry; an enormous investment. Or
just a few weeks after that a new catalytic cracker for Shell over at Geelong which
is going to change our petroleum industry, going to sell into the Singapore oil
market and into south-cast Asia.
VO/ TO'd GIO'ON 91: ZT Z6' 30613:-131 
These are just in the space of a few months and there are more of them and as
many as I talk about John can double them because he gets more invitations than
me, most out there in the manufacturing industry, they like him more.
Last week I was at the AMECON plant, we were not opening it but we were down
there tyre kicking, looki~ ng around and there was the latest destroyer delivered to
the Australian Navy, a most sophisticated warship, state of the art, world quality,
navy accepted it it had no faults, which is almost unprecedented; at its sea trials,
no faults. They say it is a better quality product from similar plant ships from the
United States, a great Australian achievement.
And recently I was at the Pacific Dunlop tyre plant where we see again technical
innovation to turn a new export business out of tyres; or at theFord plaig. where
we're exporting the new model Capri to the United States. This is just in Victoria.
Last week I was atMitsubishi where we saw the new Magna wagon go 6,000 of
them around the world as a-new export market for Australia.
We've made the jump, we've made the cultural shift to a society which is putting its
focus on technology and ability and part of that is of course, bringing up the quality
of our education system because the greatest Australian resource was never the
next deposit of minerals or the next paddock full of wheat, but the Australian
people themselves. And that's why now in 1992 just over 7 out of 10 children
complete secondary school where it was just 3 out of 10 in 1982. How could you
ever hope to be a technologically smart country if only 3 kids in ten completed
secondary school? Forty per cent of those are now streamed into universities
where we have added 50 per cent of places, we created the equivalent of twelve
universities of an average campus size of 10,000 since 1986 and we're now seeing
a revolution in vocational education, in technical and further education with a
Na_ t ional Training Authority to do in vocational education what we've done in
tertiary education and participation rates in schools.
We're seeing all that fed into a much more conscious research an~ d deve lopment
culture with support for research and development and product innovation which
welre seeing come through in Australian business. We are seeing Australia
integrate itself with these products with our near neighbourhood with the rest of the
world. Just a week ago I came back from Japan and Singapore and not long before that a
from earlier in the year from Indonesia and Papua New Guinea and there's no
doubt in those countries Indonesia, Japan, Singapore et cetera that we are finding a
new place for Australia and we are building up conducive training and government
relationships and private relationships which is going to lock Australia much more
O/ ZO'd ST0' ON 95!: 2-T Z6* 430O6 :-1133.1 
into that Asia Pacific area. Already 70 per cent of our exports go to the Asia
Pacific area, 60 per cent of it goes to the south-east Asian area, 75 per cent goes to
the APEC area, Asia Pacific area as a whole.
We're already part of this region and we're integrating with it now rapidly. I
suppose the most important statistic one can quote is that a decade ago 14 per cent
of our produce was exported, this year it is 23 per cent; that is nearly a quarter of
everything we produce is exported. This is a phenomenal change which without
that our current account deficit would be double, our debt levels would be
astronomic and of course, the international financial markets would already be
inducing a permanent slow down of Australia so that our debt levels didn't
increase. So we've madc a very important change and part of the change is in the culture of
business and the culture of the workforce, it's not just entrepreneurship like
Richard's ( Pratt) display here or the marshalling of the capital or the technical
innovation in the management group, but also in thc great revolution in industrial
relations. Because we are now seeing enterprise agreements written across this
country where all sorts and manner of conditions, be they penalty rates or hours of
work or conditions of employment rolled into new innovative agreements which
give us all the flexibility in the world, higher productivity, better salaries, lower
costs and lower inflation and it is that sea-change in industrial relations which has
given us a period of unprecedented industrial peace and which is seeing us do the
most innovative things, introduction in plants across the country. I think that
consensus model, that bringing Australia together and holding it together and
giving people a stake in the business, giving people pride in what they are doing
and having management to include them, an inclusive policy is the one that's
obviously producing the goods for Australia and not a competitive policy in the
work place where one worker is pitted against another or an adversarial
relationship where the management is pitted against the employees. That's what
we want to avoid and if we want to take any lessons from Japan or any of the
cultures from our near north, if there's one thing in common they have is that peer
group pressure and the work ethic have come togethcr as a cohesive group is what
made those societies productively great in what is changing Australia.
So the spirit is there and the faith is there and that is what's going to matter to us
and the hope is there. The fact is, T said this week with some criticism that the
recession is over, technically it is true and as we know we are still living with the
effects of it and we will for some time. But the point is the recovery is on and it's
on in plants like this across the country and it will grow as we go through thc 1990S
as a low inflationary culture where we've got the emphasis on product innovation
and we're looking to add value and do good things for our employees.
tVO/ MOd G9100N 91: LT Z6* 13O613:-131 
But in every business they are all becoming more productive, Richard was telling
me at the table that in each plant of course there are fewer people producing more
products and that's true across the country. It has to be true to be competitive. So
what is the answer? What is the answer to the implied redundancy of having fewer
people producing more product; and the answer is to produce even more product,
even greater levels of product. There are just thousands of business opportunities
that will be taken up in the 1990s doing innovative things, producing more product
to let the country grow, hut you can't run this country at a speed which takes the
employment up without it spilling into inflation, without some agreement about
incomes. Whether you call in an Accord or you call it ca-operation or an
understanding, call it what you like, but there is no way sonme draconian Reserve
Bank on monetary policy is going to let Australia grow and at the same time keep
inflation down while we can take up the unemployed into productive jobs. If we
want higher rates of employment and more growth, we must have more production,
more speed in GDP, greater rates of growth, but if we want to lower intended
intlation risk and keep that competitiveness we've got to do it together. We'll never
do it banging people over the head with a vicious monetary policy administered by
some independent reserve or central bank.
So it's all about doing things together as things have been done here, doing clever
and complex things, but doing them well, seeing intelligence, entrepreneurship,
street smartness, good will, a bit of heart brought together to produce something
really new and innovative.
So Richard, I congratulate you on what you have done, I congratulate you on the
business you have developed which is a good thing for Australia, you're replacing
all of those imports which you would otherwise be taking as raw product, you're
doing things to employ Australians and you'll keep on employing because youll
keep on growing your business, notwithstanding the fact you need fewer of them in
the productive process and in doing so you are part of that great cultural change of
Australia, going out, meeting the world, engaging the world and doing it in a way
which earns Australia a place of repute, of substance, in the world of trade
particularly in the A-ia Pacific where we live.
This is a a great day for the industry of Victoria and of Melbourne and I salute and
congratulate every Victorian who has been involved with it, none more so than our
afcsbian entrepreneurial fricnd, Richard Pratt.
Thank you.
S910N 9 Z6' 430613:-131 



TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO T1IE BARCALDINE COM M UNITY, BARCA LDINE,
OCT~ OBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Rob ( hulls), Lancc ( Norman), Pat (.) and Rob's wife
Petrina and ladies and gentlemen.
It's a great honour to be here and thank you very much for so many of you coming
out to see us, on this I'm sure another Queensland sunny day. My daughters are
telling me now I've got a bald patch up here I've got to watch and I should have had
the sun tan cream on it; I'm warming up for the Sydney summer. It is lovely to be
In such nice weather, but more particularly in nice company and thc nice company
being those of you who kept flying the flag of the L abor Party and the spirit of
Labor and thc spirit of Australia so known to be connected with the town of
Barealdine and the famous Tree Of Know. ledge under which the Labor Party Was
formed a century ago.
It is an interesting conjunction of events that in this decade, the last in this century,
that a century ago, in probably our worst drought and worst depression, the Labor
Party was formed and we went through that great time, that great spirit in
Australia, when Australia federated and became a nation. And that great spirit of
experimentation continued right until the First World War. And now a century
later, in what is not a general drought but one near by here, and a rcession we arc
now moving from, we are contemplating that spirit of Australia again because we
lost that sense of social experimentation which came in the 1890s and in the first
fifteen or so years of this century. And the problem was it was snuffed out at 
G9allipoli when all the conservative forces of this country took what was a very
radical thing, the contribution of the young men and women of Australia to the
First World War,-and wrapped themselves conservatively and all their conservative
mores around it.
And then, of course, we had the ' 20s, a period of economic expansion, the ' 30s with
the depression. the ' 40s with the war and thcn, under Menzies in those years, the
and ' 60s, we again kept focusing back on other countrics rather than our own.
So we lost that sense of nation, that sense of experimcritation, that spirit of
Australia which was kindled here a century ago.
That spirit has, I think, returned and there's now a greater sense of national identity
than there was at any time since just before the First World War. Anrd that_ has
been recovered, I think, across the countryside; people are much more clear about
their identity as Australians and Australia as a country is more clear about its
identity in the world as a nation.
The Labor Party has always been called upon to lead that national spirit and one
wonders today if we hadn't federated a hundred ycars ago would we fcderatc in this
decade. Given all the various rivalries between the States and thc Commonwealth
I don't know.
But yesterday we had another indication, I think, that that spirit is around. We
decided in June this year to form a National TrainingAuthority that's to take the
TAFE system and turn it into a nati-onal ratherthan a state-s-ystem and yesterday
the deision was made to put the headquarters of the national body in Brisbane.
So, for almost the first time, Brisbane has picked up a national authority in the
State of Queensland and that spirit of co-operation which will produce for
Australian kids a vocational cducation system to sit beside the universitics is
perhaps a glimpse of that great spirit that obtained in the 1 890s in this country and
in this part of Australia.
So the spirit of Australia, the spirit of Labor owes a great deal to Barcaldine, but
the Labor Party still carries the spirit on and in this century, in the latter half of it,
we've had to remake Australia in Labor's image. That is, try and take it from a
closed country to an open, robust country again one that is prepared to look at
some social experimentation like a century ago but this time go out to the world
in trade. And we have done this in the 1980s. We've made the great cultural shift
out, Instead of staying with'the cultural shift in which we had through all the post
war years. This is the first year that we'll export more manufactured goods than
rural exports or mining exports. Because the problem was, though the great rural
industries and mining industries have been such strong things for Australia, they 
weren't able to pay for our imports as long ago as 1980 over a dccade ago. So we
had to start developing our goods and our services, but you can't develop goods and
services, you can't develop sophisticated things, without developing the most
valuable resource and that's our young people our children.
When we came to office only three children in ten completed secondary school;
this year that's over seven in ten, and in five years' time we think it will be nine in
ten. And then we created enough places for 40 per cent of them to go onto
universities. But there was always a hole: those who couldn't get into university.
And we're now filling that by developing a proper vocational education system
under that so that wc end up with a trained workforce that can develop
sophisticated products and not only that add value to our rural product-, so instead
of selling beef and wool in an unprocessed way, wc start adding value to it and
selling it to those markets that really matter. That's what really is going to add
income to Australia, add benefits to the country and put a stable base in
employment right across the country.
These are the things which we've done, but as well as that we'vc picked up all the
social aspects of the people, the views of the peoplc who have met here a century
ago. And while there was drought here a century ago, now we have drought relief
courtesy of a Labor Government.
Where they were talking about unemployment a century ago in that depression,
we've got unemployment benefits. Now Dr Hewson, our Tory friend, wants to cut
them out after nine months) but we've got them there, we've increased them
through the 1980s and we've got a decent social security _ system. sitting there for
Australians courtesy of the fact that a Labor Party was formed -so long ago. And it
means now that access to health through Medicare, access to education, support for
the aged in retirement, a new scheme of support for the aged with occupational
superannuation for those who will be retiring in some years hcncechild care, as
well as all those aged care things, all that support in the education system, that
great social wage has come from a Labor Government that knows to keep Australia
strong, you'vc got to keep Australia together. And the notion that the rich should
prosper and they'll flick some crumbs off the table and the rest of the public pick
that up, is not our view of the world.
We say all Australians should come along together. So we want to build a strong
industrial base, but not just growing wheat and wool or even raising beef, but to
add value,-to make sophisticated products, to get into services like tourism as we
see tourism changing the whole of thc state of Queensland, an industry that
developed entirely under a Labor Government in the past ten years. And that trade 
4
in international services, whether they be tourism or medical services or financial
services or health services, have all come from a Labor Government.
The funny thing is, it has taken a Labor Government to give Australia an open
market econom~ y. In that great struggle between capital and labour here a century
ago, capital won, but capital has been tamed since so that now it works with labour
to make Australia stronger. We are working together. And now the great phalanx
of enterprise agreements across Australia, where unions and employees and
managers and businesses are sitting down making novel changes for productivity
and higher wages, is part of the growing up and maturing of Australia, part of the
maturing of Labor and the country.
There's always been a to-ing and fro-ing in this century between the notion of
private interest and private reward being the key to everything and government
intervention being the key to everything. We saw the robber baron capitalists of
the United States and Britain in the 19th century believing that private interest and
private reward was everything, and yet we saw the communist parties of Europe, of
Russia, and some of the other socialist parties, believing that government
intervention was everything.
In the Labor Party we've had neither one of those things. We've always had that
nice happy mix, that fair mix of saying not everything is going to be solved by
private reward or looking after yourself and it's not all going to be solved by the
government sector getting too big so let's render unto Caesar thc things that are
Caesar's, but let's get that nice balance in there.
We think we've got that balance in there, that is the rights of the individual, the
freedom to achieve, but at the same time this concept of nation and community.
And that's what I think our friend Dr I-ewson has forgotten. He's trying to tell us
basically that greed is good, if you go out and achieve for yourself that's all that
matters, but God help you itf you are not an achiever, God help you if you are not
on the top of the heap because in that sort of a world you get left behind. We heard
John Howard speaking at the Press Club during the week about industrial relations,
he wants to deprcss Australian working conditions. So it's the same old stuff. As I
said during thc week, Howard could have made the speech in Lancashire in 1895
and I'm quite sure the people arguing for capital could have made it here in
Barcaldine in 1890 or 1891. It's the same old argument, put by the same sort of
people, but wve're not having a bar of it. We're saying all Australia comes along
together, let's grow together prosperously, lct's rekindle the spirit of Australia that
came with the federation in the 1890s and let's do it with the spirit of Labor which
came from Barcaldine in 1891. 
Let's make the spirit of Labor in the 1990s as relevant as it was in the 1890s and
let's show as we did a century ago that Australia leads the world in social
experimentation and social change and economic change with it-We can do it
again, in fact we arc doing it again and while the recession has been a real problem
for us and brought a lot of suffering to people as we get out of it into a recovery, a
strong recovery, the basic breadth and depth of the country will mean that we've
got those balances right and that spirit and hope which the Labor Party has always
been able to provide will be there again in the last decade of this century.
To the people of Barcaldine can I say not only thank you for seeing Rob and me
here today, but thanks for keeping the faith, thank you for keeping the spirit and the
hope of Labor which has for nearly all of this century been the hope of Australia,
And a century later say that your loyalty has brought back that economic and social
change, that economic and social experimentation which this town and my Party
started a century ago.
T'hank you very much. 



TE: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 01/ 13T
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTERt, THE HON PJ. KEATING MP
Business Council Of Australia Annual General Meeting
Sydney, 15 October 1992
Our partnership with the Business Council is now almost a decade old.
It dates back to the heady days of the Economic Summit of 1983 and the realisation by
the business community at that time that there was a need for a ncw organisation to
meet the times.
There was a need for a sophisticated business viewpoint different from the narrow
sectional views of the past.
With the Government clearly interested in building a community-wide commitmecnt
for change and reform, business wanted to be part of that commitment, part of that
change. For the Government's pait, we welcomed this dcsire by the business community to be
included and we were pleased at the decision to establish thc BCA in 1983.
There have been the occasional celebrated squabbles over the years.
But we have continued to work together and talk together.
We have been able to co-operate with the BCA in a range of ways.
I am glad that we are keeping the lines of communication open because that is a
hallmark of this Labor Government.
I have always believed that a solid partnership with business should be a central plank
of a successful Labor Government.
Without a confident, profitable, expanding business sector Australia will not be able to
build the basis for a successful society or a successful nation.
TEL 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 02/ 13
2
Without it wo will not be able to generate-. b
Without it, we will not be able to cut unemployment and give hope to those who
would otherwise face a barren future.
Without a successful business community we will not be able to achieve a better
environment, or better social infrastructure,
Wc will not be able to look after peoplc as we would wish.
With this Government, success with business is the starting point of a virtuous circle
which underpins a successful society.
And all my public life I have been of thc view that building a successful business is a
complex and difficult matter.
This realisation came to me as I tried to help businesses in my electorate of Bankstown
cope with the debilitating years of the 1970s.
It was reinforced by my experience of the 1980s.
When I became Treasurer in 1983, the view at the time was that the key to building
successful businesses was for the Government to take steps to boost profits, get rid of
the so called " real wage overhang", cut back the size of the public sector, reduce
public borrowing and cut inflation.
At the time this hardly seemed enough to me and I added the need for more
competition by international islng the economy and deregulating the financial markets.
I also saw the importance In establishing and developing a dialogue with the Trade
-Uipflrnoveincnt and with talking to business and other groups at the Economic
Summit. This was not just to rebuild profits after the bleak Fraser years but to build a
commitment for workplace and community change.
Having made remarkable progress on these fronts, we then took on the task of
microeconomic reform.
We embarked on reforming aviation, the ports, shipping, land transport,
communication and the rest.
I mention all of this to make the point that thcre are no simple text book solutions to
building succesful businesses.
TEL 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 03/ 13
3
The agenda for governments must of necessity be a long one and must be addressed
with dexterity and with a feel for all thc inter-relationships that exist within a society.
Take for example the Government's commitment to boosting business investment in
research and development by maintaining the R D tax concession at 150%
indefinitely.
This is part of a deliberate strategy to accelerate the speed with which Australian
industry improves the sophistication of its products.
This Is what we must do if we are to make our way in the world.
The cost of the R D concessions is worth carrying on the budget to help structural
change and expand industries which will form the basis of tomorrow's job growth.
Ukcwise, the ooeaieRsac Centr&amp; es both a way of devcloping links
between government funded resarch outfits and business and a means of spawning
ncw industries.
And we are having success.
34 of these centres are now in place and this will increase to around 50 by the middle
of next ye~ ar.
Communications, agriculture, mining, manufacturing, medical research, the
environment and others arc covered by these centres.
Frequently it is industry that is taking the lead as is the case with Hawker de Havilland
and Asta which were instrumental in setting up the centre for Aero, Space Structures.
Also, the centres cut across a wide, range of industries BHP, Carlton and United
Breweries, Qantas and CAA are all involved in the centre for intelligent decision
systemns. The centre for waste management and pollution control is supported by many
companies including Brambles, ICI, BliP, ADI, the Water Board and so on.
The whole of Australian. inds is becoming much more focussed on innovation and
research. In 1990, for instance, Australians registered twice as many patents overseas as they did
in 1983.
Providing accelerated depreciation for new equipment investment is also part of a
deliberate strategy to boost investment and grow new industries. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 04/ 13
4
These new schedules announced in One Nation mean that our tax rules for investment
will be more than competitive with comparable countries.
Increasing the depreciation rate for tourist-related buldng from 2 1/ 2% to 4% was
also designed to play to our strengths.
The decision to fund a major expansion of vocational training. and to develop a new
national training system more relevant to industry, will help young people get jobs
and is also playing to our strengths.
It Is training, research and development and new investmnt which will create the
industries and the jobs relevant to Australian needs.
They will be industries and jabs which will enable us to take advantage of the growth
prospects in our region.
These are the natural, sensible, creative things that Governmnent should be doing.
And what this Government believes in.
We do not believe in Government withdrawing from its responsibilities.
Nor in simplistic solutions which deny a role for governmcnt.
in effect I am saying beware of those who come before you with simple nostrums
promising salvation.
At this point you probably think I am about to become a little political.
And you are right.
In the next six months or so Australia and Australian businesses have to make a
choice.
They have to decide whether they will embrace Dr Hcwson, and the doctrinaire
narrowness of the E!&amp; ghtback package.
Or whether they will continue to participate with a Government that has a clear reform
agenda but believes in developing partnerships with people.
T'hey will have to decide whether they will embrace the nostrums of Fightback with its
massive dislocating tax shuffle.
They will also have to consider whether they accept the simplistic belief that business
should deal with their employees through intimidation and not through cooperation. 
TEL: 15. Ot9 NoUUb~ 5 F U57'ñ
it is as if Dr HieWSon has been caught in a time warp.
it is as if he has learnt nothing from the succsss and the setbacks of the 1980s.
He remains committed to the text book ' Solutions' that he learnt in the 1970' s and
which Malcolm Fraser stopped him from Introducing.
Can business really be expected to believe, for instance, that it has been the $ 6 billion
state payroll tax and the $ 7 billion excise on petrol that has been the major factor
holding them back all thewe years.
Can they really believe that the removal of these two taxes would unleash a business
surge that would enable them to conquer new markets in Asia or develop a new
product. Life is rnot like that.
T7hey should also consider that the payroll tax is a State tax and that thc States will not
be properly compensated by Fightback for its abolition.
As a result of Fightback, the States will suffer a cutback of rno less than $ 1.4 bil lion in
Commonwealth funding.
Consequently they will be looking for new revenue sources, most of which are likely
to impact on business.
Business should also realise that Fighthack is committed to $ 13 billion of income tax
cuts it can't properly pay for.
Consequently any Coalition government at the Commonwealth level will also be
looking for extra revenue.
Doubtless through higher road user charges or some such.
It is an unplcasant fact of life that one way or another the books will eventually have
to add up.
People have to accept that Fightback cannot at the same time be a major benefit to
business without hurting households.
Some one is going to miss out.
But most Importantly, business should have every reason to disregard any benefits
from the changes to payroll tax and the petrol excise because they would be funded by
a $ 27 billion GST which is a tax on everything they produce. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 06/ 13
6
A tax equal to over half of the current income tax.
And why tax everything?
Why tax the output of an expanding industry like the tourism industry, which is where
the jobs and our future lies?
Particularly when a GST on domcstic tourism will make it relatively cheaper for
Australians to take thcir holidays overseas.
Why drive Australians offshore?
Why tax food?
It can only be an ideological obsession with the GST itself.
In 1985 believed in a GST.
But upon later reforming the income tax system I realised it was not worth the
macrocconomic dislocation.
I do not believe In a GST today and I haven't believed in one for many years.
It's too big a price to pay for too little return.
On the other hand, Dr M-cwson ploughs on regardless.
And it is not only the mirage and dislocation of the tax shuffle that business should be
concerned about with Fig~ htback.
They should also be deeply worried about the change that will occur in their
relationship with their employees.
Gone will be the developing commitment to change that the workforce has embraced
over the past decade.
And as many in this room today will appreciate, with that commitment to change has
come a degree of co-operation that has enabled a quite amazing transformation of
industrial practices in this country.
Every day I am being reminded of this by busincss leaders as I go around the country.
In its place will come suspicion, intransigence and a determination to Protect
entrenched entitlements. 
TEL: 15 . Oct .92 16 : 55 No0.00G6 0i1
7
With a l-ewson Government all subsequent progress on workplace reform will be
fought out in that same old culture of conflict which debilitated this country for so
long. Companies who have made existing arrangements work well for thenmselves and for
their employ= e, and who have seen major improvements to work practices and
productivity, will see all that progress dashed,
And for what?
To satisfy an inflexible, anachronistic dogma that refuses to accept that great progress
has been madc in the way Australians do business.
Fightback and Dr Hewson refuse to accept that co-operation can bring big rewards if a
Government accepts its responsibility to promote reform and make it happen.
And, as anyone who has tricd to run a business knows, it is the culture of management
and the employees who in the end determine whether a firm is successful or not.
Dr R-ewson threatens to destroy the great progress we have made over the past decde
in building a productivity culture amongst the workforce.
The successful economies of the world are those that have built up employee
commitment to productivity and invariably this has centred on a cooperative approach
with management.
Dr HewSon's approach to industrial relations will rip all of this apart.
The reform agenda that this Government has overseen is impressive but, most
importantly, it will continue.
It will continue because the Government has locked into place a process that demands
change. We have learnit all of us that change breeds change.
Australia can no longer stand still.
The system now demands that we all make progres.
This is not fully understood by those who believe that Governments should be
constantly inflicting change on the community in some self righteous frenzy.
Governments have to make hard decisions, and I can assure you all that I have
participated in many. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No .006 P. 08/ 16-
But it is better to also create a community commitment for change and to design a
system which rewards progress and makes it impossible to stand still.
This is what this Government has done by making co-operation and dialogue a key
factor in dealing with change.
But most importantly, by internationalising the conomy we have set forces in train
that are requiring all of us to be competitive with the rest of the world.
Firms that have to deal with the world are dez~ anding that their suppliers are
competitive and that their services are efficient.
The BCA itself has served a useful role in promoting the needs of business and in
being an agitator for reform.
And as I have said the progress is there.
To take a few examples:
On the waterfront, by October this year the stevedoring workforcc will be half of what
it was three years ago. Our reforms have doubled the number of containers handled
per man and the average ship turn around time has fallen by 39%.
Most importantly thc waterfront now works reliably.
We have more than achieved what we said we would do when we set out on this task
In 1989.
Our ports now compare favourably with best practice overseas.
Stevedoring charges for ncw business and contract renewals have fallen by 25% over
the last year, providing clear evidence that the benefits of reform are being passed on.
In shipping. the Govcrmcnt has also Introduced a new coastal voyag permit syster.
and the number of foreign vessels operating on the Australian coast has increased
rapidly with 48 such voyages in 1988-89 rising to over 200 in 1991-92.
in the last three years crew sizes have fallen by a quarter, to equal the average crewing
for OECD ships visiting Australia . saving industry $ 50 million per year. As a result
ship owners have spent nearly $ 2 billion on 22 new ships about a third of the fleet.
These important changes have been brought about with very little industrial disruption
simply because all parties the Government, shipping companies, the unions, the
shippers all worked together.
Of course more can be done and more is being done. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 09/ 13
9
Senator Cook has been working with all parties on the next stage in shipping reform
and we will be announcing that shortly.
By dec&amp; 4ain domestic aviation we cut fares by around 23% in the first eighteen
months; in the twelve months ending March 1992 airfares. fell by a further 14%.
In * 1991-92 a record 17.9 million passengers were carried by domestic carriers, a
massive 30% above the previous peak in 1990-91.
Lower fares have been critical to the success of the tourist industry and we have no
intention of letting competition in aviation wither away.
The Government has also orchestrated a revolution in Australia's international aviation
services.
Ansett will now be able to compete with QANTAS and other international carriers.
To ensure that Anscit has the opportunity to develop into a successful regional airline,
the Government is re-negotiating our air service agrecments with other countries to
provide for multiple designation and additional capacity.
The National Rail Corporation, incorporated in September 1991, will reduce the
average cost of providing rail freight services by 45% in real terms, and will improve
labour and rolling stock productivity by 35-45%.
The number of unions with coverage of national rail employees will be reduced from
over 20 to 2 and these unions are currently negotiating an enterprisc agreement with
thc Corporation to deliver these productivity gains.
National Rail will commence operations in February 1993, following completion of
the entcrprise agreement and the passage of all relevant State legislation.
The Corporation will turn around Interstate rail freight from losing around $ 320
million pa to financial break-even in 1995-96, and profitability by 1996-97.
Along with the One Nation spending on rail infrastructure, this will produce an
effective national rail network and create a national standard gauge system for the first
time in our histor-y.
All of this would have been unheard of a short time ago when most assumed our rail
system was heading for extinction.
On roads, all national road projects funded by the Commonwealth are now subject to
tender, doubling the level of funding put to tender since 1988. 
T1EL5:. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 10/ 1,
Heavy vehicle mass limits have increased, yielding large cost savings to Australian
industry. Conventional vehicles payloads and productivity have increased up to 20% since the
mid 1980' s.
All of this has led to an unheralded but major advance in transport efficiencies.
National introduction of B-doublcs ( a large artijculatcd vehicle) will allow further
productivity gains of up to 40% which can reduce national transport costs by up to
$ 200 million.
In co-operation with the States, we have established the National Road Transport
Commission to develop and maintain a national systcm of uniform regulations for all
vehicles and a fair system of heavy vehicle charges.
This initiative has been strongly supported by the Road Transport Industry.
And the Industry Commission has estimated that gains to GDP from reforms along
these lines to be in the order of $ 190 million each year.
T'here will be full competition In telecommunications in 1997. As part of this process
we have alrcady introduced a second network carrier with provision for three mobile
phone scrvicci.
The Government has also put in place price control arrangements on charges for
AOTC services to ensure that AOTC do not misuse their existing miarket power, and
that new technology and cfficiency gains are reflected in lower prices to consumers.
As a result, the average price for AOTC's main services has fallen by 4% per annumn in
real terms over the past three years.
For the next three years this price cap has been set at 5.5% below the rate of inflation.
The improvcd profitability and lower prices achieved by AQTC is illustrative of what
is now happening with many government business enterprises.
,_ gMznonwcalth GBE dividends have increased from around $ 100 million in 1987-88
to over $ 440 million in 1991-92 through improved productivity rather than higher real
pricm. But as I said earlier, the agenda moves on.
Ralph Willis will shortly be announcing mecasures that will see the Commonwealth
GBEs operate on a still more commercial basis with realistic relationships between
the GBE's and the Governuent, as shareholder, established.
TEL: 
TEL: 15. Ot9 1: 5N. Ub l-. 11' 1-, Y
And the State GBE's are also being subjected to,' and responding to, closer
examination. But the most interesting new development is the National Review of the Trade
Practices Act to be conducted by Fred Hilmer.
Following this review, we the States, Territories and Commonwealth will have the
opportunity to establish a national competition policy.
That is a policy which should support the development of Australia as one competitive
market for our industries, not a sct of divergent regulatory regimes.
Competition policy in the future will need to be consistent with removing unnecessary
barriers to comipctition and a reduction in complexity and administrative duplication.
The significance of these principles and their potential impact is great.
TFhe specific focus of the Review will bc on sectors and industries exempted from the
current Trade Practices Act.
Such as:
State business cntcrprises like electricity, gas ( in some states) and water
unincorporatcd bodies such as partnerships including professions
statutory marketing authorities such as Egg Boards, dairy marketing and fruit and
With the States we arc also committed to making major improvements in electricity
generation and distribution.
Because of our abundance of low cost coal and other energy resoures, electricity
should be a key part of any industrial strategy for this country.
With the States the Commonwealth will be working to make sure that the electricity
generating and distribution industries are efficient and that we make the best use of our
rcsourcc-S.
While the States have primie responsibility in this area we must work for a national
approach. Wo have already secured agreement to the development of an Interstate transmission
network and to genuine separation of distribution and gencration. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 12/ 13
12
Work is continuing on this subject through the National Grid Management Council
and will be taken further with the Premiers.
Customers and final users of electricity including members of the BCA also have
an interest in the reform process and I will be discussing with the Premniers how input
from these groups can be given greater prominence.
Let me restate. We value our partnership with you.
For example, in 1984, more than 20 BCA member companies participated in a pilot
program for thc Governmernt's Affirmative Action for women legislation.
More rcently, 5 BCA members have joined with the Governnien to develop practical
ways to address work and family issues in the labour market.
And following a request from your Equal Opportunity Council, I have asked the
Office of the Status of Women in my department to provide peak employer and union
bodies with access to Its Register of Women, which should assist you in locating
qualified women for appointment to boards and senior management positions.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a gentle irony I supposc that the Busincss Council of
Australia has never known a conservative govermecnt.
It's a bit like those of us who lived through the twenty three years of the Menzies
&amp; 0vcrnrncnt.
But this is no reason to believe that it is time for a change.
I think that, notwithstanding the ground we have lost in this recession, our
achievements Australia's achievements in the past decde have been remarkable.
Thc changes have been remarkable the structural changes and the attitudinal ones
We do things differently and we think differently.
And so long as we take the people with us on these things, so long as we involve
people In the change, so long as we stick to those principles of consultation and
consensus, the process will go on.
It could only bo reversed by throwing out the cooperative culture that has developed
over the past decade, and the institutional arrangements and supports which are at
once agents of the change and guarantees of continuity.
Ladies and gentlcmen, I believe we now have a great opportunity. It is one we have
earned all of us. 
TEL: 15.0ct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 13/ 13
13
It has been hard won and we are still not there. But we would be very foolish to throw
it away. Very foolish to change the course which is changing Australia.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you this afternoon. 


ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, T'HE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP TOTHE SIXTH NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS FORUM SYDNEY, 19OCTOBER 1992Mr Edwards, my coleague, the Flon David Beddall, ladies arnd gentlemen.Thank you for inviting me to talk to you today.I want to talk to you about what the Government is now doing, and what it intends todo to make sure that small business continues to play its part in the expansion of theAustralian economy which is now underway.But before I do that I want to spend a little time describing to you the quiteextraordinary sea change which the Australian economy has undergone In recentyears. We face many challenges over the coming decade, and the most important evidence ofour capacity for change is the change we have already made.We simply are a much morc competitive, productive, internationally-oriented, exportbased ccononiy.No one would deny that that is what we want to be what we must bc.Australians should be aware of these achievements because they arc theirs. Theyshould know, for Instance, that:we now export almost twice as much as we did a decade ago.that, exports now account for more than 23 per cent of total output.that we now sell more than manufactured products overseas than metalores and minerals, and, for the first time in our history they match ourexpotts of rural products.that in 199U-91 our manufactured exports showed the fastest growth inthe OECD, and fastest among them were Elaborately TransformedManufactures which have grown at a rate of about 45 per cent in recentyears. that our service exports have tripled in the last decade.that tourism is now our single largest export industry, accounting forover 10 Tper cer, of thc iotal. T1EL9: . Oct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 01/ 09
TEL: 19. Oct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 02/ 02that we arc exporting ETMs and services as well as mincral and ruralproducts to thc fastest growing economies in the world thc Asianeconomics. that we are exporting them through ports which have doubled theirproductivity in the past couple of years.that they are being generated in officesq and factories and mines whicharc increasingly working under enterprise agreements whose number isgrowing so fast we expect half the workforce to be under them bymidway through next year.There has been a great change in our economy and a great change in our attitudes andI think Australians deserve to be reminded of it, and encouraged to take heart andpride from what they have achieved.And it is for thesc reasons that I have to say that I willt passionately resist theOpposition's intentions to undo those achievements.And you shouldn't be surprised if I'm passionate about it because you know it wasthe L. abor Government which took the leap, against much more internal resistancethan you would expect the conservatives to have faced, and made the changes, andopened the economy up.And 1 believe very strongly that we wouldn't have made them, we wouldn't have thechance we now have, if we hadn't taken the people with us.if we hadn't built a consensus, encouraged negotiation and consultation andmaintained our commitment to social development.Unashamedly, I take the view that there is a role for government. We cannotresponsibly back away from maintaining the necessities of peoples lives, we cannotretreat from our economic role.I take the view that governments can make subtlc and sensible interventions in theeconomy and I think the facts of the last decade support me.I have no doubt about that and no doubt about the one great certainty in theeconomic life of this country that a great deal will depend on the continuing cnergyand initiative and skills and ideas of small business.It will continue to depend on the success of people like yourselves and those yourepresent. We recognise that small and medium sized firms employ much of the Australianlabour force over the past two decades small business has generated more thanper cent of the new jobs.We recognise that small businesses generate a lot of the new product, and that theydrive a lot of those very welcome developments I outlined earlier.We recognise that the potential of their enterprise s unlimited. When they thriveAustralia does.
TEL: 19.0ct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 03/ OS3We recognise that they form the basis of much of the future growth and prosperity ofthe Australian economy.We recognise that it is among them that a lot of the risk is taken. A lot of thenecessary risk.They know fear. They know frustration. They know hard work.But they also know hope, and excitement and fulfilment.Recognising all these things, the Government's role is to minimise the frustration, andmaximise the fulfilment.Small business has been an integral part of the consultative process of thisGovernment starting with the Economic Summit in 1983 and put on a more permanentfooting with the establishment of this very successful Small Business Forum.We have not always agreed with each other.And we have not always been able to do all we would have liked.But the results of the continuing consultation between Government and therepresentatives of small business can be seen in the measures introduced.Our assistance to business has ranged from the deregulation of financial markets tothe deregulation of aviation; reducing company tax to reducing wholesale sales tax onmotor vehicles; reducing the number of strikes to a thirty year low to reducinginflation to a thirty year low.We made tax reforms in One Nation specifically for business.the nine week deferral of company tax payments for instance.a new accelerated depreciation schedule which allows plant andequipment with an effective life of, say, ten years, to be written offover five years, rather than eight. A measure which in one year aloneconstitutes a peak saving to business of $ 1.25 billion.an increased depreciation rate for industrial and short term travelleraccommodation from 2.5% to 4%.an increase from 20 to 50 per cent of the capital gains tax exemptionood will, and a doubling of the eligibility ceiling from $ 1 million to2 million of net business interests.We have legislated to allow for the development of Pooled Development Funds tohelp firms obtain equity capital, and I am pleased to announce that the EquityInvestors Ltd has been registered as the first of many PDFs that will play a vital rolein assisting the expansion of small and medium sized Australian businesses.Ladies and gentlemen, with public discussion in economic reform directed largely atthe need to create internationally competitive industries, there is a tendency to feel thatlocally made goods and services are uncompetitive.This is a long way from the truth an increasingly long way.
TEL: 19.0ct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 04/ 094Our agriculture and mining industries are among the most competitive in the world,while the record of our manufacturing and service sectors in responding to thecompetitive challenge has been simply outstanding.Manufactured exports have grown at a rate of more than 14 per cent each year since1985/ 86 and now total nearly $ 13 billion annually.Exports of services such as tourism have been similarly impressive with a real 8.5 perCent average annual growth since 1985.And one of the reasons for the extraordinary growth has been the greatly improvedquality of the products Australians now make.And small and medium fixed businesses are a major clement of this success.Of course, the Government recognises the extra hurdles small businesses face if theyare to succeed in international markets.This is why we established the Export Access pogram that will assist 700 small andmedium enterprises over the next three years.These days we build cars and sell them into the most demanding car market in theworld, Japan the same country where Peters WA sells $ 50 million worth of icecream each year.Australian companies build the ferries that cross the English Channel. And some ofthe best luxury motor yachts in the world.I could list dozens of other examples, but chances are you will know about them,because it is companies like your own or your members' which are doing a lot of thesethings.The simple fact is that these days, across a whole range of products, you can't buybetter than Australian.All of us have an interest in telling Australians about it telling Australians thatAustralian made products are very often as good, if not better, than anything madeanywhere else in the world, and that when they buy them they are doing boththemselves and their country a favour.In a sense it is the return on their initiative, imagination and hard work. Buying goodAustralian products pays the dividend on the all the changes we have made.It is for this reason in this Australian Made month that I am pleased today toannounce that the iovcrnment will work with the Advance Australia Foundation tofurther promote the Australian Made symbol.We will put in $ 2 million in each of the next two years to ensure continuity and a highprofile for the campaign.
And a central element of the campaign will be the quality and reliability of productsmade in Australia.
It's desirablc for example for the Governmnt to regulate unconscionable conduct&nbsp;under the trade practices legislation, and we will introduce a Bill into Parliament forpassage this session to do just that.&nbsp;
It's certainly desirable to have clear and conmprehensive rules to encourage&nbsp;competition and fair pricing.
This is one reason the State and the Federal Governments agrccd to the need for anational competition p~ olicy which, as I recently announced, is the subject of anenquiry to be cha" ird y Professor Fred Hilir of the Australian Graduate School ofManagement. it will look at extending the reach of competition policy into areas not now covered,such as government business enterprises and the professions.There has to be cquality of competitive standing betwecn government enterprise andprivate enterprise.Again, that is an area where the application of law to Ousincss is a good and necessarything and, by and large, business both big and small supports it.But I know there are regulatory inconsistencies between thc States or between theStates and the Commonwealth areas whcrc regulations may no longer fulfil theiroriginal goal, and areas whcre regulations may have been made without sufficientsupervision by the Parliament or the Govcrrcment.Many of these problems have been addressed by the adoption of principles of mutualrecognition by the States and the Commonwealth.From March next ycar standards recognised in one Statc will be recogniscd in allStates. I am firmly committed to cutting inessential regulatory burdens on small businessesbut let me tell you that the administrativc burden of a GST will be vastly greatcr thanany reporting requirements presently faced by small business.I havc spokent to a lot of small business people about the idea of a Goods and ServicesTax in recent months, and I must say I am puzzled by the gap between what they sayand what somec small business organisations say on their behalf.The people who spcak to mc recognise that small business would be a big loser fromthe GST.It is small business which will have to collect the tax. Undcr our amended wholesalesales tax, only 20,000 businesses will be required to be in the system. Most smallbusiness will be able to opt out and have no reporting requirement whatsoever.But under the Opposition proposals all small businesses will havc to pay a 15 per centtax on their purchases, and add a 15 per ent tax to their sales. They will get the firstper cent back eventually of course, hut only when they have done the paperwork.They will remit the 15 per cent on sales to the Govermecnt, and again they will haveto do the paperwork.
TELAlready, Australian products compete favourably on price; a clearer apprcciation byconsumers, other producers and distributors of the quality of our products can only bebeneficial for all Australia.In deciding to provide this additional support to thc Australian Made -symbol, I havebeen very awvare of the problems that have bccn cncounicrcd recently by somedoubtful labelling practices.We have all heard stories of thc overseas product with a Made in Australia labelbecause it was packagcd here.Fortunately this is not a major problem with thc Australian Made symbol itself.But it is clcarly a problem with the rangc of descriptions that appear like " Made inAustralia", " Product of Australia", " Manufactured in Australia' and so on.And it is not only the consumecr who is confused.Business does not have clear guidelinei and definitions in the various Federal or Statelegislation to which it must adherc.Accordingly, the Ministcr for Consumer Affairs, Jeanniette. McHugh, has been giventhe task of developirng practical definitions of such termis to ensure that bothconsumers and those charged with enforcement such as the Trade PracticesCommission and Customs have a solid and universally-applicable basis forassessing whether something is, in fact, Australian made or not.Thcrc will bc a number of complex matters involved in the review and the vicws of allaffected parties including the groups represented here today will be welcomed.I will also be writing to the State and Territory governments asking them to contributeto this process and adopt its outcome.I expect that this task can be undertaken without delay, and that we can putappropriate changes into legislation in the first half of next year.I said earlier that 1 know something about the hopes and fears of small businesspeople. I know it primarily because my father ran a medium sized business. I grew upknowing it.For example, I know of the difficulty my father had in persuading the banks to lendhim money on cash flow or receivables. They only wanted to lend against theproperty and I have to say that therc is still too much of that kind of thinking amongthe banks today.It was hard to get a loan from a bank in those days, and just as hard to finance thebusiness from profits, because undlistributed profits in private companies were taxedin a very discriminatory way.That's one of the things I'm pleased to say I fixed as Treasurer.Government regulation is a particularly difficult prohlcn because there are, Of course,many areas where regulation is desirable. T1E9L: . EOct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 05/ 09
TEL: 19. Oct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 07/ 097As a New Zealand accountant reported for that country, small businesses people willlose their Sundays to new paperwork.The Canadian expericnce is particularly telling for small business.Canada intfoduced its GST in January 1991. In November 1991, the Canadian peaksmall business organ on, the CFIB, released the results of a survey it conducted ofits members in a report titlcd " The GST: A National Tax Tragedy."Over 25,000 responded to the survey, the biggest response to a CFJB survey ever.And their message was very clear.Over 70 per cent of respondents reported a negative impact from the GST on theirbusinesses while only 8 per cent reported a positive impact.The message was clear small business is much more disadvantaged by a GST thanis largc business.Compliance costs were 5.5 per cent of sales for small business but less than 0.2 percent f) r largc firms.We are told business will b; better off because payroll tax will bc eliminated butmost small businesses don't pay payroll tax. Only a small proportion of the 800,000small businesses in this country, pay payroll tax.About 700,000 businesses will not benefit at all from the removal of payroll tax.What they will receive is a new and complex consumption tax which will hit each andevery link in the business chain.In a way, the position of small businesses illustrates what I think is one of the biggestproblems with a OST.It is a very considerable clerical burden but for nothing.It won't sell one additional article of commerce.It won't help most of the small businesses selling services, which are not taxed now atall. It won't help the construction industry, which will not be able to offset the tax it willpay on all inputs.It won't help the tourist industry, which would be obliged to hit its clients on day onewith a 15 per cent price rise.Here we have an industry which is making a tremendous contribution to our exportsuccess, which has grown so rapidly in the eighties that it is now one of the majoremployers and export carers in this country, and the Opposition proposes acent tax on cvcrything it does.It wants to slap on the tax despite pleas from the Access Economics firm whichhelped it write the GST package.
TELIt wants to slap it on despite the resistance of the Opposition shadow minister fortourism.Anid it wants to slap it on despite thc nearly unanimous view of the industry iself thatimportant products of the tourism industry should be exempted.It's a similar story with industrial relations, We have right now in Australia a set-upin which employers can ncgotiate just about anything with their eniployccs penaltyrates, hours of work, thc working week, work practices and so forth.They can negotiate whatever they wish and come to any agreement they wish, so longas the employees arc not lcft worse off by the new arrangement.That seems to mc a reasonable reservation in our socicly.These deals can be done in a framework of cooperation which has sccn Australia'scompetitiveness improve by miore than 10 pcr cent over the last decade, and ourinflation fall to one of the lowest in thc OECD and in our region.Yet again the Opposition want to throw all that away. It wants to tear up all thcpresent agreemcnts and awards and return to thc kind of pitched battles bctwcenemployers and unions which wc had in the sixties and seventies.Ladies and gentlemecn I began by saying that Australians could take pride in what theyhave achieved in the past decade, and that they have many reasons for confideneabout dccadc ahead.What they have achievced may be attibuted very largely to the spirit of consultationand consensus which dcveloped in the eighties, and which now characteriscs so muchof our industrial relations Culture and the relationship between government, businessand unions.I said there had been a sea change in the Australian economy: it has been the changein our attitudes and in the way we do things which has produced it.And this will bc the province from which more change comies.Morc than anything elsc, it has been the change in the culture from conflict tocooperation which has brought us up to the rest of thc world and given us a chance.And it is the threat to those gains which I think we should perhaps fear most.I have addressed you today as people engaged in business.In conclusion I would addrcss you as Australians meaning people with a care for thcsociety and economy at large.It seems to mie, and I quite sure it will become clear to the majority of Australians, thatour Opponents' policies will be destructivc of both.Destructive of the economy for the reasons which I have broadly outlined.Destructive of the social fabric principally because they seek to replace the principlesof cooperation and consultation with a regression to conflict and divisiorn.We small business and the Government have come a long way in the past decade.Further, I suspect, than of either of us can readily recall.
And, faccd with the alternative which the Opposition is proposing with absolute&nbsp;inflexibility, I do believe we need to be rernindcd.&nbsp;We've come too far to throw it all away.



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
WELCOME TO PRESIDENT ROBINSON OF IRIELAND
CANBERRA, 27 OCTOBER 1992
President Robinson, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Australia it is my great pleasure to welcome
you. It is truly a great pleasure for the reason that in
certain significant and undeniable ways we Australians
share your rrishness.
Even those who are not of Irish descent will say that
when they go to Treland it is uncanny how much they feel
at home.
We would like to think that you feel something Similar
among us here.
And when we fppl the-se bondq of recognition and affection
we shouldn't be too surprised.
For at every major point in our history since 1788 the
Irish have been there, in word and deed and spirit.
It is not easy to say just what that spirit comprises.
There has frequently been an eloinent of rebellion about
it of course, but it's much more than that.
The Trish contribution has been primarily to the
language, literature, law, politics, religion and
philosophy of Australia.
And football, and horse racing, and farming, and eating,
and drinking, and story-talling, and what is these days
called the hospitality industry, and music.
To name a few.
In other words, the Irish have been a great clvilising
force. A great creative force.
We share some basic attitudes.
t7/ 10d S000N Z1J: ZT Z6* 1O22 :-11331 
2
Perhaps the most important of them, as you said in your
speech to the Press Club yesterday, is a deep attachment
to the land&amp; we live in: the land itself lives in our
minds, and informs the way we think about ourselves.
More than anything else, the shape of the continent
somehow defines a disparate and far-flung population as
one Australian people.
We have long been thoroughly urbanised and
industrialised, but the land is still at the centre of
our identity.
And I've no doubt that the Irish imagination played some
part in keeping it there.
But as I am sure you know, the Aboriginal people, who
were herp for 40,000 years or more before us, understood
this land in ways that we can never hope to emulate.
Yesterday you told the story of the Choctaw Indians who,
on hearing of the Irish famine, raised seven hundred
dollars and sent it to Ireland for the relief of the
victims. It was a case of people who were already displaced
feeding those who were about to be.
In another nineteenth century example of the global
village, in turn, those Irish were among the settlers who
displaced the Aboriginal people of Australia.
It is one of our great hopes in this last decade of the
twentieth century that we can put to rights the
devastating impact that the European occupation of their
country had on the Aboriginal people, and that we can
reconcile at last the economic, social and cultural
differences which still keep Aboriginal and non-
Aboriginal Australians apart.
This should not be beyond people who have succeeded in
creating a very rich and harmonious society from an
extraordinary variety of cultures.
Through these and many other avenues of social and
economic policy designed to strengthen the ties which
bind Australians, the Government I lead is seeking to
create an Australia which is more truly one community and
nation. President I know Ihat you also look to reconcile the
differences which make for the continuing tragedy of
NorthernIreland. I know that you seek to bring opportunity and justice
equally to women and men and close the divide between
them. 
3
I know that you seek to narrow the gap between rich and
poor, and that your great hope is that everywhere the
outcasts of the world can be brought in.
I know, that being Irish, you must be attracted to your
country's past, to your ancient heritage and traditions
but I know that you look to your country's future.
We have this in common too.
In the last decade Ireland has grown out of the shadow of
both Britain and its own past to become a more outwardlooking
nation, more confident of its identity, more
alive to the world and its region.
A nation carving out for itself a very independent
position in European affairs, and with it a stronger
place for itself in the world.
It has done these things of necessity. Because they were
the only way to give Ireland back its future. The only
way to ensure that the Irish of the next generation will
have no need to emigrate.
So these days when we Australians and Irish say that we
see something deeply familiar in each other, it is not
merely our common past but also our present
preoccupations and our aspirations which we recognise.
For Australia has done the very same things we are more
open to the world, more confident and independent-minded,
and alive to our region, the Asia Pacific, as you are to
Europe. Like you we have stepped out of the past.
old countries we might be in different ways, but in a
sense we're younger than we have ever been.
President, we share many of your hopes.
We share your country's determination to be a modern and
dynamic nation.
our affinity with your country and our roots in all of
its political and religious traditions has always made
the conflict in Northern Treland a matter of deep concern
to us, and we earnestly hope that the current talks being
chaired by our former Governor General, Sir Ninian
Sephen, will be successful.
We share your hope for sexual equality and social
justice; and, at the end of a decade in which some
countries have discounted these ambitions, we are proud
to say that we have made substantial progress toward
them.
GS0ON ZV: ZI Z6OL0 -113311 
That is something else we share it may even be the
strongest of the ties that bind us we know that when we
change we have to take our people with us.
President, the light which you keep burning in your
window tells all your compatriots around the world that
they will always be welcome home.
But, with the greatest respect, there's no need to keep
it burning for the six million Australians of Irish
ancestry. It would never occur to us for a moment that we weren't
welcome. It would never occur to any of the other eleven million
for that matter.
We presume we're as welcome as you are here. And that is
very welcome.
VO/ VO'd SOOON ZV: ZT Z6' 30* Z1: 131 


PRODUCTIVE DIVERSITY IN BUSINESS CONFERENCEMELBOURNE, 28 OCTOBER 1992Ladies and gentlemenI welcome you to this conference on Productive Diversity.It is a timely and important event which may well be seenas a turning point in the way we regard multiculturalAustralia. in the past decade and a half Australia's policies ofcultural pluralism have been among the most innovativeand creative in the world. They have also been thehallmark of a decent and far-sighted society.In a world very often afflicted by ethnic and culturaltension, bitterness and bloodshed, Australia stands amongthose few countries which actually relish theirdiversity. under the umbrella of an overall commitment to the nationand its uniting values and institutions, a society ofgreat richness and variety and remarkable harmony hasevolved here.It has been In part the product of policy, and in part, Ithink, the product of democratic and egalitarian valueswhich have always run deep in Australia.This is something of which Australians can be very proud.it should give us confidence.If this conference should mark a turning point it willnot be in the nature of a break with the past, but rathera Significant Change of emphasis.It is a matter of building on achievements and creating anew multicultural agenda.-There have been three distinct phases In Australia'spost-war response to its immigrants.
The first phase was characterised by an expectation thatimmigrants would fit into the dominant Anglo-Australianculture. The second was characterised by the encouragement oftolerance and respect for diversity, and the effort toensure access and equity regardless of ethnic origin,And this effort will continue.But we now have the beginnings of a third phase.We now nmust take advantage of the potentially hugenational economic asset which multiculturalismrepresents. That is what Productive Diversity is about. It is theharvest on the crop sown and nurtured by our immigrationand multicultural policies.The inspiration for this Conference is the perceptionthat two things must be brought together:*the need for a still more competitive andd4vereified economy with a strong export base andthe cultural affinities Australians have withvirtually all the countries with whom we want to dobusiness.These affinities might be likened to havingrepresentatives in the field who, through theirunderstanding of our customers' culture, language andpreferences, can increase our competitive edge.To give you some examples:At a time when the prospect is for increasedeconomic opportunities in Vietnam we have in thiscountry sixty thousand speakers of Vietnamese.At a time when the triangle of southern China, HongKong and Taiwan is achieving staggering economicgrowth rates, we have in this country one hundredand seventy two thousand Australians to whom theChinese culture and language are a given, notsomething which needs to be learned.At a time when Australian industry aspires to pickup contracts in Eastern Europe and the Middle East,we have in this country eighty two thousandAustralians whose origins were there.And we have a market in Australia whose diversity isa virtual microcosm of the world into which wetrade.
The inspiration for this Conference is the realisationthat we must as a nation find ways to capitalise on theseassets.How can we use our diverse cultural knowledge andlanguage skills to penetrate overseas markets and boostAustralian exports?How can companies reach Australia's diverse domesticmarkets and increase profits at home?How can we better manage the diversity of Australianworkplaces and improve our productivity?Australia is a country of extraordinary achievements andequally extraordinary potential.In no small measure, this is because we are a country ofimmigrants. It takes imagination, ambition and courage to emigrate toa new land.And in my view, it is precisely these qualities that havecontributed to our past achievements, and will enable usto use our potential to the full In the future.During my recent visit to Asia, I stressed our country'scapacity and willingness to change.I said there, as I have said in various forums inAustralia the proof of our capacity to change is in thechange we have already made.We now see ourselves very differently, and we arestarting to be seen differently by others.And we are different.Australia has opened up, both culturally andeconomically. We have realised that our future depends on makingourselves relevant to the rest of the world, andespecially relevant to the most dynamic region of theworld which sits at our front door the Asia-Pacific.If only to take advantage of this great opportunity, thedevelopment of an export culture is a national priorityfor Australia.The change is already well underway.Australian export earnings have reached record levels,despite subdued world trading conditions and depressedcommodity prices.
T2EL8: . Oct. 92 17: 26 No. 035 P. 04/ 14Our export volumes have risen strongly in the ninem~ onths ended March 1992 they were over 10 per cent aboveyear earlier levels.The extent to which our economy relies on trade has risenby around 50 per cent since the early 1980s exports nowaccount for over one fifth of our total output.There are various steps we must take to build on thissuccess.We need a more informed and aggressive national attitudeto exporting.We must better educate and train our workforce.And, most critically perhaps, we must use all theresources at our disposal one of which is our culturaland linguistic diversity.Changes in our markets tell us this.In the 1950s, only one quarter of our exports were soldto non-English speaking countries. Today, over threequarters of our trade is with non-English speakingcountries. Moreover, our fastest growing major markets over the pastfour years have all been in non-English speakingcountries principally, but by no means only, in Asia.In the next decade income levels in Asia will risedramatically. The potential market for Australians goodswill grow in direct proportion.The challenge for Australian business is to developexport and international business plans that take accountof these new markets.We are dealing with countries which are very different.But they are not " foreign" to all Australians.Indeed, for every country which constitutes a potentialmarket for Australian companies, there are Australianswho know their way around.The key to gaining better access to all markets isknowledge knowledge of their cultures and languages, oftheir business practices and networks, and of theirpolitical and legal systems.in an address to the National Conference on Arabic lastyear, the Deputy Director of the National Farmers'Federation, Mr Phillip Eliason, pointed out that we donot necessarily enjoy a great advantage because we speakthe language of international business.TEL:
Advantage often lies, he said, with the country orlanguage group whose communications are difficult topenetrate. Our-Asian Australian communities, through their ownsmall-business networks, are making considerable progressin opening up new avenues of trade and consolidatingcommercial links with all parts of the Asia-Pacificregion. A recent study of Australian entrepreneurs from Chineseand Indian backgrounds has shown how personal networksare crucial in building export markets.This is not confined to Asia.The Middle East is a significant export market forAustralia. It has also been a significant source ofmigrants. The same applies to Eastern Europe, as well as thetraditional markets of Western Europe.Today, well over 20 per cent of Australians were born inanother country. Mure than half of them came toAustralia from non-English speaking countries In Europe,the middle East, Asia and South America.Combined with their Australian-born children, theyconstitute 40 per cent of our population.Such diversity in human resources Is rare by anystandards.The advantages of such diversity are not confined to" ethnic" businesses. All Australi~ an businesses have easyaccess to it. All Australian businesses can profit fromthis specialised knowledge.Australian firms can draw upon the wealth of language andcultural skills that resides in their own workforce, orthey can draw upon them by forging partnerships between" mainstream" and " ethnic" businesses.The Government, through the Office of MultIculturalAffgair shas been piloting and exploring 8 number ofinitiatives which illustrate these possibilities.For example: In conjunction with New South Wales TAFE, a pilotprogram to train exporters of primary products inselling to Asian and MIddle-Eastern countries.A proposal to create from ethnic chambers ofcommerce and other agencies a supportive nationalnetwork for small and medium sized businesses.
A pilot program to place overseas-trainedprofessionals into Australian businesses.Sponsoring a consultancy group which providescultural, linguistic and market expertise tocompanies.The opportunities go beyond exports. They concernproductivity and efficiency.A study of migrant skills undertaken I-n 1989 showed thatsome Australian employers fail to understand or discountthe value of training acquired overseas.It fur Lher showed that employers tend to perceiveimmigrants from non-English speaking backgrounds asidentical, whether or not they have skills.Through the National office of Overseas SkillsRecQnition, the Government 18 attempting to stem thiswaste of talent.of course, there is a significant issue of 800181 justiceinvolved here, as well.But rational self-interest alone dictates that we try toliberate resources locked away.And, in the interests of both fairness and economicefficiency, the Government is taking further measures toassist those job seekers whose lack of functional Englishis impeding their employment prospects.As part of the Employment Package, an additionalmillion has been allocated over the next three years sothat all registered job seekers without functionalEnglish can be referred to English as Second Languageclasses. This will assist approximately 48,000 jobseekers.Central to the Government's micro-economic reform agendaand to our national prosperity is the determinationto revolutionise vocational training based on keycompetencies. Australians from Non English Speaking Backgrounds and thevalue of the languages they speak cannot be ignored inthis process.This conference will hear of work to identify anddocument the practical methods some companies haveemployed to make the most of competencies in languagesother than English, or to work around language barriers,or to communicate cross-culturally.It is not just the opening up of overseas markets thatcan enhance our economic future. There are also marketson the home front.
Ethnic niche markets in suburbs where 70 per cent of thepopulation speak languages other than English at home.The National Australia Ban-k has put in special efforts toreach ethnic niche markets.Indeed NAB has sponsored an ethnic small business awardscheme and I look forward to speaking to the awardcer-emony tonight in Sydney, via satellite.Telecom Australia, for example, recently commissioned astudy of the needs of Its clients from non-Englishspeaking backgrounds.The study will also identify any cultural or linguisticbarriers to telephone use among this client group.Telecom already advertises on SBS television, and Ibelieve that the motivation for this study combines twoaspects of the Government's multicultural policiessocial justice and economic growth.In fact the Government has itself seen the need tounderstand its domestic market better. Through theOffice of Multicultural Affairs we've set up a network ofmore than 600 people who are experts in communicatingwith ethnic communities and groups.The network was developed in response to the Government'sneed to identify the views of individuals or groups whenplanning policies and services.It acts as a channel for the views of those Australianswho for reasons of language, culture or geography havebeen overlooked in the past.Tonight I am pleased to announce that, subject toensuring that the public interest is not compromised inany particular case, this network will be made availableto the business sector on a commercial basis to testproducts, services and advertising for local nichemarkets and potential excport markets.Managing a culturally diverse workforce may not beperceived as a challenge by managers and business owners,many of whom think that their workforce is able to speakcand communicate adequately in English.But a number of studies have shown that there areproducL. Lvity costs in not paying attention tocommunication issues, And some companies have seen thatit is shrewd to invest in English language trainingthemselves.
We are also exploring the option of contributing, alongwith business and community partners, to a scholarshipscheme for Australians with language and cultural skillsto develop international management and marketing skillsat the University of Sydney Graduate School of Business.This would complement Austrade's existing businessfellowship scheme for Asia.I said before that the Government itself is not exemptfrom the need to make better use of Australia'smulticultural skills.We need to ensure that; key agencies providing economicand trade advice and support to business the Departmentof Industry, Trade and Commerce, the department ofForeign Affairs and Trade, as well as Austrade also tapinto these skills.On the face of it, the evidence suggests that Governmentcould do better. for the public service isdispropoxrtionately of English-speaking background.So as another practical step, I'm asking the PublicService Commission and relevant agency heads to lookclosely at what special efforts can be made to ensurethat we recruit people from culturally diversebackgrounds and utilise their particular skills.We are a nation rich not only in natural resources, butin human resources as well.If we are to maximise our potential, to achieve all thatwe are capable of achieving, we need to harness theseresources. In doing so, we will achieve our twin aims of economicdevelopment and social justice for all Australians.Tomorrow, the conference will focus on how we can bestuse the local knowledge and language skills of ourdiverse worktorce to penetrate foreign markets, howcompanies can lift their profits by tapping domesticniche markets, and how we can exploit our manifoldworkplace skills to lift productivity.you will be exchanging ideas and, I hope, developingstrategies which will do much to guarantee our economicplace in the world and, with it, growth and prosperity.Lodies and gentlemenI am very confident about the future of Australia, andone of the principal reasons for my confidence is ourproven capacity in recent years to adapt and meet newchallenges.
9This is a very determined generation of Australians. Itis also a very worldly and knowledgeable one.This conference is a means of ensuring that forAustralia's sake and for theirs we do not waste theirambition and skills.It is, itself, another reason for confidence in ourfuture.Whatever you come up with whatever you say I canassure you, I'll be listening.I congratulate CEDA, the Office of Multicultural Affairs,and all those who have contributed to this very importantconference and I wish you well.Thank you.



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE MON. P J KEATING H4P
FORUM ON THE NATIONAL STRATEGY ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Thank you for your invitation to attend today's Forum and to
accept, on behalf of the Federal Government, the National
Strategy on Violence Against Women.
I am aware that Commonwealth, State and community
representatives have worked together on this document and I
am pleased to know that you have been able to reach
agreement on an approach towards dealing with this extremely
serious issue.
It is a matter of great concern to me that violence against
women seems to be increasing.
Freedom from fear is a basic, inalienable right. It is
enshrined in the Atlantic Charter. It is a responsibility
of democratic governments to fight it in the same way that
we fight poverty, repression or discrimination of any kind.-
It is also the responsibility of communities to fight it.
It is the responsibility of all Australians particularly,
it has to be said, of men who cause most of the fear and do
most of the violence.
Violence against women is Intolerable.
All Australian women are entitled to be safe, and to feel
safe on the streets and in their homes.
I know-that personal safety is of major concern to
Australian women. For many women, fear of attack by men is
a constant source of anxiety and stress. 
It is a matter of shame that in our major cities women are
afraid to use public transport, particularly trains, outside
of peak periods because they do not feel safe.
That nurses and other shift workers are afraid to walk to
their cars except in groups.
That students in our tertiary institutions cannot freely
walk about the campus at night.
I know that this evening women around Australia are taking
to the streets to march to " reclaim the night", to assert
their right to be safe, and to feel safe, at night wherever
they live.
I fully support the aims of the march.
I often make the point that Australia is a pretty good place
to live in, that our values of democracy and equality, and
our concern for those who need help, make us a society to be
envied. But it Is also pretty obvious that these values are
undermined, and even contradicted, by violence and
especially by violence within the home.
We do not know the true extent of domestic violence but I
think we can say that it is a muchi larger problen ihan many
people are prepared to recognise or admit.
I find this both tragic and totally unacceptable.
In recent days we have had to confront a truly awful example
of such violence.
All Australia was shocked and appalled by what happened on
the Central Coast of New South Wales earlier this week, and
our hearts go out to the surviving families and friends of
the victims. And to their commnunities.
I find it appalling when individuals resort to violence to
deal with feeling frustrated or aggrieved.
We as a society have an obligation to do something about it.
We have to reaffirm the integrity of women and their
equality as-fundamental values which violence undermines. We
have to instil in our children, especially in our boys, the
notion that disputes should be resolved in non-violent ways. 
Our schools have a role to play here but most particularly
parents. And so does our media. There is far too much violence on
television in my view, and this is encouraging violence to
be seen as normal and acceptable. it is sending totally the
wrong signals to our children, and to those individuals who
are wont to resort too readily to violence.
As a federal government, our powers are limited in this area
but there are some practical actions we can and do take.
For instance, we provide funds for 263 women'sreus
Australia-wide which offer safe shelter to women and
children escaping domestic violence.
We provide funds under the Commonwealth -State Housing
Agreement to ensure women escaping domestic violence can
have proiyof access to public housinj This means they
and their children have a real alternative and are not
forced to return to a violent situation simply because they
have nowhere alse to live.
Similarly, we ensure that women escaping domestic violence
have immediate access to the Sole Parents Pension so they
can support themselves and their children and not be
dependent on the man who has been violent towards them.
But perhaps most important of all, the Federal Government
can, and should, provide leadership on this issue.
We can help set the tone of public discussion and public
debate. We can speak out loudly in saying it is simply not on. We
do not want a society where it Is regarded as acceptable or
excusable for a man to attack a woman. It ig not and it
never can be.
We are prepared to put money into reaffirming this strong
view. Early next year the Government will be launching a
million community education program.
We will be using television and other media to proclaim the
message that-violence against women is not to be tolerated
in Australia today and should stop.
I welcome the comprehensive strategy on violence against
women which I have just received as a source of further 
ideas and thinking on how we tackle this sore o u
society. o u
I look forward to reading its proposals and to discussing
with my Cabinet colleagues how we can act to do our bit
towards ending the toll of violence against women.
I urge my fellow political leaders at the State level to
take this document to heart, to study it and to take the
appropriate actions. I
This issue is not a partisan one.
It is one on which we can all agree.
We can agree that we want the world to be safe.
I want a world where none of us is pray, where all
Australians can feel safe, a world where women can get on
with their lives without fear or anxiety.
This is a goal we as a nation can work towards and I pledge
that I will do all I can to see that we do.
Today's national strategy document is a first step. I look
forward to there being many more.
Canberra A.
October, 1992 : A
tIV 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE EVALUATION OF ACCESS AND EQUITY' REPORT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 10 NOVEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Neil ( Edwards), Gerry ( Hand), Robert ( Tickncr), other distinguished
guests, ladies and gcntlemen. I am delighted to launch this excellent evaluation of
the Commonwealth's Access and Equity Strategy and the new access and equity
regime. A week or so ago I spoke of extending the -multicxultural agenda to take advantage
of Australia's huge national economic asset rcpresented by our linguistic and
cultural diversity, our so-callcd productive diversity. It is true that while for many
years we have been very proud of ourselves about the way in which we have
created something new in Australia, something dirferent to other countries in the
world, we have settled quite divcrse communities into oiic nation. There is as well
as the great social achievement of that, a very clearly emerging and strong
economic bcrnefit, and that is the capacity to do things around the world by virtue
of the fact that we have a very strong multicultural community in this country. Our
skills, our linguistic skills and our cultural diversity, mean that whencer Australia,
which is now an open trading economy, seeks to approach particular markets or
sections of particular markets there are people in this country familiar with those
markets, those places, those customs, those morays, those languages. We can take
advantage of our productive diversity and build again further on our multicultural
achievement. As far as the Government is concerned, I said a week or so ago that wc are
continuing to build on the firm foundation of multicultural policies based on
assuring accss and equity to programs regardless of ethnic origin. Of course all of 
us who are interested in this room know that without fair access to programs we
can't expect all Australians to be able to contribute their best.
The new regime I'm launching today shows our determination to strengthen access
and equity. I must say that whilc we may be talking in these ternms access and
equity I am delighted to see that just a wcck ago we had the American President
elect speaking in their national debate in these terms about access and cquity so
that the people of that country can share in its wealth, have access to what the
United States offers and have equity in terms of the approaches people can take to
it and expect from it.
We have been developing these themes over all of the 1980s, and what I can say
for this Government is in the early part of the 1980s we were standing against the
wind in terms of the prevailing northern hemisphere ideological breeze; that was,
all that mattered was private initiative and private reward. But now where the
breeze has changed and the wind has warmed up, one finds that Australia's view
about such things as fairness and equity in society and programs oftgovernment
which govern for cverybody and seek to help everybody equitably arc becoming
the voguc world wide. So all the more reason and all the more appropriate that we
should be evaluating what we are doing oursclvcs and strengthening our
determination to do things equitably and to demonstrate full access.
The new regime will demonstratc our firm belief that the programs must be fully
available to all Australians regardless of language, race, culture and religion. The
evaluation shows that there has been real progress, but a lot more can be done.
This Government has endorsed the evaluation's recommendations and expects that
all Government agencies will implement them with vigour. The new regime will
be practical and participatory, it will address the real barriers and make sure that
Commonwealth agencies do reach out to all Australians.
These are not just programs in name, but they are programs in reality that actually
do what we say they will do. The agencies of the C-ommonwealth, many of you
here today who administer them, are fervently taking the view that they will reach
to where they are designed to reach and that they'll meet their program objectives.
It gives me very great pleasure to launch both the evaluation and the new regime
and now my colleagues Gerry Hand and Robert Ticker will address you about the
details. Thank you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL FAMILY SUMMIT, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA ACT, I11 NOVEMBER 1992
Ita, Summit delegates, fricnds
I appreciate being given the opportunity to deliver the official opening adldress to
this important event.
I know, Ita, that you were motivated to organise this national gathering by your
concern for the social problems you identified as hcing suffc red by many
Australian families today.
I commend your initiativc in gathering together an impressive array of Australians
for this meeting, and trust that these two days will produce fruitful and productive
discussions. I note that you intend to present to me a summary of the Summit proccdings and I
look forward to hearing your thoughts on how wc should all bc rcspoilding to the
changing face of families in Australia today.
For my part, I would like to spend the time available to mc this morning
contributing some of my own thoughts on this challenging subject.
In doing so, I speak as a family mcmber as a husband and a father, as well as a
son and a brother. But T also speak as a member of a Government which has
directed considerable policy effort over the past decade towards addressing the
financial and othcr nccds of familics.
ZO/ TOd 1000N 60: 8 Z6' AON'TI :-1331 
I am proud of my own contribution towards many of these policics particularly
those, such as the establishment of the Child Support Agency and the introduction
of the Family Allowance Supplcm nt which have put money into the hands of
women and children who previously went without.
The record of thc Child Support Agency speaks for itself.
Before it was set up in 1988, only 24 per cent of custodial parents received child
support and the average level of maintenance was $ 26 per child per week.
Today the Agency collcts 70 per cent of the amount on its hooks, and the average
level of support is now $ 48 per child per week.
Similarly, the Family Allowance Supplement has put money into the pockets of
those who really need it. The $ 3 per child per week incrca-.; to FAS recipients
provided for in the ' One Nation' package bcnefited 750,000 low income families
who, between them, have 1.5 million children.
Some of thc government's; biggest programs such as Medicare, Family Allowances
and our housing programs are greatly beneficial to families, especially families
with low incomes.
In fact, it is difficult to think of any of our policics in the income support area, the
health area, the housing area, the community services area that do not benefit
families. This is especially true when wc consider the great variety of family forms that exist
in Australia today.
When we talk about Australian families today. we have to include families of all
sorts and sizes.
Familics with children where both parents are present.
Families with children headed by sole parents women or men.
Families that include several generations living uinder the same roof.
Families where one member cares for another who is frail aged, chronically ill,
disabled or suffering from HI V/ AIDS.
I0/ ZO0d TOO'ON 60: 8 Z6' AON* TT13-131 
And let's not forget all the other combinations, thc single people, the childless, thc
once-or never-married who live alone, the " enipty-ncstcrs" and all the others who
arc equally entitled to be included whcn we speak of the great family of our nation.
In other words, when it comes to caring for people in need be that need physical,
financial, emotional or spiritual let's not overlook anyone just because they
happen not to live in the kind of traditional arrangements that perhaps once
characterised the majority of households.
At the same time, I think we have to acknowledge that families where children are
present are often those where governments have a special rolc to play in providing
financial and other forms of assistance.
Families with children often have greater financial needs, and it is up to us as a
society to ensure that the next generation is clothed and fed and -; hcltcrcd and
educated. That is thc very least we can do.
Ladies and Gentlemcn.
You are no doubt aware that 1994 has been designated by the United Nations as the
International Year of theFamily.
We see this as a most important year because it will enable us, as a government and
as a community, to draw together our ideas and our thinking about families and
help us frame approaches for the future.
We intend that, as far as Australia is concerned, 1994 IYF will be a year in
which we truly try to come to grips with some of the challenges today's families
face.
To emphasise how seriously we intend to treat JYF let me inform you today of
some of the initial decisions we have already takcn in order to be well prepared.
First, I propose to appoint a Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the
International Year of the Family and I have already approached the Minister for
Aged, Family and Health Services, my colleague Peter Staples, ahout accepting
this position.
I am delighted that he has agreed to do so.
TOO00N 60: 8 Z6' AON'TT13:-131 
Secondly, I have decided to establish an JYF S-cretariat in my department so that I
can bc closely involved in thc Ycar's activities. Part of the role of the Secretariat
will be to support an lYF Council composed of members with a variety of
backgrounds and expertisc who will advise the Government and bc a focus for
IYF. I am very pleased to be ablc to announce today that Jennifer Rowe has accepted the
Government's invitation to be Chair of this Council.
For the past fivc years Jennifer Rowe has been editor of Thc Australian Women's
Wcckly, a position sh~ e will leave next month in ordcr to devote herself to her
writing. Ms. Rowe is well known as thc author of adult mystery books, but shc also
deserves recognition for the six best-selling children's books she has written under
the pen name Emily Rodda. Indeed, four of these books have won thc Australian
Children's Book of the Year Award.
Ms Rowe is vitally interested in all aspects of Australian family life and especially
in the challenges faced by the traditional form of the family in today's inceasingly
complex and difficult world.
Her stewardship of the Women's Wcckl-v has put her in touch, with thousands of
familics and she is very alive to the many issuecs families face in a world that no
longer provides tradition or other forms of certainty.
Ms. Rowe is uniquely qualified to lead the IYF Council and I am very plcased she
has agreed to accept this important post.
Thc Government will give careful consideration to the issues nominated by the IYF
Council to address during the Year, but I should like to say today that I will be a
strong advocate for the inclusion of two vital issues.
Domestic violence is one.
How we go about reconciling work and family is the other.
Les's than a fortnight ago I spoke on the subject of violence against women.
I said then, and let me repeat now, that we as a socicty have an obligation to do
something about the terrible toll of violence against women. I singled out domestic
I0/ VO'd 1000ON 60: 8 Z6' AONvr 1131 
violence, saying that we do not know its truc extent, but it is probably greater than
any of us would like to admit.
I say today that I believe we should make the elimination of domestic violence one
of the major aims of the International Year of thc Family.
I don't want to be unrealistic hy setting unreachable goals, but I do believe we can
say that as a society we regard violence within the homc as intolerable and that we
will use the International Year of the Family as our opportunity to take every step
we can to end it.
Womcn and children have the right to safety, the right not to fccl frightened in the
very place whcrc they are entitled to find shclter.
It is surely not too much to ask that wc as a society will strive to make this right a
reality. The second issue I wish to argue for is the reconciling of our work and family lives
for policies and arrangcments on how to make the various aspects of our lives fit
more harmoniously together.
So our lives can become less stressful.
In particular so women's lives can becomc less stressful.
It is women who, these days, are more often the ones who shoulder the " double
burden" of managing the time-tables of family members and who run family
finances in addition to their paid job outside the home.
It is no wonder that many women are just dead tired all the time.
We should be looking for ways to make it easier for them, be they at home all day
with kids or in the paid work-force.
This is an issue on which the government has spoken many times in the past.
I have myself previously advocated that our workplaces become more " familyfriendly".
By this we mean more flexible working arrangements so parents can attend to
children who are sick or need special attcntion. We mean better access to child-
ZO/ SOd 1000ON 60: 8 Z6' AONII : 11331 
care, and child-care where the hours arc compatible with parcnts' working days.
We mean leave that enables women and men to spend time with newborn infants.
As a government we are proud of our rccord in child care.
We have increased the number of places five-fold. We have cstablished a fee
relief system which kccps fees down in community and private sector centres for
low and middle income families. And we have introduced nccds-hased planning
to try to ensure that services arc located where they arc most needed.
Since we came to office we have increased the number of subsidised places from
46,000 to 193,000. By mid 1996 we expect to have over 250,000 child care places
available. This is a record to stand on but we intend to do more.
Already we are planning innovations in our approach. For instance, we have begun
piloting special care for sick kids because we know this is one of the greatest
causes of anxiety in parents what do you do if your child is sick and needs to be
looked after?
Thcrc are many other subjects we could include under this issue of how we
reconcile these two important areas of our lives.
You could almost say it is the crux of modern family life.
It will be one of the more challenging aspects of the International Ycar of the
Family, I believe, to come up with practical suggestions for how to make it easier
for all of us but especially those of us with young children to achieve greater
harmony between these two areas of our lives.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I do not believe it is necessary to wait until 1993, however, to address another issue
which I know is of great concern to parents.
I refer to the subject of violence in the media.
Last wcek in the Parliament I raised the matter of the amount of violence on
tclevision. Following my remarks, I have been in touch with the Federation of
Australian Commercial Television Stations ( FACTS) and I will bc meeting with
Bob Campbell, its Chairman, next week.
TO000N 60: 8 Z6' AON* IT : 131 
I look forward to a productive discussion with Mr Campbell, and I am confident
we caii address the legitimatc conicerns many parents have within the selfregulatory
framework to which the government is committed.
But my concern about violence on our screens is not confined to what is aircd on
television. I am also worried about what we see on the big screen when we go to the movies
and what we sec in our homes when we rent videos.
I believe that all us should bc ablc to have confidcnce in thc classifications system
so that we are not taken by surprise by the contents of a film or a vidco.
This is important to us as adults who want to decide what kind of entertainment we
are paying for, but it is quite cr itical when it comes to choosing movies or videos
for our children will watch.
For thc past three years the Office of Film and Literature Classification has
enhanced the classifications by providing consumer advice for all films and videos.
This advice is set out on the bottom of video covers and in display adver tiscmcnts
for films.
This consumer advice is important in assisting parents to try and decide what is
suitable for thcir children to see, but it does not make up for a funidamcntal
weakness in our classification system.
I am referring to the far too broad scope of the classification for films and
videos. The category is absurdly broad.
I find it difficult to accept the utility of a system which brackets " Crocodile
Dundee" and " Cape Fcar" in thc same " IM" category.
I am sure many other parent.-would share my lack of confidence in such a system.
But what can wc realistically do about it?
In the past there have been suggestions that a special category be creatcd just for
films which depict violence.
2-1OLd TOO* ON 60: 8 Z6* AQNTT13:-131 
TEL: 8
While this would help to identify violent films, it would ignore the concerns of
many parents in the community about coarse language, or depictions of sex or
drug-use which also feature prominently in the category.
I believe that there should be two levels in the prescnt category.
The first would cover the lower end of the category, would include all films and
videos which contained " milder" material and would like the present " M"
category be advisory only.
The second, which might be called MA, would be restricted rather than advisory
( meaning there would be penalties for allowing children under 15 access to these
films unless accompanied by an adult) and would apply to the
other, more raunchy and more violent end of the spectrum.
At the same time as we were making more sense of these classifications, we might
want to take a look at the recommendation of the formcr Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal for a singlc classification system for television and for films and video.
The present dual system is confusing to all concerned.
I recognise these are difficult issues.
We are not trying to restrict what adults can watch.
But I do think I speak for many parents when I say we need more reliable means of
knowing the contents of films and videos so we can make infornmcd choices about
what our children are subjected to.
In this spirit, I propose to ask my colleagues, the State Premiers and Chief
Ministers, to agree to list film and video classification as an agenda item at the
Council of Australian Govermecnts meeting to be held in Perth on December 7.
I trust they will agree that finding a fair and equitable solution to this subject is in
the interests of us all and is especially in the interests of Australia's children.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I have great pleasure in declaring this National Family Summit officially open and
I trust the next two days will see you engage in much constructive discussion.
Thank you. T1EL1:. Nov. 92 9: 45 No-005 P. 02/ 02 


IADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,RECEPTION FOR THE PRIME MINISTER'S ELEVEN WELCOME TOTHE TEAMS, PARLIAMIENT HOUSE, 11 NOVEMBER 1992Ladies and gentlemen.Let me begin by saying that on behalf of the Government Iam delighted to welcome the West Indies and Australiancricket teams to thiS reception in their hon'our.in particular I am sure everyone here will want to joinme in welcoming the West Indies cricket team toAustralia. No doubt it is easier for me to say this than it is forsomeone who has to play against them.But Australian cricketers, being of the traditional mouldthat enjoys a challenge, no doubt are looking forward tothe summer.Because, lit ule as I know about the game, I know it hasto be said that playing the West Indies represents thebiggest challenge in modern cricket.For sixty years they have produced legendary players.in the last fifteen they have produced legendary teamsthey have been consistently the world champions.You might ask how someone who is not a renowned cricketlover gets to know such things.But how does a non-cricket person like myself get to knowabout the West Indies?I know because the West Indies are legendary you can'thelp but know about them.And you cdin't help but admire them. You can't be at thetop for so long without having something special aboutyou.
2You can't come from behind like they did in Barbados tobeat South Africa without there being something specialabout them.All comparisons with the trend in national opinion pollsare, of course, totally invidious and out of order.The thing about great sportsmen and women is that theyhave something which goes beyond excellence andcommitment and belief in themselves they have spirit.They lift the game to the realms of art. Ultimatelythat's why everyone knows about the West Indies.Great sportsmen and women can also lift a game to thelevel of the contests Involved in life itself.Contests between Australian and West Indies sides havelong been fierce and uncompromising.I don't have any problem with that I have much the sameattitude to the Parliament.It's where the game is won and lost, and if you'reserious about your profession and the country you'replaying for, you play seriously.But you'll play better if you love the game.If you take pleasure in it.If you've got a sense of humour about it.And I hope that we see these things this summer deadserious but uplifting and inspiriting.Now I haven't said anything about my side yet.A lot of you probably don't think I had much to do withthe selection of it.Not true. I insisted that _ Allan Border was in it.I can tell you now that I said to the member of my staffresponsible for cricket is Allan Border in it, mate?And he said -of course he's in it.And I said -just as bloody well.There's no need to thank me now, Allan. I wans't going tolet them leave you outI said, if Allan's in it we're in with a show aren'twe? I said before that to stay at the top for a long time isthe mark of someone special.
3There is really nothing more to be said about AllanBorder. I mean, like the West Indies, even I not only know whoAllan Border is, but I feel like I know something abouthim. He is the definitive Australian cricketer of his ere,which is to say that he's more than the best over theperiod he's the cricketer who has done more than anyother to describe us to the world and to ourselves.You can say about Allan that when he's in it we're 811in It.We're all out there with him, and the best thing about itis, we're only speaking metaphorically.Now I won't hold you up any longer.I welcome both sides and wish them luck tomorrow and inthe coming series.To the West Indies team I say I hope you enjoy your stayin Australia. You know you are always very welcome.To the Australian team I say good luck, you know you havethe nation behind you.To both sides I hope it's a great contest played ingreat spirit, and that tomorrow's match sets the patternfor the whole series.I'll be out there tomorrow to tos$ the coin and check theweather and put the key in the pitch and all those otherthings you have to do before a cricket match.Good luck to all of you.Thank you.



S-I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL IMMIGRATION OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
SYDNEY, 13 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have the opportunity to address this
very distinguished gathering, and I think I should begin
by saying on behalf of the Government, thank you for
giving your time and expertise to a conference of very
great importance to Australia.
The names of those taking part attest to the Continuing
centrality of immigration in Australia's life and, I
think, to the great public spirit at large these days.
And I think it is true to say that these days we can
sense in Ausiralian public life beyond the party
political sphere a new sense of purpose and engagement in
national issues, a new level of interest in the future.
it is something I think all of us would encourage.
Ladies and gentlemnen, a few months ago I attended a
preview screening of the Australian film, Strictly
Ballroom which has since set box office re'cords ' and won a
raft of prizes here anld elsewhere in the world. It is an
extraordinary popular phenomenon.
Strictly Ballroom has a few lessons for us I think.
For a start it is a reminder that creativity and
productivity, the cultural and the economic, are
complementary. Strictly Ballroom is popular culture, including
inulticulture, and it is art. It is also a terrific
return on a public and private sector investment and it
exports. It is both economics and culture, including
multiculture. The story of the film would have been impossible without
the post-war immigration policy. It could not have been
conceived without it. Nor could the personnel the cast
and crew have been conceived for that matter. 
2
Strictly Ballroom concernls faith and hope and opportunity
and care. The making of it concerned the same things.
Strictly Ballroom is about excellence but it is also,
quintessentially, about ordinary people.
The film tells us that, hard as it often is to do it, old
ways need to change. It tells us that we need to be open
to new ideas.
But it is also about the best of Australian values
their immutability and their adaptability. It is a
decidedly iunpiA film. It's about continuity as well
as change.
it might be read as a metaphor for Australia in the last
half of the century. It is about all of us. There is a
bit of all of us in it, and it suggests to all of us, I
think, that there is a lot to learn from the experience
of multicultural Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the latter half of the 1970s,
when I found that I was increasingly in 8 position to
have some influence in the Labor Party, and therefore
potentially some influence on Australian public life, the
nature of my ambitions became clearer to me.
Since then they have become clearer still.
I hope you will bear with me for a moment while I try to
explain them. I think it is worth doing because I don't
think my experience is at all atypical.
The comm unity I grew up in was distinctly Anglo and
Celtic Australian. I grew up with old fashioned
Australian working class traditions, one of which was a
pretty happ~ y partnership with s-ocial mobility.
Success was encouraged and applauded, but it was assumed
that you wouldn't forget your roots. You would take them
with you wherever you went in life, whatever you did.
Now I don't need to explain to you the relatively simple
cultural parameters of such a society. The faiths, on
the outside at least, were work, family, church, league,
racehorses and rock and roll.
Under the surface lurked a love of Australia and its way
of life, a broad egalitarianism, a belief in social
justice, the idea I know it's a cliche but it's true
of a fair go for everyone.
These values were simple enough once you understood them,
and to grow up in them was to understand them.
But what perhaps does need to be explained is the paradox
they contained for people of my generation. 
3
For, you see, I had the greatest respect for the values
and traditions of the Bankstown community. I still do.
Fundamentally, they are what I am.
_ Bankstown is nothing more or less than home.
And, as people do with homes, I want to protect what it
is and what it stands for.
But the paradox was this: much 88 I loved it, I wanted
to change it. I wanted to open the place up.
The Australia I knew as a young man was narrow, insular,
uncertain of itself.
The Australia of the 1970s was still too narrow.
It seemed to me that, for all its great virtues,
Australia was missing out on what the world had to offer,
and it was offering the world less than it could.
Australians in those days tended to believe that you
could only keep traditions up by keeping others out.
By the 1970s I had begun to see my cause among those who
wanted to open Australia up to the outside world I
wanted a Labor Party and a Labor government which was
open to the world and phobia-free.
Like Australia itself, Bankstown is now a very different
place, and perhaps the most obvious change can be seen in
the shopping malls where these days Lebanese and
Vietnamese businesses predominate.
This causes some concern among the older residents just
as it caused concern among my parents' generation when
migrants from Italy and Greece began to move in.
These and other migrant groups have added to the life of
Bankstown they've given it more strength and interest.
In due course I have no doubt the migrants of recent
years will too.
But the old values are still strong there is still that
faith in the idea of social justice, expanded opportunity
and broad egalitarian democracy, faith in Australia,
concern about Australia all these are still the
dominant values, and they transcend ethnic origins.
One of those values is tolerance. 
4
we should not lose eight of the fact that along with the
willingness of migrants to come and join in the life of
Australia, and ' thd wir'lingness of governments to
facilitate that, the essential preconditions for the
success of the immigration program were the values of
democracy, tolerance and goodwill in which earlier
generations of Australians believed.
This is not self-congratulation so much as giving credit
where it's due. I say we should give credit to democracy
Australian democracy.
For under that laconic exterior a serious democracy is
lurking. And under the conservative attachment to the
Australian way of life, there is a capacity to
accommodate change, and welcome difference.
We can draw a parallel between multicultural policy and
economic policy in the 1980s.
As Treasurer I saw miy role as the necessary one of
opening Australia up to the world, making us a player: inthe
longer run, I have no doubt, not just a player, but a
winner. There have been setbacks the recession has been an
awful setback: but essentially that is what it is a
setback on the long road to an Australia which
successfully competes in the world and thus successfully
sustains a high standard of living, increased
opportunities and a healthy democracy for its people.
Just as we are an infinitely more interesting, rich and
rewarding society because we are now multicultural, so
the rewards will be greater infinitely greater
because our economy has joined up with the world.
Imperfect as they might be, the deeper democratic values
of ordinary Australians were absolutely necessary in the
transformation of Australia from a narrow and inward
looking society to a more cosmopolitan and outward
looking one.
i have said several times this year at various functions,
here and overseas if you want the proof of our capacity
to change in the next decade look at the change we have
made in the last one.
It has been the willingness of Australians to make the
change and the capacity of their institutions to make it
which has brought about the revolution in our workplaces,
and which more than anything else gives us reason for
confidence about the future.
We are succeeding In making this a competitive, exportoriented,
productive culture because the people of
Australia have come with us. I I I J A. I I i Ld Q _ 4 
We will only make it wealthier society, and therefore a
place where more opportunity exists, by the same meansnot
by creating an underclass, or by employing some form
of trickle down economics, but taking all the people with
US. I won't belabour you with figures now. Nor am I
shrinking from realities which still need to be
addressed. But the shape of the Australian economy has changed
dramatically in the last few years and the most telling
evidence of this is in the fact that our exported
manufactures have doubled and total exports now make up
23 per cent of Gross Domestic Product compared with 14
per cent a decade ago.
The message is the same as the message of
multiculturalism. The basic values of Australia support
change. our broad egalitarianism does not drag us down, it
underpins our capacity to adapt.
It is our strength. And for me that is the resolution of
the paradox between those things which we value and
those things we want, what we have and what we need,
between inertia and progress.
The basic mould of Australian society has served us well
through generations, through great trials and
extraordinary change.
We need to make it stronger, bigger, more adaptable and
interesting.
But it must not be broken.
The Accord provides another example another example of
building from the mould from the cooperative, equitable
nation-building instincts of Australian society.
The Accord is primarily responsible for giving us rates
of du&amp; strial disputation sixty per cent below the 1970s,
the creation of 1.5 million jobs since 1983, a ten per
cent reduction in labor costs, a substantial shift from
wages to profits, the lowest rate of inflation in the
OECD, a doubling of manufactured exports since 1983 and
an increase of 63 per cent since 1988-89.
There has been no greater contribution to our
competitiveness than this partnership and there is no
better guarantee of it increasing.
The recession has given us totally unacceptable levels of
unemploymeat, but we will not find jobs for those people
by disp~ osing of our strengths and the Accord is perhaps
the greatest of these. 
ILL'.. I ~ oU. PU~
6
I firmly believe that our economic success rests
ultimately on the same bases as our social success -our
success as a nation involves both.
The key is this if we include Australians and their
beat traditions we'll succeed. If we leave their Late to
chance, I believe we'll fail.
More than that, we will lose one of the great egalitarian
societies in the world. We'll lose both our heritage and
our future.
I want to make the point very plainly: the chances for
truly radical change depend on social acceptance of
change. Change which tramples on social values, which
breaks the mould, will simply not succeed.
What I want to say tonight concerns change. Not change
of the strictly economic type with which I know I am
generally associated. it concerns some of the things I
believe we can do in this decade leading to the centenary
of federation to extend the domain of our common heritage
and our common hopes.
if it is true that it was caring for cultural traditions
which made multiculturalism a success, it follows that
fostering ai~ nitifgtenation's cultural life is a
matter of priority.
It's why, among reasons like pure pleasure, I set a lot
of store in the arts.
I think much more than is often appreciated in politics,
they serve to bind society together.
The arts define and re-define us and in that they give us
confidence. They encourage tolerance as well as
excellence, they shape and reinforce the mould of our
society, and by all this they can help carry us through.
Again, we can learn something from that famous decade a
century ago.
The legacy of the 1890s was not just federation and the
Labour movement it was an Image of ourselves and this
land indelibly engraved by Australian writers and
artists. They defined Australia, and in so doing they gave
Australians faith in themselves for generations to come.
I live in hope and it's a confident hope that the
1990s will renew our faith and the faith of new
generations. 
.7
That's substantially why this year we established a panel
of leading Australians to develop a national cultural
policy to bring cultural questions into the mainstream
of decision making in Australia, and to encourage
excellence and broaden participation.
In this the Government is taking a leading role, but it
also responding to public interest and concern.
As I said when I began there is, just now, an enlivened
interest in the nation.
it can be seen in programs aimed at re-defining Australia
both at home and abroad, particularly in Asia.
Some of these programs are coming from government
departments, but what is most striking and most
encouraging is the degree to which they are being
generated by groups of independent individuals or by
institutions which never contemplated such a role for
themselves a few years ago.
I think it is true to say that they are in part a return
on the issues of nationhood which the Government has
raised this year.
Not that we invented them there has been for a long
time I believe a rising tide of national feeling and a
great need to open the channels of expression.
You can be sure that we intend to keep them open.
Ladies and gentlemen, when we think about the issues of
Australian nationhood in the 1990s, once again I think
there is something to be learned from the multicultural
experience. it's worth remembering that long before the post-war
immigration program one could have drawn a cultural map
of Australia defining regional and other differences
based on AuStrala2 experience.
The map essentially still exists. And, as with
multiculturalisem, the object is to find unity in the
diversity, productivity in the diversity.
Long may Queenslanders be Queenslanders and Sandgropers
Sandgropers, and the people of Wagga or Weipa, or the
Mallee or the Barossa take pride in their distinctive
communities, all they do and all they have done.
In fact it should please Australian nationalists to think
that, culturally speaking, Australia will be
characterised by stronger regional identities as time
passes. And by a stronger natlonal Identity. i iov ji rqo uuz) r ui i 
We need a strong national identity at home to give us
more strength of purpose and belief. We need it abroad
to leave no one in any doubt about who we are and what we
stand for.
I think we should and can encourage it.
We can encourage the idea of Australian citizenship in a
number of ways, including by serious consideration of our
national symbols and by a full non-partisan debate on
constitutional change.
I think I have made my position on these pretty clear in
the course of this year. I am one who thinks our flag
would better reflect our contemporary identity and
aspirations if it did not carry on it the flag of another
country. I also believe that thefLaA should not be changed
without the support of a majority of the Australian
people and it will not be.
There would now appear to be no doubt that something very
close to such a majority exists in support of an
Australian republic, and that the number is growing.
It seems to me that the public Is increasingly interested
in this debate and expects of the Government that the
appropriate constitutional changes be fully and expertly
canvassed and considered.
I don't believe Governments in the nineties are going to
be able to avoid this responsibility, and, I think and
certainly hope, that the time is rapidly approaching when
it will be possible for political leaders to discuss
these matters without the inference being drawn that one
is Irish, or creating a distraction, or hostile to
Britain or Her Majesty the queen.
This is not change so much as institutions keeping up
with change with national growth.
These things will have to be confronted because the
people, particularly younger people, want them. And
deserve them.
If it is true that those basic values of Australian
democracy were an essential factor in the success of
multiculturalism, then I think it is probably time that
we acknowledged them more formally.
I saw recently that Asian participants in an Academy of
Social Sciences project said that they were at once proud
of their Australian citizenship and puzzled by how little
pride native-born Australians seemed to take in it. 
9
1 think it is probably true that Australians who were
born here tend to take their rights and responsibilities
for granted, and lapse into believing that this democracy
came to us by accident in the same way that we not so
long ago believed our prosperity was an historical
accident. In truth, just as we have learned that we must work at
creating national wealth, that we must be cleverer and
more cooperative and cohesive, so we have to work at
social and political development at national growth.
In this decade I think we might profitably aim at
building in the whole community a more spirited sense of
our democratic achievements and greater involvement in
the questions now confronting us.
it would be absurd if migrants attending citizenship
ceremonies felt more strongly and were more knowledgeable
about Australian democracy than Australians of long
standing. if our education system is the best means of changing
this, then we should use the education system to change
it. If there are other means, we should employ those as
well. In the next few years we should be looking at all those
elements of our political and constitutional heritage
which have been lost to Australians or leeched of
meaning. Just as we deliver our cultural heritage back to all
Australians, I think we should be seeking ways to deliver
the essential strands of our nationhood.
The patriation of our Constitution from London might be a
start.
As my colleague, the Minister for Justice, said last
night, another very useful initiative might be the
adoption of an Oath of Citizenship sworn to Australia and
the principles of democracy and tolerance, and explicitly
recognising that Australian citizenship is a common bond
involving reciprocal rights and obligations which unite
us all.
At another level there can be no greater hope than that
our efforts to achieve reconciliation with the Aboriginal
people succeed, and that we can convert the
unconscionable tragedy of 200 years into a common cause
for social justice.
Ladies and gentlemen, last February we brought down an
economic statement with the non economic name of Npne_
Nation". 
I LL
By this we meant to convey our message that social and
political cohesion and purpose were as important as
economics in the effort for recovery and securing the
nation's long term future.
It was not just the name, but the programs we announced
which told the story the National Rail Highway and road
programs, the National Traff* gA-uthority, the National
Electicity idwere at-6once emblems and manf-festations
of-our intent.
As a Labor Government whose primary goal is always full
employment, we recognise just how severe the effects of
recession have been how severe they continue to be.
We have devoted by far the greatest part of our efforts
this year to reducing levels of unemployment and doing
our best to alleviate its effects. We have devoted a
very large part of the Budget to this.
We have also taken the view that the solution is not
merely economic.
And the experience of immigration and multiculturalism in
Australia makes that plain.
one cannot speak of immigration without thinking of the
hope and faith which migrants need. In themselves and in
Australia. If we are to succeed as this, the greatest of Australia's
social undertakings has succeeded, we will need those
elements of hope and faith in Australia.
And we will need the tolerance and good will on which the
immigration program rested.
We will need to keep the best of our traditions alive and
guiding us, and our hearts and minds open to the world.
I think that is the best lesson to be learned from the
past fifty years of our history.
That lesson applied might see us with our democratic
traditions essentially unchanged in the year 2000 but our
people more aware of them, and more eloquent in their
expression of them.
By this I mean something beyond a nation in which
everyone knows the words of the National Anthem.-but
that would certainly be a good start.
whatever decisions Australians make in the next few years
and I think it is likely that they will choose to have
an Australian Head of State the proper role for
Government in these things is to open debate and the way
for change. I L) V L) I I q U U UL, r 
I I-IU v L i 4U. U UQ F
The greatest hope is that by the year of the centenary of
federation the social justice Australians have always
believed in is more than ever before a thoroughgoing
reality in Australia and that, above all, full
employment is entrenched again.
if these are my hopes for the year 2000, my hope today is
that, for 811 the necessary detail of your deliberations
here and elsewhere in your professional lives, you never
lose sight of this bigger picture.
Thank you. 



Ii
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KKATING MP,
ADDRESS TO ST VINCENT DEk PAl L, TOWNSVILLE, 15 NOVEMUR1R 1992
E &amp; OF. PROOF COPY
We support~ yv lqntar agenies in program with funny names. One we caM SAAP,.
Supportive Assistance Acormonudazn Program, and that program is rccurent expenditure
which we provide to voluntary agencies for overnight and other acixommodation and care.
We havo another thing cAlled C AP, the Capital Ashistance Programn, which builds the
accomnmodation which provides for those people. We have the general relief program
where, if people need a 1it of money for the gps bill or the light bill or food or whatever it
might be, we supply some money as wel.
We're not the dominant supplier but were becoming more significant in wupport for the
voluntary agencies. In the One Nation prograrn announced earlier this year, I put some
exctra money in for the voluntary agencies this year because of the problem the recesson
has brought.
But the thing that will always mnatter the most when dealing with the underprivileged or the
weak or the poor or the sick, will bc in' this sort of society public provision. That'Is why we
must keep a stron~ g social secu5itv~ y" e. We should reject those, as the American
electorate have just reJocted those, who have argued the line that if we support the poor it
drags the rest of us down.
1 might say to you that some of my opponents are arguing that if you put a hand out to
pull the poor up behind you it instead pullsthe rest ofus back. I don't beevetgut Ithink
a community we'-v got to go along together. Sure, some win earn mome in this
communityand somewll am lows, bvthe gapshouldn't beso greatas tosee an
underclass actually oewur, where it actually grates away from the main comnmunity.
The public systemn has got a role to play in providing a good, secure safety net for people.
And that's why I was very pleasantly supportive when I found myself able to tick off the
sentencs in the statements of the Catholic Cornmission for Social Justice and Peace in
recent months, saying thcac very fffings. Ilat co mmunity value is the value that we have to
play to, and not the value of the individual. Private initiative and private reward have their
place, but it shouldn't be the dominant culture of Australia. It has to be a community and a
broad culture.
V* 



*/ 3
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
" INTO ASIA" TRADE AND INVESTNIENT CONVENTION
PERTH 17 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address the " Into Asia" Trade and Investment
Convention, and I congratulate the Western Australian Government and other supporters
of the conference on the imaginative program you havc devised.
Its appropriate indeed that you are rnccting in this State, because Western Australia in
some respects has been leading us into Asia.
With less than a tcnth of Australia's people, this state now accounts for nearly a third of
Australia's total cxports.
And today, 70 pcr cent of Western Australia's exports go to Asqia.
We are familiar of course with the great wealth that continues to be generated by exports
from Western Australia's mining and energy industries.
[ ron orc from the Pilbara and natural gas from the North West Shelf will remain sinews of
interdependence bctween Western Australia and North Asia.
The State govcrnxncent recognises, however, in its " Into Asia" strategy that Western
Australia's future prosperity depends not only on maintaining these traditional links of
trade with Asia, but also on learning to exploit rclatively new arcas of compctitive
advantage in the dynamic Asian market.
This means expanding services and manufactures exports while continuing with
commodity exports.
As Western Australia has found new markcts in Asia, so too has Australia as a whole.
Nearly two thirds of Australian exports now go to Asia, and Asian mnarkets; continue to
lead all others in export growth.
I would like to take a little time today' to discuss what this powerful and consistent trend
means for our international trade policy and for the way we think of ourselves as
Australians.
e-/ 1O* d 900* ON Z: iT Z6" AON2. I :-11331 
During the 1980s, the dozen or so countries and territories of North-East Asia and South-
' East Asia grew twice as fast as the rest of the world.
During the 1990s, they seem likely to repeat that performance.
At a time when the OECD has had to revise downward its growth forecasts for Europe, the
United States and Japan, Australia's strengthening links with the more rapidly growing
economies of Asia are of critical importance to our economic expansion in the 1990s.
The North-East Asian economies are more complementary to Australia in resource
endowment and trade composition than any other economies in the world.
North-East Asia accounts for nearly half of Australia's exports.
North-East Asia is a major source of tourists, investment and business migrants, and is the
single most important market for Australia's cducation exports.
While North Asia rcmains by far the single most important market for Australia,
Australia's exports to the six countries comprising the Association of South-East Asian
Nations ( ASEAkN) are now growing more quickly than our exports to any other part of
world. The ASEAN countrie-s now account for more Australian exports than cither the United
States or the European community.
Even more striking. is thc fact that Austral ia's manufactures and service exports to South-
East Asia are growing morc quickly than exports of primary commodities.
As South-East Asian economics have modernised we and they have discovered greater
and greater opportunities in trade.
Indonesia probably best exemplifies the need for Austra lians to revise their image of
South-East Asia.
Despite the fact that it has already become our ninth largest export market and second
largest in ASEAN, too many Australians still have an image of Indonesia as a poor and
backward country which is somehow threatening to Australia's interests.
My visit to Indonesia in April this year served various foreign policy objectives.
But, just as importantly, wanted to underline new realities for the Australian public.
I made a point of highlighting the cnormous strategic benefit Australia has obtained
during the past 25 years through the success of the Soeharto Government in consolidating
political stability and economic devclopment in the Indonesian Archipelago.
Between 1966 and 1991, Indonesian's real GDP rose 450 per cent.
In the late 1970s, Indonesia was the world's largest importer of rice. In 1984, Indonesia
became self sufficient.
The people of Indonesia are now better fed, housed, and educated than evcr bcfore. Infant
mortality rates are approximately half of what they were.
_ O/ ZO~ d 9OO* ON VZ: iT Z6* AON *. T1131 
In recognition of the dynamic economic relationship Australian and Indonesia now enjoy,
President Soeharto and I agreed to establish a regular Ministerial Forum to discuss at a
high level trade and economic matters of shared interest.
Establishing this body reflects a ncw maturity and mutual confidence in the relationship.
I am pleased to note that yesterday and today the first meeting of the Ministerial Forum is
taking place in Jakarta with five Australian Cabinet Ministers participating.
I am also pleased to note that one of your distinguished speakers yesterday was His
Excellency Governor Soelarso of Indoncsia's East Java Province, whom I met during my
visit to Surabaya last April.
No visitor could help but be impressed by the vitality of economic dcvelopment in
Surabaya and its environs.
I congratulate the State of Western Australia for its foresight in establishing a sister
relationship with East Java.
A new study by the East-Asia Analytical Unit of the Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade demonstrates that Australia has hcld its market share in South-East Asia during the
past five years.
if we continue to hold it for the rest of this decade and I am confident we can we will
put an additional $ 12 billion onto our annual exports.
So you can see that because of their rapid growth, South-East Asian markets will become
increasingly important to Australia's prosperity.
Now, of course, we won't get the growth and we won't get the exports unless we can
continue to transform our culture, but if you want proof of our ability to transform
ourselves in a decade ahead, you need only look at the way in which we have transformed
ourselves in the decade behind.
We have transformed ourselves from a high inflation nation to a very low inflation nation.
We have increased our competitiveness by well over one tenth.
We have replaced industrial disputation with a cooperative system which has delivered the
lowest strike rate for 30 years a system of consensus which I think the Australian people
are very reluctant to abandon.
We have opened the economy to the world with a floating exchange rate, financial
deregulation, and Cuts in protection.
We havc succeeded in putting governmcnt behind trade with the unification of trade and
foreign affairs policies and departments, the creation of Austrade, the succssful
leadership of the Cairns group in the Uruguay Round, and the initiative which lead to the
creation of the APEC group of Pacific trading nations.
A decade ago, we exported one seventh of what we produced.
Today we export nearly one quarter of what we produce.
2. O/ 20Od 900' ON Z: il Z6' AON* -T :-113J1 
And as the quantity of exports changed, so too has the composition and direction of
exports. Today our manufactured exports are equal in value to our rural exports and our mining
exports. And more and more of our exports arc going to Asia.
As trade becomes more important to our national prosperity, international trade policy
becomes more critical in national governmecnt. I
As I have already made clear, our core interest is in protecting and cnhancing our trade
with Asia.
We Australians should see it as our historic good fortune to be located close to the world's
fastest growing economies and one of its Vrcat economic powerhouses, and to have
already established closc economic ties with it.
We have the further advantage that the regional emphasis of Australia's foreign policy and
our shared strategic intcrcsts with nicighbours to our north correlatc vcry wcll with the
rcgional focus of our trade and commercial interests.
As I said, it is our good luck. It is not the first timle we have been lucky, of course. For
years we were able to rely on special relationships and our rural and mineral products to
see us through.
But our good luck this time is an opportunity to be seized, both by governments and by
business. It won't come to us as a branch office, or as a quarry and a farm.
As never before in our history we have to seize the time ourselves.
Of course, our trading interests are not confincd to the Asian region.
We strongly believe in maintaining and strengthening the open, non-discriminatory
multilatcral trading system based on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade or
GATIT. This interest is shared by Japan and other East Asian trading partners because each of
them pursues outward-looking economic policies and depends, on access to a wide spread
of international markets.
The beniefits of a new multilateral agreement would be considerable.
It would extend international trade rules to cover agriculture and services, and also
strengthen the disciplines and dispute-settling procedures of GATT.
We have been deeply disappointed at the apparenit lack of political will in Europe, and in
France in particular, to agree on reasonable understandings on agriculture.
Sobered by the prospects of trade conflicts in a climate of slower OECD growth,
negotiations betwccn the United States and the EC have now resumed.
900* ON t7Z: i1 Z6* AONL T -1331 
An agreement is, I believe, the most important thing that Europe and the United States can
do to stimulate world growth and confidence.
But whatever the outcome of the Uruguay Round, we are now in a period of fluidity in the
world trade system.
There is an increasing tendency towards regional, subregional and bilateral trade
arrangements. We may or may not like this trend, but it is indisputably there and we must
seek to use it to our advantage.
At the same time, there are powerful forces enhancing globalism, including the extinction
of communism and the new universality of market economics, and the more powerful role
the United Nations is now able to play in world affairs.
In this new era in international affairs, our ovcrriding objective is to do all we can to
preserve and enhance a trading environment in which our major markets remain as open to
us as possible, and these markets remain open to each other.
We must never lose sight of the fact that most of our trade, and the fastest growing part of
our trade, is now with other countries in the Western Pacific.
We must also not lose sight of the fact that many of these countries are highly dcpendent
on the US market.
At the regional level, an important clement of Australian policy is the promotion of a
trade-liberalising agenda in the APEC group.
The grouping includes the United States, Canada, Japan, Korea and the other main
cconomies of the Western Pacific.
Its member-, account for 50 per cent of world output and over 40 pcr cent of world trade.
The importance of APF. C underlines the pivotal role that the United States will have in
determining the trade environment in the Asia-Pacific region.
The United States is the world largest economy and trading nation.
As shown in the Uruguay Round, it retains a vital leadership role in helping maintain a
sound multilateral trading system.
Despite the growing economic importance of Japan, the United States remains the leading
export market for most EAst Asian economies.
And much more of the United States' Own trade now takes place across the Pacific than
across the Atlantic.
Against this background, the policies of the Clinton Administration will have a decisive
bearing on trade alignments in the Pacific.
I have been much impressed by President-elect Clinton's conviction that foreign and
domestic policy are two sides of the one coin.
2O/ SO'd 900* 0N PZ: iT Z6' AON'I -11331 
By his recognition that the United States must he able to compete successfully in the
global economy if it is also tio suciicat home.
We also noted that he affirmed strong support for the multilateral trading system and
avoided the temptation to engage in the Japan-bashing that some in his party have
indulged in.
In Australia's dealings with President Clinton and his Administration, we shall make every
effort to encourage Washington to think more deeply about the future institutional
structure of economic relations in the Pacific.
We think it is very important not only for ourselves but also for Japan, the United States
and other trading nations in the region, that the United States and Japan increase their
economic interdependence rather than diminish it.
We will resist any process which has the effect of dividing the Pacific into trade allies of
the United States and trade allies of Japan.
As I explained during my visits to Japan and Singapore last Scptember, Australia's core
interests lie in maintaining the most favourable possible environment for our bilateral
trade rclationships with Japan and the other economics of East Asia.
This reflects a situation where East Asia now accounts for nearly six times as much of our
total exports as does the United States.
But the regional trading environment for Australia will he so much better if the Western
Pacific and North America remain part of the same thriving trading community.
As important as they are, the initiatives of the biggcr players cannot of themselves
guarantee Australia's success in international trade and commerce.
We have a big responsibility at home for maintaining the drive towards making our
economy intcrnationally competitive, and developing a creative culture of
entrepreneurship. While thcre is much that the Australian Government can do to hclp create the right policy.
environment, we have to recognise that the ultimate challenge Of SLuccccding in the region
rests with Australian business.
Many of our private companies havc acceptcd their responsibilities and arc aircady
demonstrating how well they can succccd.
But there is a broader challenge for the whole Australian comnmunity.
it is a question of attitudes, to do with how we see ourselves as a nation and how we
perceive our relations with the region.
Australia can no longer afford to be a society located with its geographical feet in Asia,
but with its intellectual head and emotional heart in Europe or North Amecrica.
Part of this is being confident in ourselves and knowing that our political and social values
do not have to be compromised in a closer association with Asia.
e2/ 9O* d 900* ON tZ: iT Z6* AON* 2T: 131 
7
Indeed, I would argue that Australia's reputation for openness and multiculturalismi are
definite assets in a region which is already very diversified politically and is showing
increasing pluralism as it advances economically.
We should recognise the increasing contribution that our Asian migrant community is
making to commercial links with Asia.
It also serves our economic purposes that an increasing number of Australian students are
studying Asian languages at secondary and tertiary level.
During my recent visit to Japan, government and business leaders were very imnpressed to
hear that we now have around 100,000 students studying thc Japanese language.
Thiis number is gcater than the number of Japancsc-language students in any country in
the world outside North Asia.
There are now 41 centres or institutes of Asian studies at Australian universities and there
is a growing number of educational exchange programs between Australia and Asian
universities. Increasingly, we are recognising that just as the changes we have made in the way we do
business at home and in the way we conduct our industrial relations involve cultural
questions, so too will our continuing success in integrating ourselves with the economies
of Asia depend upon cultural changes that allow us to adapt our basically European
society to Asian cultures.
It is here, I think, that thc Australian people and government will find its grcatest, most
absorbing and most rewarding challenge in the coming decade.
( VON t?: il Z6* AON* ZT :. 131
inI. Sn-A 90 



Embargo d Until... -1 fn
SPEECH BY THE PRXIME MINISTER, THE HON KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ADVANCE AUSTRALIA FAIR, MELBOURNE CONCERT HALL
18 NOVEMBER 199S,
it's my great pleasure to be here tonight to enjoy this
concert and, particularly, to take part in the launch of
8 new arrangement of the AustralianNationalAnthem..
I understand this is a curtain raiser for Australian
Music Day celebrations on 28 November, and that over
1,000 events promoting Australian music and artists have
been arranged by Ausmusic for the month of November.
The adoption of Advance Australia Fair marked a change,
not just in the song we sang, but in the way we thought
about ourselves.
It has to be said that some people are more equipped for
change than others.
It's unfortunate when sometimes those who lack the
imagination for it hold the others back.
Too often in our history Australians have been held back
and the changes that have been made in the last decade
are proof of that.
We have taken on more change in the last decade than
perhaps we did in the previous forty.
we do things very differently.
We are more open to the world than we have ever been,
more a part of it, more a player in its affairs.
We are much more a part of our region.
We are much more open and phobia-free.
But we are no less Australian for the change.
Notwithstanding~ the permanent barrage of American popularculture
that we endure along with most other countries in
the world, we have kept our best traditions. 
ILL; iC.. 140V~ j If U2% Z., 1 U&amp; 4'
2
In fact I think we have etched them deeper.
And we should continue to.
When the idea of a distinctively Australian National
Anthem was raised in the seventies, the people who
instinctively shy away from change, Cried anarchy and
treason, and sacrilege and blasphemy, and how dare you
cause offence to our past and our cultural superiors.
But those who welcome change when change is due
persisted, and in due course they won bipartisan support,
and now even if a lot of people still don't know the
words we stand for our own national anthem and we are
moved by it.
The words go like this I learnt them a long while ago
in a moment you will hear them recited much more
tunefully. Now it's true that some of the words are a bit old
fashioned.-and so are some of the sentiments.
They come from an age when Australians felt that the
richness and immensity of the land, combined with their
love of it, guaranteed them a golden future.
They are pre-industrial lyrics, and pre-multicultural.
The second and fourth verses are so anglophile and
Victorian they're almost pre-Australian.
But the words of most national anthems are old fashioned,
the British and the French Included.
Both of those prattle on about scheming enemies and
hateful tyrants plotting the overthrow of virtue.
If nothing else Advance Australia Fair is more hopeful
and less paranoid.
It is my duty tonight to thank all those people who have
taken Advance Australia Fair into the realms of a more
modern world, and into, perhaps, the grandeur a national
anthem deserves.
In particular I want to congratulate Ausmusic and Lachian
Wilson. I heard some of Lachlan's music at the recent laying of
the wreath ceremony for Vietnam veterans, and I
understand that that music was actually composed while he
was on active service. 
I also know that he is an old rock musician and that he
was drawn to this project by a desire to make such an
important expression of our national life more
contemporary and more widely appreciated. And more
easily played and sung.
I thank Lachlan for his stirling efforts, and also
Ausmusic for its initiative and follow through and
among the latter I have to single out the irrepressible,
inescapable and undeniable Executive Director, Pete
Steedman. it's a great thing to have the new arrangement an even
better one to have it published and recorded on CD and
sent around our schools and other institutions, so that
all Australians may come to know and take pride in the
Australian National Anthem.
So on behalf of everyone here I thank them all.
As we go into the nineties and the next century we will
need a bold and unmistakeable identity.
we will do best if we have no doubt about who we are, and
if we leave the world in no doubt.
A re-vitalised and popularised anthem will help.
There are a lot of Australians, I know, who retain some
doubts about Advance Australia Fair.
I'm not one of those. it touches a patriotic chord in me,
as I think it does in most Australians. It is
unmistakeably our anthem.
I share with many Australians a sentimental attachment to
Waltzing Matilda.
But it is hard to sing solemnly about a jumbuk.
if Advance Australia Fair is our National Anthem,
Waltzing Matilda Is our national song and I think we
should make it clear that it 1ia our national Song.
There is nothing unusual in this. The United States has
the Star Spangled Banner as its anthem, and God Bless
America and America the Beautiful as its national songs.
God Save the Queen is the British anthem, but Rule
Britannlia and Land Of Hope and Glory, among others, are
equally well known and inspire no less popular sentiment.
So to those who say Waltzing Matilda is the definitive
Australian song, I would say there is no reason why it
shouldn't remain so.
And no reason why it should not sung and played more
often on public occasions. 
4
We can have both the formal anthem, and the popular
song.
And if those who have done such great works with the
anthem feel there is something to be gained from doing
much the same with waltzing Matilda, I'm sure all
Australians would be delighted if they took on the task.
Let me thank Ausmusic and Lachlan Wilson once again and
all the performers the Australian Girls Choir, the
Melbourne Youth Music Council and the Percy Grainger
Youth Orchestra.
We look forward to hearing the new improved Advance
Australia Fair.
And we look forward to singing it.
Thank you. 



ILL: ZU. INUV. 25Z 1( 11i NU. UZU r.' JI'Ut
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL EXPORT AWARDS PRESENTATION
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA 30 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be with you this evening to
participate in these awards and to celebrate Australia's
export achievements in the past year.
I commend the efforts of the Austrade and its fellow
sponsors in identifying Australia-1' best.
I know from travelling round the country how difficult
the final choices must have been.
There is so much talent out there, and commitment to
excellence is becoming a defining quality of much of our
business and industry.
These awards are a recognised national institution. For
nearly thirty years they have recognised the tremendous
contribution Australian exporters make to the nation's
prosperity. There is no one in this room tonight who doeS not know
that Australia's future depends upon our ability to
compete in the world.
Such is the level of economic awareness in Australia
these days, I doubt if there are many Australians who do
not know it.
For employment opportunities to expand and for living
standards to grow we need more companies like those
represented here tonight companies prepared to pursue
export opportunities and with the determination and nouse
to succeed.
You are here tonight because you have passed the ultimate
test and succeeded internationally. Passed it with
flying colours. 
TEL 2
You've done it by concentrating on quality, skills,
workplace relationships, design, technology, management,
market responsiveness. You've done it with international
-be-st practice.
The last twelve months have seen a difficult
international trading environments Not a few of our most
substantial trading partners are either in recession or
experiencing very slow growth.
So it is all the more a triumph to see Australian
ventures succeeding in a diverse range of markets.
We see this diversity among the finalists tonight.
we have Australians selling cars end car parts to the US
anid Asia.
Australians selling cheesecake and pet food to Japan.
Australian suppliers of beg-handling systems and
packaging machinery to Asia, France, the Pacific and the
US. Australians consulting on major infrastructure projects
in Asia.
Australians exporting high technology computer equipment
and software around the world.
Australians providing engineering equipment, concrete
mixers and state of the art refrigeration technologies
and storage containers.
Australians exporting medical products for sleep
disorders, and training videos for occupational health.
Australians exporting high tech scientific equipment and
specialised resource mapping services.
Australians exporting gas cylinders and steel.
Australians exporting magnesia, salt, iron ore, oil and
gas. Ladies and gentlemen
Australia is a global trader. We are dependent on an
open, liberal trading environment.
Australia's overriding foreign economic policy priority
is to preserve and enffa_ 6iig a tradinig-environment in which
our major markets become more open to us and to each
other. T2EUL:. NOV.% i2 1(; 11 NO. uzu r. uziu( 
TEL 3
For our part, the Government is always on the look-out
for ways of se curing better conditions for our trade., in
whatever context, be it Multilateral, regiona~ l or
bilateral. The Government today, and everyday, is working to see the
global trading rules improved, market distortions removed
and our access to markets enhanced.
In a changing economic world, Australia needs to be open
minded about the institutional forums and the
arrangements we might enter to secure these objectives.
We do not rule out bilateral trading agreements or
membership of regional trading arrangements as means of
achieving our goals in trade.
Nor do we wish to pursue agreements which are prejudicial
to our interests.
The Trade investment Framework Arrangement which we are
now concluding with the United States is an initiative
which arose during the visit of President Bush in
Jatnuary. it is an example of our willingness to enter into
understandings which suit our interests, and which fit
well with the development of the region's trade patterns.
The arrangement will provide Australia with a valuable
opportunity to hold high-level consultations on issues
such as subsidies, quotas and non tariff barriers which
effect some of our exports to the United States, such as
beef, sugar and steel.
our overall interests are clear. A strong liberal global
trading system based on the GATT and a successful Uruguay.
_ Round outcome will mean a un isal liberalisation of
markets. A Pacific-wide trading area, with its most powerful
economies building closer trade and investment bonds,
helps ensure individual markets are fired by the vigour
of prosperity and open trade.
And the facts around these interests are clear.
Australia's overall trade performance and our ability to
negotiate better access for our exports depend
substantially on the competitiveness and performance of
the national economy.
A decade ago our cost structure made it hard for
exporters to compete.
Today we have increased our competitiveness
substantially, and entrenched our competitive advantages
with low inflation and higher productivity growth.
TELU: . Nov. 2JZ 1(; 11 NO. UZU r. uO,/ Va' 
4
More importantly, we have encouraged a wholesale shift
into enterprise bargaininM as the principal means of
deciding wages, and pushed forward 8 program of industry
reform which has dramatically increased the prodtuctivity
of ofr ports, and changed the f ace of our aviation and
telecommunications industries.
These industries are, of course, vital to exporting.
No one should be under any illusions about these reforms
both their strengths and their present limitations.
They are overdue. There is, no doubt, still some way to
go: just as there is still a way to go in developing a
thoroughgoing export culture in Australia meaning an
awareness at every level of the community, that it is
fromn what we do and what we make that success will
spring. But that awareness baa grown dramatically, and so has the
pace of real reform in recent years. Without doubt, it
has been much greater than anyone expected.
Take the key issue of industrial relations: we expect
that by next year abd-ut half the Au btiraian work force
will be working under enterprise agreements.
From any perspective, that is phenomenally rapid change,
and it is happening for the fundamental reason that we
had a cultural change, a change in outlook, in the
previous five or six years.
it was the change in attitude which underpins the
concrete results we're now seeing.
And, truly, there can be no sense in ripping the heart
out of reform and with it, in large part, recovery by
smashing the cooperative ethic which has been fashioned.
why declare war when the peace is working?
And when the only possible victory would leave us
infinitely worse of f?
Why go around the country saying, as the Victorian
Premier did yesterday, Have Courage! Have couragel
when patently, by their actions, Australians do have
courage: and, more than that, common sense, imagination,
public spirit, the ability to work together.
The point is we have made extraordinary progress in the
past decade, and the changes will breed more change. To
reverse the progress will be to halt the change, and
nothing could iever persuade me of the sense in doing
that. Ladies and gentlemen 72EUL:. NOV. 232 1(: l NO. VZU rAJ' 4' u 
TEL:
Australian companies will benefit from the major
investments we have made in infrastructure in aviation,
road and rail; in the doubling of productivity on our
wharves, in reduced shipping costs, reduced
telecommunications costs and improved services, and so
In our One Nation statement we also made changes to our
business taxation system which make it one of the most
competitive among industrial countries.
The important poir&amp; to be made is that these reforms build
on progress.
There has been a transformation of our trade a
transformation in volumes, composition and destination.
Exports of goods and services as a proportion of our
national product have risen from less than 14 per cent
ten years ago to 23 per cent today.
A decade ago we exported less than one sixth of our
production. As the sheer volume of our exports has increased, their
composition and direction have changed.
The value of both our services exports and manufactured
exports have tripled over the last decade.
Manufactures and services together accounted for 34 per
cent of our exports in 1982. Last year they accounted
for 40 per cent.
In the 1990s Australians are succeeding in tourism in
ways unimaginable a decade ago.
in 1982 950,000 tourists visited Australia. Last year
nearly 2.4 millfifn ~ aiiived an average growth rate of
more than 10.6 per cent, and yielding an increase in
foreign exchange earnings of $ 6.3 billion dollars from
$ 1.9 billion in 1982 to 88.2 billion last year.
The forecast number of visitors in the year 2000 ranges
between 4.8 million and 6.5 million.
There is no better or more obvious example of our
individual and collective capacity to adapt, to develop
skills and infrastructure, to exploit our natural
advantages and add value, or to seize an opportunity in a
competitive international market than the success of the
tourism industry.
it now represents 12 per cerit of our total exports up
from 7 per cent in 1982/ 83: and tourist operators, like
all exporters, will continue to receive encouragement and
support from this Government. TZEUL:. rwV.' JZ rNU. UZU r'. UDIV( 
TEL 6
In the last decade or so the Asian region has been
transformed into the most rapidly growing regional
economy in the world, with a high share of exports, and a
high degree of trade within the region.
our economy is increasingly integrated into the region.
Nine out of ten of our largest export markets are now in
Asia and the Pacific.
Last year about 60 per cent of our exports went to East
Asia. The Government is providing strategic support for a
number of key export-oriented sectors, at the same time
progressively lowering the tariff walls in order to
assist restructuring and enhance competitiveness.
Many of the companies here tonight have worked in
partnership with the Government in specific areas for
instance through the International Trade Enhancement
Scheme, the Asia-Pacific Fellowships Scheme, or Austrade
industry special-s-ts refll __ iig _ a _ joint long term
commitment to exporting.
We have shown we can change and adapt.
We have shown we can work together. We have demonstrated
our versatility in many fields of endeavour. We have
shown that we can succeed.
But each of us here tonight knows that to get here has
not been easy it requires sustained application over
the long haul and we still have much to do.
The Government for its part will continue to encourage
more Australian companies to export.
As well as the changes at home, we have been spreading
the message abroad of the " new" Australia. I have made
this a central theme or my visits this year to Indonesia,
Japan and Singapore.
in the last two years, the Government has opened a number
of new posts in the increasingly affluent Asian region.
Ladies and gentlemen, the success of the companies
represented here tonight is an inspiration and example to
others. They need only look to your success for
confirmation that the labour is worthwhile.
Your imagination, determination, skills and effort
constitute a profound contribution to the great national
endeavour in the 1990s. T2EL0:. Nov. 92 17: 11 No. 020 P. Ub/ r' 
IEL: ZU. NOv. z 1 r. 11 NIu. VUV r . Vu u
7
The effort to make Australia a vigorous trading nation
and a prosperous society which can deliver employment
opportunities to all.
Your success is a material contribution to that process,
and a psychological one. Because success raises
Australians' hope, competitive success in the world
raises Australians' self-esteem.
It raises confidence and we will need that in the coming
years, as much as anything else.
So I thank you all, and congratulate you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TIlE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE lION P J KEATING, MP
. AUNCI I OF TERRY AULICH'S BOOK " TIlE RIVER'S END"
26 NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well thank you very much I am quite happy to be associated on this occasion with
Kerr publishing and most particularly with my friend and colleague, Terry Aulich.
On this very novel occasion for the Parliament because we believe that this is the
first novel written by a meniher of Parliament since Federation, which makes it
something of an event.
You have got to say one thing about the Labor Party we can breed all the
varieties -we arc the entrepreneurs, the adventurers, the romantics of Australian
politics. And in that high tradition we have produced Brother Aulich. He has
brought to the public a very hiteresting novel. It is interesting because it is about
something which is not quite a contemporary issue, but it is not that long ago that
it was, a decade ago. The issue of the Franklin River and its possible damming,
something which divided our national life which caused the fall of a Government
in Tasmania. The first time that a Government actually took on an cnvironment
issue in this country and of course changed Tasmania for cver, I won't say for ever,
that is too big a claim, at least for the monient. But certainly from the quieter days
of Tasmanian life, things changed when the Franklin and the Gordon-below-
Franklin debate was on.
The interesting thing about this is as described this book, not simply as fiction but
as faction. Half fact, fiction, or fact rolled with fiction, or fiction rolled with fact.
And Terry paints quite interesting pen sketches of some of the players, including
Doug Lowe, then Premier, who Terry in the past used to describe to me as the sort
of boy-ncxt-door type that every mother loved and that every mother wished her
daughter to marry. Well that was a prctty big wrap for Doug, but it didn't do him
much good politically when the crunch came.
œ O/ TO'd 2-O'ON Z,: SI Z6" AON' 9 
2
He lived through this period tumultuously. Of course, one has to know Tasmanian
politics to understand just how tightly fought it is, within that H-are Clarke system
and those multiple-member constituencies. People of thc same party campaign
against one another, so it is all hamlet and village-political machination, inighting
and thc rest. And I had much experience of this when I used to come to
Tasmania as the Shadow Minister for Tasmania in the then Opposition in the
1970s, and Terry was the person who used to take me around the State. Terry
always had a good automobile under him and wc used to he likes the good
things in life Terry and we dashed up and down Tasmania; Fingal, up the top,
and one day Fight down thc full length of the State to two or three things, we were
stopping at all these villages we will just stop in here, two drinks, be seen at the
pub, say hello, out we go, back in the car and off again. He had this sort of death
defying -struggle with the dreaded Michael Policy, who he shared a place with in
the same constituency and it was the fox eyeing off the fox and how one would
gamner support within this constituency. Now you can just imagine an issue like
the Franklin River dropped into the middle of this minutia of political
manoeuvrings that went on, and of course it was really something which was
cathartic to the political system.
What's nice about this book is that Tcrry has writtcn about it in a way that only
somebody as involved as he was could write about it. Someone who actually
knew about it, knew about all those little internecine battles, all those little
jealousies, past rebukes never to be forgotten, all that sort of stuff. And he has it
here woven into a story which I think tells a very nice tale about a big Australian
national issue. That's a very good thing to do and of course it is a most
unpretentious book, and that is in keeping with Terry himself who is certainly not
a pretentious person. He is good humoured and he does like a laugh and he has
that mocking style and all the time I have ever known hinm he has always sent up
all the personalities around hinm and has never taken the whole thing all that
seriously. Now that comes through, which is a very good way to be, a very good
way to be, particularly in public life, and that comecs through in the book, and I
mean there are just some very nice sort of this could only be written by an
Australian as, " Sinbad was a born victim, he had a certain style which didn't go
unnoticed." " There was a sudden intake of breath, a cross between a honk and a
snort", it goes on, " she's a bit on the skittish side and that right fetlock is still
troubling her", or, " you are seeing a lot of that McMillan bird" ( bird is an old word
now in Australia) but " Kerry Wade said plonking his burai on my desk". I mean it
is not reallIy James Joyce, but nor is it obl ique and distended l ike Patrick Wh ite.
So, this is very readable and while it may not be knocking on thc door for a Booker
prize, it's ccrtainly a very nicc piece of writing about Australia and the Australia
that we all know.
It is interesting that Terry has, it's one of a trilogy of books, he has two others
completed and in the course of publication, and it's again quite interesting that
somebody who has been involved in public life as much as he has has been able
still to turn his mind to a subject like this and get himself published and have two
œ O/ ZOdJ _ OON ZZ: GT Z 6AON* 9Z ' 113J1 
other bo~ ks at the ready as well. So, I think this is going to be a joy for many of
us. particularly in political system and journalists, to read. Terry has had a bent for
prose with poetry and writing over the years and I think that many of us who are
ourselves victims of the systemn of politics will find this a really good read.
So Terry, congratulations on putting it together, it is a very rcadablc book, it spins
a very nice tale, it paints tremendous pcn portraits of the characters, Patrick
[ Cennedy reads Ilike a refugee from the NSW Labor Party, but I[ don't know whcthcr
that is true, and he certainly found his way around Tasmania. Congratulations
again, Terry, I hope the book succeeds, it deserves to, it occupies a unique place in
the history of this place and the fact that you are the first as we understand it, the
first MP to have published a novel and not just one but three. Congratulations to
McMillan an Australia publishing company for publishing it. Goad luck to all
concerned. 



I:.
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
TO THE WALKLEY AWARDS PRESENTATION DINNER ANA HOTEL,
SYDNEY, 27 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a great pleasure to be here tonight.
It is always a pleasure to be among the nation's press.
I have only a hazy idea of why this is so.
But that is better than the Leader of the Opposition who has no idea at all.
Let me get the politics over with early. I don't share this Nixonian you won't have me to
kick around any more attitude.
I like engagement.
The Garboesque has no attraction for me. I don't want to be alone.
I ask myself these days does this make me peculiar?
That I like to talk to the press?
That, wrong-headed or inconvenient as they sometimes are, like journalists?
That like politics?
Am I wrong to believe that for all the inevitable imperfections this is one of the world's
better democracies and Australian journalists are a powerful reason why this is so?
I don't think I IM wrong.
I think it must be a kind of cultural attraction that you have for me.
I see the press down the back of the plane on overseas trips fierce and hungry, like
grizzly bears on a package tour of the Orient.
There are members of my staff who are too frightened to walk down the aisle between
them to go to the toilet. 4423 
They wait till nightfall and tiptoe down when they're all asleep little knowing that
journalists ame at their most dangerous after dark.
Yet I can't resist going down for a yarn..
I think the reason I enjoy the company of journalists, even when I can see by the look in
their eyes that they would like to tear me limb from limb, is that Ilactually like democracy.
It has its problems, democracy.. It doesn't always turn up the results we want. It can be as
frustrating to those of us who want change as it is to conservatives who want the world to
stand still.
But it's far and away the best form of government anybody has ever come up with, and I
must say I think it is my natural habitat.
In fact it seems to mec that in Australia we probably don't sufficiently appreciate the facts
of our democratic achievement that this is one of the great democracies of the world
and, we shouldn't forget, one of the oldest.
Those who complain about politics and politicians in Australia have a point. The number
of our governments creates a demand for good politicians in excess of the supply.
And the good ones have to learn to live in a maelstrom which is often made more by
media forces than by political or policy ones.
Televising parliament has dramatically increased that tendency and set all sorts of new
ii-iWa'o-i &amp; litical success.
For every politician who thrives in this environment there are others who drown, or who
merely cling to the sides, or stay forever unnoticed, tucked up in the vortex.
There is a lot of room for improvement. It does get a bit rugged, and, no doubt, dispiriting
for electors.
But so long s! iQuestion-Time is the televised spectacle of questions without notice being
fired at ministers in the hope of getting them to publicly slip up, there will be severe
pressures on nicety and decorum.
And so long as it is also the forum in which the great questions of the day are fought out, it
will be more than a game of croquet. It will be very often verbal war and no one
prepared to go to war should fight it with less than total commitment.
And really, while it is more public now than perhaps it used to be, the House of
Representatives has always been a rugged place.
Since Federation since parliaments began there has been sniping and pantomime in
styles as various as the human personality.
There has been absolute savagery sometimes.
And we Australians are not alone in it.
4424 
Few Australian politicians have declared their loathing of their opponents in the terms that
Winston Churchill did.
" I hate the Tory party" he said " their men, their words, and their methods."
rye always had a soft spot for Churchill.
That was the same Winston Churchill who, in the House of Commons, called Ramsay
MacDonald " the boneless wonder".
Yet in Australia, which is said to be such a rough-house, it would be considered a bit
beyond the bounds of decency in Australia to say you actually hated the Opposition.
At the very least you would have to be funny about it.
And I know if I called someone " the boneless wonder" on a day when there was not much
other news around, you could be sure that night there would be a fair bit of pious clicking
of tongues in the vicinity of television screens.
Particularly because the grab, almost certainly, would be taken out of its context.
Context is everything.
What Churchill described to the House was how he had been taken to the circus as a child,
where the advertised exhibit which most interested him had been the one described as Thse
Boneless Wonder.
He went on to say " My parents judged that the spectacle would be too revolting for my
youthful eyes and I have waited fifty years to see The Boneless Wonder sitting on the
Treasury Bench".
You would never get all that on the TV news.
It would just be a grab of me shouting over the din of the Opposition " I've waited fifty
years to see The Boneless Wonder". And a cut-away to Peter Reith feigning hurt and
outrage. Lloyd George once described the House of Commons as being to, a politician what a pub
is to a drunkard meaning that it is their natural envirornent and source of happiness,
however perverse.
I would say much the same about the House of Representatives or any great democratic
chamber. And I'd also say to those who believe that the standard of the place will be raised by
replacing the politicians with some species of non-politician that it would no more do
that, than a pub would be improved by having a clientele of wowsers.
Or a newspaper would be a better newspaper for being written by people without a taste
for politics and people.
Better to have better politicians. Ones who have enough faith in the strength of this
democracy to be prepared to push changes. Tough ones. Passionate ones. Ones who
understand politics and power. 4425 
And better to have journalists who understand these things too.
And proprietors who understand them.
There is a cast to Australian democracy which is unique, and which has given us, I
believe, unique advantages.
The principal thing to understand is that it conmes from the bottom up it is not imposed
from the top.
And I believe that its a source of strength.
If the democracies have been the successful societies of the past century, the most
successful democracies have been the social democracies.
The ones that have not feared the inclusion of the less well off in the social system, or
discarded the social net: but who have seen their strength in it, the source of their selfesteem,
the measure of their worth and national achievement.
If you measure the achievements of Australia, this is where they principally lie. They are
democratic achievements, or, at least, they are cast in a democratic mould.
The fundamentals were laid down at the time of federation or before.
And since then, from the principles of arbitration and the basic wage to the development
of social services with few rivals in the world, the cast of politics in Australia has been
democratic. It underpins the success of multiculturalism, no less than it underpinned the ethos of the
first AIF and the legend it created.
These are out of the egalitarian stamp of Australia.
The same thing underpins the Accol. It underpins our recently revived reputation for
advanced social legislation.
It underpins, I would say, the decision to abolish the discrimination against homosexuals
in the armed force.
It is decisions like this which keep us in the front rank of democracies.
When people say they want to break the mould of Australian politics would say watch
out! Because you can't break it without threatening the mould of society too you can't break
it without threatening the democracy.
And that I think is why it is the case that those who are talking about breaking the mould
of politics carry with them policies to break the mould of Australian society.
Perhaps they fail to understand that the two can't be separated.
Perhaps they understand it very well.
4426 
Perhaps they don't understand that, of all the values and traditions which bind Austraia
those of the people are the strongest and the most important.
Perhaps they confuse tradition with class and caste and official ritual.
it would not be surprising if it was simple confusion: becaus the conservatives in this
country have very often been confused about the fact that our institutions and traditions
belong to the people they made the best of them and if they need changing they will
change them.
I will forgive them their ignorance, of course.
But I doubt if Australians will when they get their chance to judge.
And that, rm inclined to think, is what politicians and political journalists have always to
remember. That politics doesn't start in Canberra. It ends there.
And, just as it does politicians good to escape the unreal world of Canberra, it would do
the political culture no harm if the gallery sometimes extended the peripheries of their
vision. There is a culture in Canberra which encourages politicians and press alike to see only the
links and not the chain.
T7hey are very small links in a very long chain.
They are no more than each day in the political life of the country.
it seems to me that this is one of the reasons why journalists often feel obliged to
editorialise in news stories: it is the only way to make sense of what is more often than not
an uncompleted story.
Too often I think.
I do believe Australians have to pick their way through too much opinion to get to the
news. in fact the opinion becomes part of the news the news today is that Michelle appears to
have changed her mind. Or Geoff has not changed his. Or the jury's still out on what
conclusion Peter will come to.
I do think the Australian news is over interpreted.
I know Gerard Henderson has been saying lately that journalists should improve their
knowledge of history and I agree with him.
He also reckons I should improve mine and I don't agree with him.
But the point is well taken. 4427 
It's not to sy I don't thoroughily enjoy the daily meal the gallery makes of our activities, to
acknowledpe that the democratic culture would be better served by mome of the broader
style of political journalism, and more matter of fact reporting of political events.
I think the bers could hunt in a bigger circle the bigger circle of Australian democracy,
the provenance of our institutions and traditions and ideas.
But I think with equal certainty that what is done now is essential and is done remarkably
well. It is literally true that democracy is impossible without a free press.
And it is literally true, and patently true every day of the political year, that the democracy
which is practised in Canberra would be impossible without the free press which operates
there.
Thank you for having me here.
4428 



TEL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 03/ ag
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING M. P,
PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE FECCA CONGRESS, CANBERRA
THURSDAY, 3 DECEMBER 1992
Ladies anid gentlemen
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to address this
third Congress of the Federation of Ethnic Communities
Councils of Australia.
Over the years, FECCA has made a substantial contribution
to the process of~ nation-buildinfg, to Strengthening the
social fabric, and to defining an Aus~ trali -an identity.
which more accurately reflects today's national
aspirations and realities.
I congratulate you for it and urge you to keep up the
good work.
You have played a leading role in one of the
unquestionable success stories of this country's history.
Multicultural Australia is one of the great social
engineering achievements. In a world once more torn by
ethnic hatred and bloodshed, what has been done here
stands increasingly as a benchmark of democratic common
sense. it is something all Australians should be proud of and
I say " all" advisedly.
I say it because while governments have played a leading
part in this success, and FECCA has played a notable part
with various ethnic groups, and while the ethnic
-communities are themselves deserving of enormous credit,
ina the last resort success depended on Australian
democratic values and_ principles of tolerance.
The policies of multiculturalism encouraged those ideals
of course. Groups like your own have encouraged
tolerance. But, as I said to a recent immigration conference, the
triumph of multiculturalism, is a triumphi of Australian
democracy. 
TEL: 3. Dec .92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 04/ 0'
2
It is built arnd could only be built on a sturdy sense
of-social justice.
Australia was inclined to narrowness arnd xenophobia,
there is rno doubt. All nations in their own way are.
Not a11 nations, however, overcome these feelings.
In not all nations are the democratic values stronger
than the undemocratic ones, the values of-tolerance, the
idea of fai -rness stroriger than the feelings of fear and
resentment towards those who are different.
In Australia to an unsurpassed extent they manifestly
are. And must remain.
in the 1990s I would like to see Australians counting the
democracy they have built here high among their many
reasons for pride.
And the success of multiculturalism high among their
democracy'se achievements.
Multiculturalism should never be seen as a denial of
Australia's heritage, but as an affirmatioi of our
democratic values -and traditions.
The notions of access and equity are not new ones they
were current at the birth of the Federation. They were
there in the 1890s. They have been with us ever since.
Properly understood, multicultural~ ism is an extension of
democracy of pluralism.
The proper end of multicultural policies is cultural
plurallsm The integrity of different cultures within an
Australian democratic framework.
I say these things because I think it will be good for us
in this last decade of the century, the decade leading to
the centenary of federation, to re-awaken awareness of
Australian social democracy.
Awareness of our social democratic values and
achievements. I think sometimes we could do more to raise our
democratic consciousness.
I think it would at once help reinforce democratic
institutions and traditions, and make the way easier for
necessary change.
Multiculturalism is among the institutions a greater
level of democratic consciousness would support. 
T3E. LD: ec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 05/ 09
3
Multiculturalismi as I have described it the opposite
and the antidote to ethnocentrism and cultural
fragmentat ion.
It is a source of cultural strength arnd, as we are now
discovering, a potential source of economic strength.
In this regard I was pleased to attend the ' Productive
Diversity conference, and to announce there some steps we
are taking to exploit our linguistic and cultural
diversity in the interests of a stronger, internationally
oriented economy.
As you probably know I also told the conference that we
have taken steps to assist job seekers whose lack of
formal English is impeding their employment prospects.
In another innovation we have established the Bilingual
Consultants Network to meet the need for
governments to identify the views of individuals and
groups within the community when planning their policies
and services.
The network is designed to act as a channel for the views
of those Australians who, through language, cultural or
geographic barriers have not to date been adequately
considered. The Australia-wide BCN comprising 600 people and fifty
languages, and extending to all States and the Northern
Territory, is now available to government and community
organisations. It can, for example, let agencies and companies gather
knowledge among client groups of their policies and
programs. it is an invaluable, cost effective tool for those who
require soundly-based information on the needs and views
of all Australians.
By such means as these the Government can do much to
create an envitroinent in which all Australians have a
chance to play a part in society.
When I say all Australians let me specifically
acknowledge immigrant women, of all ages and backgrounds,
who have contributed so much to this country and whose
needs, I recognise, have not always been met as they
should. Ladies and Gentleman,
Ethnic radio is a major element in the Government
strategy for enabling those from non-English speaking
backgrounds, particularly older residents and newly
arrived migrants, to participate in the life of
Australia. TEL 
TEL: 3 . Dec .92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 06/ 0S!
4
Ethnic radio programming is an important vehicle for
accommodating the information and communication needs of
people from non-English speaking backgrounds.
Unfortunately, there is at present insufficient air time
available on the SBS's two radio stations to satisfy the
programming demands of all ethnic communities in Sydney
and Melbourne.
-SoS currently provides programming in approximately 64
different languages between 6am and midnight, but the
demand on available air time means some languages are
limited to half an hour per fortnight.
And there is no SBS radio service outside Sydney and
Melbourne. To provide migrant communities with a fairer share of
broadcasting services, I am pleased to announce that the
Government is establishing a.-s econd -SBS radio network in
Melbourne and Sydney, and extending the service to Perth,
Adelaide, Brisbane, Darwin, Canberra and Hobart.
For the first time, Australia will have a _ nati-onl ethnic
broadcasting network.
A second SBS radio network will begin broadcasting to
Melbourne in December 1993 and to Sydney in July 1994.
The first services to Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane and
Darwin will commence In late 1993 with services to
Canberra and Hobart to follow.
The new network will ensure that the many people in
Sydney and Melbourne who are of non-English speaking
background get a better deal.
its programs will be directed to meeting the needs of
ethnic communities in Sydney and Melbourne which cannot
now be accommodated on Radio 2EA and 3EA.
The new service will complement the excellent EA radio
services in each city, and also those of the volunteerbased
public -radiQ. stations that offer multi-lingual
programs. Community broadcasters have nothing to fear from the
decision to extend SBS radio services. The Government
will continue to support the public broadcasting sector.
The new network will help meet the needs of ethnic
communities for programs in their own languages,
including communities affected by the recent
re-scheduling of services on Radio 2EA and 3EA. 
TEL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 07/ 09
The programs will mostly originate from SBS's new studios
at Artarmon in Sydney and be networked to other capital
cities. The SBS will be carrying out consultations with ethnic
communities and stakeholder groups before taking final
decisions on program content, format and scheduling.
I know you will forgive me for pointing out the sharp
contrast between the Government's policy on ethnic
broadcasting and the Federal Opposition's stated
intention to cut $ 6 million from the SBS.
Such a reduction must put in jeopardy plans for
expansion, as well as existing programming, services and
staffing. Six million dollars is more than the SBS spends on
program acquisition. It is more then their Australian
production budget. It is more than the total operational
costs of 2EA.
SBS is a remarkable and in my view remarkably effective
and valuable institution of Australian democracy.
You may be absolutely sure that the Government will
continue to support it, and where possible expand its
services. Ladies and Gentlemen,
Australian citizenship with its attendant rights and
obligations is part of the glue which binds this nation
and its citizens.
The Government is keen to encourage all Australian
residents to become Australian citizens and does not
consider it should be restricted to a privileged few.
The recent decision of the High Court on the eligibility
of several candidates in the Wills bi-election has
implications which are a matter of concern for all
Australians. In particular, the decision which found that two
individuals were ineligible to stand because they had
failed to take " reasonable steps" to renounce their
foreign citizenship may raise doubts about the value of
Australian citizenship.
I recognise that immigrants from certain countries face
almost insurmountable barriers to renounce their former
citizenship, even when assuming Australian citizenship.
Technically, therefore, thiy can be constitutionally
precluded from entering the Commonwealth Parliament for
reasons quite beyond their own control. 
TL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 08/ 0'-
6
The High Court decision effectively debars naturalised
inunigrants Austrfalian citizens from certain countries
from standing for Parliament, unless they have taken
" reasonable steps" to divest themselves of their original
citizenship. Only a constitutional -_ referendum-can ensure that this
does not happen agai-n.
I recognise that the High Court decisions on this and
other eligibility requirements for members of Parliament
raise a number of complex issues, including the -role of.
dual citizenship in our society.
I would welcome your views on these matters and will take
these into account in the Government's consideration of
the subject.
Practical considerations preclude a referendum at the
next election. However I intend to pursue the issues
with the opposition in the next Parliament, with a view
to changing the current constitutional requirements for
eligibility for Parliament.
And in my view Australian citizenship should be
sufficient qualification.
Ladies and gentlemen
Let me conclude as I began by saying that
multicultural ism is an extension of Australian social
democracy. A dramatic extension.
it has radically changed the way Australians live and the
way we think about ourselves and the rest of the world.
But it is built on a traditional democratic foundation.
we need to expand economic and social opportunity, of
course that is the basis of social democracy. It is
one of the principles underlying multicultural policy.
But we also need to develop a greater awareness and
appreciation of our democratic institutions and values
among the immigrant population and among Australians of
long standing.
It is my passionate belief that in this decade we need to
build a multicultural Australia which is richly
pluralist, richly democratic -and richly and
unmistakeably Australian.
Finally I must say a word or two about your retiring
Chairperson, Carl Harbaum.
I know of the hard work he has put into the Federation
over many years, of the dignity and the deep love of
Australia which he has brought to the job.
TEL 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER FOR KEIDANREN MISSION
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
WEDNESDAY, 9 DECEMBER 1992
Mr Itoh, Ambassador Hasegawa, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to welcome Keidanren's Economic Exchange
Promotion Mission to Australia.
The Australian Government and business sector value
highly the close relations we have enjoyed with Keidanren
over many years.
We recognise Keidanren's pre-eminent position among
Japan's national business organisations.
We admire the broad and long-term view your organisation
takes of your country' s economic circumstances.
Both with regard to an unending process of economic
restructuring within Japan, and the evolving challenges
you face in the international economic environment.
During my visit to Japan last September, I had an
opportunity for private discussions with your Honorary
Chairman, M4r Eishiro Saitoh, and other senior business
leaders.
Mr Saitoh's personal experience of the Australia-Japan
economic relationship spans more than four decades, and
he brings a great deal of understanding and authority to
our joint interests.
He spoke warmly about the contribution that Australia's
reliable supply of raw materials and energy has made to
industrialisation in Japan.
For our side too, trade with Japan has been a crucial
component in Australia's economic advancement.
Our two countries enjoy a truly mature and diversified
economic partnership.
4752 
The bilateral trade relationship, now worth almost
billion US dollars a year, is one of the principal
sinews of economic interdependence in the Western
Pacific. But there can be no room for complacency about past
achievements at a time when the Australian and Japanese
economies face severe challenges both at home and abroad.
Your mission to Australia is well timed.
You have the opportunity to observe the effects of
historic changes in both the economic performance and
attitudes of Australians.
During the 1980s, we embarked on an irreversible process
to open our markets to the world, and to make our economy
more internationally competitive.
We now export approximately 23 per cent of total output
compared with 14 per cent in 1983.
Our rate of taxation to GDP is now one of the lowest
among OECD countries, virtually the same as Japan's.
We have transformed ourselves from a high inflation
nation to a very low inflation nation.
We have increased our competitiveness by well over one
tenth.
We have replaced industrial disputation with a
cooperative system which has delivered the lowest level
of strikes for 30 years.
We are moving away from the centralised fixing of wages.
We have decided to make most wage settlements by
negotiation, and at the enter~ rise level.
We expect more than half the workforce to be covered by
enterprise bargains by the middle of next year.
During your visit, you have no doubt seen something of
the current political controversy about labour relations
in the State of Victoria.
The difference between the Australian Government and our
political opponents is that our side puts emphasis on
encouraging change and improved productivity through
consultation and respect for basic labour conditions
rather than by adopting a confrontationist approach.
Recession and restructuring have caused unacceptably high
levels of unemployment. 4 7773 
This year, we have invested a great deal in measures to
alleviate the social and human consequences of
unemployment. The Australian economy is now growing at an annual rate
of about two per ceint in real terms.
This is among the fastest rates in the OECD but not yet
sufficient to bring unemployment down.
Those of you who knew Australia before will have seen
that attitudes have also changed markedly.
Despite setbacks and hardship, there is awareness in
Australia as never before that our standard of living
depends totally on how well we make our own way in the
world. As you have learned in Japan, change induces more change.
Australians now have a new sense of national identity.
The challenges which face us are inspiring a new sense of
national purpose.
The recession has set us back, but the Australian people,
I believe, recognise the worth of what they achieved in
the past few years, and are not willing to give these
things up. I
We have laid the basis for economic transformation.
We know the direction we have to go and I am confident
that the Australian people are determined on going that
way. We have a more confident view of our role in the
Asia-Pacific region.
We have a sharper awareness of the opportunities for us
to engage more closely with economic dynamism in East
Asia. Australians are now committing much greater resources to
education and training.
This is so we can better meet the demands of a modern,
internationally oriented economy.
We reco~ gnise that Australia's human capital provides a
comparative advantage in economic relations with the
rapidly developing economies to our North.
Earlier this week the State Premiers and I agreed to
develop a comprehensive strategy to promote the study of
Asian languages and cultures in Australian schools.
Already around 100,000 young Australians study Japanese.
4754 
AS Australia fully comes to terms with the potential of
our economic relations with the wider East Asian region,
the importance of relations with Japan is unlikely to
diminish. Japan still accounts for 28 per cent of Australian
exports, compared with 57 per cent for all East Asia.
Mr Itoh and colleagues, I trust that your mission will
return to Japan impressed with the vitality of the
bilateral relationship with Australia and the scope for
two-way expansion of trade and investment.
From the Australian Government's perspective, the
relationship with Japan is a corner-stone in the
development of our broader policy towards the Asia-
Pacific region.
Both our countries have a fundamental interest in the
maintenance of an open, non-discrimatory, multilateral
trading system and in the promotion of open regionalism
in the Asia-Pacific area.
A recent article by a senior Japanese official in a
journal published by the Japanese Foreign Ministry
attracted close attention here.
The author identified Australia as having the attributes
to be a key partner of Japan in promoting a desirable
form of economic integration in the Asia-Pacific region.
I should say for Australia's part that we are always
ready to work closely with the Japanese Government and
private sector to strengthen cooperation at both the
bilateral and regional levels.
Senior officials of the two Governments will be
discussing just these sorts of issues early in the new
year as a follow-up to my visit to Tokyo.
In responding to an increasingly fluid world trade
system, Australia has a core interest in maintaining the
most favourable possible environment for our bilateral
trade relationships with Japan and the other economies of
East Asia.
As I said in Japan in September, Australia will not be a
party to any trade arrangement which is directed against
Japan. But in all of this our aim should be to avoid an inwardlooking
relationship and work together to encourage the
most open possible processes of economic integration in
the Asia-Pacific region. 4755 
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC process is
a particularly valuable mechanism in this regard, because
it embraces the key economic linkages between the
countries of the Western Pacific and North America.
The interests of both Australia and Japan are best served
by ensuring that the Western Pacific and North America
remain part of the same thriving trading community.
Mr Itoh and colleagues, let me again welcome you to
Australia. And let me say on behalf of all the Australians here this
evening that we hope that your visit to Australia is both
professionally satisfying and personally enjoyable.
Thank you.
4756 


10 December 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I am very pleased to be here today at the launch of Australia's celebration of the 1993 International Year of the World's Indigenous People.
It will be a year of great significance for Australia.
It comes at a time when we have committed ourselves to succeeding in the test which so far we have always failed.
Because, in truth, we cannot confidently say that we have succeeded as we would like to have succeeded if we have not managed to extend opportunity and care, dignity and hope to the indigenous people of Australia the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island people.
This is a fundamental test of our social goals and our national will: our ability to say to ourselves and the rest of the world that Australia is a first rate social democracy, that we are what we should be truly the land of the fair go and the better chance.
There is no more basic test of how seriously we mean these things.
It is a test of our self-knowledge.
Of how well we know the land we live in. How well we know our history.
How well we recognise the fact that, complex as our contemporary identity is, it cannot be separated from Aboriginal Australia.
How well we know what Aboriginal Australians know about Australia.
Redfern is a good place to contemplate these things.
Just a mile or two from the place where the first European settlers landed, in too many ways it tells us that their failure to bring much more than devastation and demoralisation to Aboriginal Australia continues to be our failure.
More I think than most Australians recognise, the plight of Aboriginal Australians affects us all.
In Redfern it might be tempting to think that the reality Aboriginal Australians face is somehow contained here, and that the rest of us are insulated from it.
But of course, while all the dilemmas may exist here, they are far from contained.
We know the same dilemmas and more are faced all over Australia.
That is perhaps the point of this Year of the World's Indigenous People: to bring the dispossessed out of the shadows, to recognise that they are part of us, and that we cannot give indigenous Australians up without giving up many of our own most deeply held values, much of our own identity and our own humanity.
Nowhere In the world, I would venture, is the message more stark than it is in Australia.
We simply cannot sweep injustice aside. Even if our own conscience allowed us to, I am sure, that in due course, the world and the people of our region would not.
There should be no mistake about this our success in resolving these issues will have a significant bearing on our standing in the world.
However intractable the problems seem, we cannot resign ourselves to failure any more than we can hide behind the contemporary version of Social Darwinism which says that to reach back for the poor and dispossessed is to risk being dragged down.
That seems to me not only morally indefensible, but bad history.
We non-Aboriginal Australians should perhaps remind ourselves that Australia once reached out for us.
Didn't Australia provide opportunity.-and care for the dispossessed Irish? The poor of Britain? The refugees from war and famine and persecution in the countries of Europe and Asia? '
Isn't it reasonable to say that if we can build a prosperous and remarkably harmonious multicultural society in Australia, surely we can find just solutions to the problems which beset the first Australians the people to whom the most injustice has been done.
And, as I say, the starting point might be to recognise that the problem starts with us non-Aboriginal Australians.
It begins, I think, with that act of recognition.
Recognition that it was we who did the dispossessing.
We took the traditional lands and smashed the traditional way of life.
We brought the diseases. The alcohol.
We committed the murders.
we took the children from their mothers.
We practised discrimination and exclusion.
It was our ignorance and our prejudice.
And our failure to imagine these things being done to us.
With some noble exceptions, we failed to make the most basic human response and enter into their hearts and minds.
We failed to ask how would I feel if this were done to me?
As a consequence, we failed to see that what we were doing degraded all of us.
If we needed a reminder of this, we received it this year.
The Report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal.-Deaths. in Custody showed with devastating clarity that the past lives on in inequality, racism and injustice.
In the prejudice and ignorance of non-Aboriginal Australians, and-in the demoralisation and desperation, the fractured identity, of so many Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
For all this, I do not believe that the Report should fill us with guilt.
Down the years, there has been no shortage of guilt, but it has not produced the responses we need.
&nbsp;Guilt is not a very constructive emotion.
I think what we need to do is open our hearts a bit.
All of us.
Perhaps when we recognise what we have in common we will see the things which must be done the practical things. There is something of this in the creation of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation.
The Council's mission is to forge a new partnership built on justice and equity, and an appreciation of the heritage of Australia's indigenous people.
In the abstract those terms are meaningless.
We have to give meaning to " justice" and " equity" and, as I have said several times this year, we will only give them meaning when we commit ourselves to achieving concrete results.
If we improve the living conditions in one town, they will improve in another. And another.
If we raise the standard of health by twenty per cent one year, it will be raised more the next.
If we open one door others will follow.
When we see improvement, when we see more dignity, more confidence, more happiness &nbsp;- we will know we are going to win.
We need these practical building blocks of change.
The Mabo Judgement should be seen as one of these.
By doing away with the bizarre conceit that this continent had no owners prior to the settlement of Europeans, Mabo establishes a fundamental truth and lays the basis for justice.
It will be much easier to work from that basis than has ever been the case in the past.
For that reason alone we should ignore the isolated outbreaks of hysteria and hostility of the past few months.
Mabo, is an historic decision - we can make it an historic turning point, the basis of a new relationship between indigenous and non-Aboriginal Australians.
The message should be that there is nothing to fear or to lose in the recognition of historical truth, or the extension of &nbsp;social justice, or the deepening of Australian social democracy to include indigenous Australians.
There is everything to gain.
Even the unhappy past speaks for this.
Where Aboriginal Australians have been included in the life of Australia they have made remarkable contributions.
Economic contributions, particularly in the pastoral and agricultural industry.
They are there in the frontier and exploration history of Australia.
They are there in the wars.
In sport to an extraordinary degree.
In literature and art and music.
In al1l these things they have shaped our knowledge of this continent and of ourselves. They have shaped our identity.
They are there in the Australian legend.
We should never forget they have helped build this nation.
And if we have a sense of justice, as well as common sense, we will forge a new partnership.
As I said, it might help us if we non-Aboriginal Australians imagined ourselves dispossessed of land we had lived on for fifty thousand years and then imagined ourselves told that it had never been ours.
Imagine if ours was the oldest culture in the world and we were told that it was worthless.
Imagine if we had resisted this settlement, suffered and died in the defence of our land, and then were told in history books that we had given up without a fight.
Imagine if non-Aboriginal Australians had served their country in peace and war and were then ignored in history books.
Imagine if our feats on sporting fields had inspired admiration and patriotism and yet did nothing to diminish prejudice.
Imagine if our spiritual life was denied and ridiculed.
Imagine if we had suffered the injustice and then were blamed for it.
It seems to me that if we can imagine the injustice we can imagine its opposite.
And we can have Justice.
I say that for two reasons:
I say it because I believe that the great things about Australian social democracy reflect a fundamental belief in justice.
And I say it because in so many other areas we have proved our capacity over the years to go on extending the realms of participation, opportunity and care.
Just as Australians living in the relatively narrow and insular Australia of the 1960s imagined a culturally diverse, worldly and open Australia, and in a generation turned the idea into reality, so we can turn the goals of reconciliation into reality.
There are very good signs that the process has begun.
The creation of the Reconciliation Council is evidence itself.
The establishment of the ATSIC &nbsp;- the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission - is also evidence.
The Council is the product of Imagination and good will. ATSIC emerges from the vision of -indigenous self.- determination and self-management.
&nbsp;The vision has already become the reality of almost 800 elected Aboriginal Regional Councillors and Commissioners determining priorities and developing their own programs.
All over Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities are taking charge of their own lives.
And assistance with the problems which chronically beset them is at last being made available in ways developed by the communities themselves.
If these things offer hope, so does the fact that this generation of Australians is better informed about Aboriginal culture and achievement, and about the injustice that has been done, than any generation before.
We are beginning to more generally appreciate the depth and the diversity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures.
From their music and art and dance we are beginning to recognise how much richer our national life and identity will be for the participation of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders.
We are beginning to learn what the indigenous people have known for many thousands of years how to live with our physical environment.
Ever so gradually we are learning how to see Australia through Aboriginal eyes, beginning to recognise the wisdom contained in their epic story.
I think we are beginning to see ' how much we owe the indigenous Australians and how much we have lost by living so apart.
I said we non-indigenous Australians should try to imagine the Aboriginal view.
It can't be too hard. Someone imagined this event today, and it is now a marvellous reality and a great reason for hope.
There is one thing today we cannot imagine.
We cannot imagine that the descendants of people whose genius and resilience maintained a culture here through fifty thousand years or more, through cataclysmic changes to the climate and environment, and who then survived two centuries of disposession and abuse, will be denied their place in the modern Australian nation.
We cannot imagine that.
We cannot imagine that we will fail.
And with the spirit that is here today I am confident that we won't.
I am confident that we will succeed in this decade.
Thank you
&nbsp;



T1EL0:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 01/ 10
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING MP
AT THE PRESENITATION OF THE BRW-ALCATEL BUSINESS AWARDS
PARK LANE HOTEL
SYDNEY, 10 DECEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very pleased to be able to join in celebrating the
achievements of some of Australia's finest enterprises and
entrepreneurs. So often we hear the doomsayers rattling around, the
jeremiabs projecting their own pessimism and self-loathing
on to the rest of the Country.
it is good to be as I often ami among people who by their
actions prove the opposite.
To re-mint an old conservative phrase, there is a silent
majority in Australia a silent majority of ders out
there.
Men and women who are going about the business of businesslooking
for opportunities, changing where change is needed,
adapting, developing and, in difficult times, succeeding.
It is a pleasure to have the chance to congratulate them.
We need their success. We need their example.
in Australia it's always a tough audience.
In sport, art and business it's the same the gloom
merchants are perched there like crows with the words
III told you Sol'-already formed in their mouths.
it's the Hanrahan syndrome -the " we'll 811 be rooned"
syndrome. But they are a minority. And, anyway, it's not so much in
their natures as in their Interests to be pessimists.
I TEL 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 02/ 10
2
in fact, in my experience, the great majority of Australians
are much more forgiving, much more realistic, and have much
more faith in themselves and their country.
And I think they have good reason to.
In the past decade Australians have recognised the need for
dramatic change, and they have had the imagination and the
will to make it. They continue to.
They have also recognised the need for continuity of
decent values, of the bases of equity and fairness.
That to me is proof of common sense, and the best possible
assurance of the future of Australia.
My typical Australian is a mixture of common sense and
flair. The stoic and the bold.
That seems to define most of our legendary figures from
Ned Kelly to Allan Border.
it might even define Bob Gottliebsen.
it defines most of the successful business people I speak
to.
And, in all likelihood, it defines the people we are here to
congratulate tonight.
Being the people they are, of course, none of them will be
resting on their laurels.
There are many opportunities out there for innovative-. firms.
many rewards to be had.
And you can be sure that these rewards will be a11 the
greater as the overall economy grows.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The recession has been deep and the recovery slower than we
would have liked.
We have not been helped by events overseas.
We can take eome satisfaction from the fact that, at 2.1
per cent in the year to September, we have one of the
fastest-growth rates in the OECD.
However, we all know that this is not fast enough to bring
unemployment down.
We must reduce unemployment. 
T1EL0: . Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 03/ 10
3
We must do it to bring an and to the hardship which the
unemployed are suffering.
we must do it to restore to them the opportunities which
Australia should offer.
And we must do it because people are our most valuable
resource. The health of our economy depends on reducing the number of
unemployed. The only way is. faster growth.
Growth of around 4 per cent or so will bring unempl~ oyment
down. It is also quite achievable.
Over the past year or so the Government has taken a number
of steps to strengthen growth interest rates have been
lowered substantially and there has been direct stimulus
from the One Nation Statement, the Youth Statement and the
Budget. These initiatives have clearly boosted demand and output.
Lower interest rates have been central to the 12 per cent
increase in dwelling investment over the past year.
Public sector demand-has been running ahead of demand in the
private sector, notwithstanding the contraction we have seen
in some of the States' budgets.
So the Government's strategy of providing stimulus is
working. But recovery has been held back by a weak international
economy and the low levels of business investment.
It is important that we understand what has been depressing
business investment, because that is the key to further
economic expans ion.
Fundamentally, it has been the result of the efforts of many
corporations and financial enterprises to reduce debt levels
and establish stronger balance sheets after the excesses of
the late 1980s.
This has been a necessary and very difficult process.
The corporate sector embarked upon an exercise of cutting
costs and reducing debt.
TEL 
T1E0L:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 04/ 10
4
The banks tightened their lending guide-lines and have
concentrated more on their traditional business.
The result has been less business investment and, for those
businesses which want to grow, more stringent tests to meet
before they can get the necessary finance.
Slower economic recovery has been the cost.
The process of debt restructuring is continuing.
But I think it is now clear that the major hurdles are
behind us.
The profit share has held up despite the recession, while
lower interest rates have seen interest payments by the
corporate sector almost halved over the past two years.
As a result, the corporate sector has had the means to
reduce their debt levels.
In fact, corporate debt/ equity ratios have been falling for
the past three years and, apart from a few notable
exceptions, appear to be at relatively healthy levels
overall. The receiverhip business has tailed off while banks' new
non-performing loans have declined sharply.
The total stock of these non-performing loans has recently
begun to turn down.
All these are significant signs of health being restored to
corporate and financial sector balance sheets.
Progress has been slow, but increasingly over the past few
months, it appears that business is increasingly looking for
new opportunities.
I notice the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan
Greenspan, noted similar developments in the United States
recently. He said that " the credit crunch which has been so
debilitating to economic performance over the past two or
three years has shown no evidence of worsening in recent
months and may finally be retreating. At least this is the
implication of some stirring in'the loan markets in recent
weeks", he said.
And in Australia business confidence has been picking up,
arnd the credit ag~ regatesi hae been growing again as new
buslness has begun to outweigh repayments.
TEL: 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 05/ 1(
Today's unemployment figures were again disappointing veryI
disappointing but there are some grounds for believing
that the pick-up in vacancies indicates the start of an
improved labour market ahead.
indeed, as the debt is reduced, businesses are increasingly
focusing on the positive factors that are there
the lowest inflation rates in the developed world
low interest rates
productivity up around 3 per cent over the past year
good underlying profits levels that will improve further
as volumies increase
very favourable international competitiveness
continued wage restraint
and, one hopes, continued very low levels of industrial
disputation.
Coming on top of the stimulus from the public sector that
will continue for some time, these factors give us good
reason to expect the economic recovery to strengthen.
Of course, growth in Australia will be constrained by the
weak international environment we face, but we can look to
the future with greater confidence.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We can be more confident about the future, but at the same
time we have to-learn from the past.
A central lesson has been the desirability of banks
establishing close relationships with their customers.
Lending will always be less risky if the lender has a more
complete understanding of the viability of a proposal.*
Moreover, lending has to be based much more on an assessment
of the likely cash flow of a proposition than on the
availability of security.
Financial -Institutions can no longer rely on property values
underpinning loans if they ever could.
The major banks assure me that they have recognised these
needs and have shifted their 3. ending rules accordingly. 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 06/ 10
6
They tell me they are providing extra training for lending
officers so they are better able to evaluate risk and the
potential of proposals.
Cash flow lending, they say, will be the norm in the
practice of Australian bank lending.
And the banks will, I believe, more aggressively try to
expand their lending under these more disciplined credit
standards. Still, I believe we should go further with the development
of relationship banking.
It is the export of services and elaborately transformed
manufactured goods that have grown so rapidly over the past
years.
These have relied on our strengths in innovation, research
and training.
A great many of the new, successful exporters are small to
medium size firms who are out to establish niche markets
especially export markets.
our future depends on being able to build on these successes
-and that means our future depends in no small way on our
banks. As Australians increasingly develop innovative products and
seek to sell them into new markets, banks will have to
improve their skills and capacities of evaluation.
it is obvious that evaluating the quality of new proposals
will be a challenge.
There is risk associated with new product lines which may
take a number of years to come on stream.
There is risk associated with developing new export markets.
There is risk associated with lending to young firms that
are growing with new ideas.
But these are risks that banks will have to be able to
assess. This is the future they simply must embrace.
And it is where, after all, the rewards are going to be.
Where returns are likely to be rewarding, they are risks
they will have to undertake. 
T1E0L:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 07/ 10
7
It is not just in the interests of the overall economy that
adequate finance should be forthcoming for worthwhile
propositions. So long as they are able to properly assess the likely risk
and return, it can also be very much in the interests of the
institutions concerned.
An important element in the success of the Japanese and
German economies has been the very close relationship their
banks have had with business.
Of course the German and Japanese banking systemis have been
more regulated than our own, and there are many features of
their system we should not try to duplicate.
But the ready access to finance for good projects which
their businesses have is something we must work at getting
here. Poorly appraised risk-taking is the last thing our lending
institutions should engage in. My argument is that they
must do more to develop their evaluation and monitoring
skills.
How this is done will be up to the institutions concerned.
it may mean providing more finance for export business
through regional centres, rather than through individual
branches which tend to be the first port of call for many
small and medium-sized businesses.
it may involve developing clusters of skills in technology
or engineering, or in providing management and financial
advice for small businesses.
From this, expertise in evaluating ventures in new areas
could be established.
of course, these ideas are not new banks have already
taken some action along these lines.
But through whatever means the individual institutions may
choose, I believe it is very desirable for us to go further
down this path.
Ladies and gentlemen
-Through the-Commonwealth* Development Bank the Government has
played a direct role in trying to ensure that suitable
finance is available to a dynamic sector of the economy that
often has difficulty raising funds I mean the Wmall
business sector. TEL 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 08/ 10
Over the years, the Commonwealth Development Bank has
fulfilled a limited buit -very useful role supplying loans and
some limited equity finance f or small business, including
farmers. Because it is required to lend only to businesses who are
unable to obtain sufficient finance through other channels,
the CDB operates at the riskier end of the market.
This means it attracts loan applications which it cannot
approve. Nevertheless it still approves many projects which
would not otherwise be financed.
Although it made a 1088 in the more difficult Circumstances
of 1991-92, it has recorded respectable rates of return down
the years.
It has done this despite its concentration on small risky
loans that tend to involve high overheads.
The reason for this relative success has been the COB's
ability to establish expertise in evaluating and managing
its loans, an expertise that is built on both a detailed
knowledge of the sector itself and a close working
relationship with the businesses concerned.
So the Commonwealth Development Bank has performed that
specialised role.
But the CDB grew up in the more regulated system of the
past. with the removal of interest ceilings, other banks have
expanded further into small business and rural areas, and
the CDB's lending has tended to be pushed further towards
the realms of risk.
It is important that the Development Bank is able to
continue to fulfil its special role, and to do so in a
manner that is consistent with the Commonwealth Bank making
a commercial rate of return.
Accordingly, the Board of the Commonwealth Bank is reviewing
the operation of the CD5 and its special charter to ensure
that it remains in a position to lend to the small business
and rural sectors.
This lending will continue to be based primarily on the
interest irihecrelt-of' a proposal rather than the value of
any security offered. 
T1EL0:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 09/ 10
9
in addition, the Government is prepared to Consider with the
Commonwealth Bank's Board whether there is a need for any
financial support that may be required by -expanded lending
opportunities. The CDB will always remain in a niche in the market, but a
very important niche.
I am confident that it will continue to fulfil its role and
that it is well placed to grow.
Indeed, I hope that Its characteristic reliance on
soecialist skills and close involvement with its customers
will be emulated by other financial institutions.
Ladies and gentlemen,
our financial institutions must play 8 dynamic role as
economic recovery strengthens.
They will be a vital player as Australia continues to make
inroads into world markets.
Closer relationships between banks and their customers will
help to ensure that Australian business can meet the
challenges and grow.
At the same time, it will help banks' profitability and
ensure that the experience of the past few years is not
repeated. Ladies and gentlemen,
i hardly need to say to you that I think Australia is on the
right path. I
We are now more outwardly oriented. we are more efficient.
We are more flexible.
We think in ways we never thought before about excellence,
about exports, about Asia and the Pacific, about enterprise
bargaining.
We are exporting things we never dreamt of making a decade
ago, and we're exporting them to places we never imagined
could be markets.
There has been an attitudinal change of profound dimensions
kind of -cultural change which was absolutely essential
to our success.
we have generated, as I said, other essential preconditions
like low inflation, and an acceptance among wage earners
that profits need to be adequate.
TEL: 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 10/ l1
We have made a number of the essential microeconomic reforms
in telecommunications, aviation, the wharves.
We will continue the process. Let no one imagine that
because we have done these things we don't intend to do more
or that more is not being done now.
what we have achieved has not been easy.
It is not easy to make structural changes and continue to
hold the social fabric together.
But in my view it is essential to do it that way.
Not just because it is more decent though that is a
sufficient condition but also because it is more
efficient. The economic transformation of Australia is not a Sprint for
speedy squibs: it needs stamina and we will get to the
line quicker and in better shape if we maintain and build
our momentum and hold body and soul together all the way.
We have learned that economic change demands cultural
change. It has social consequences.
There are no ways around this. And there is no better way
to go than by taking all sections of the community with us.
We are now reforming the labour market on these principles
of cooperation and mutual agreement on goals.
The 550 enterprise agreements have been built on that
cultural change I talked about.
They are the tangible manifestation of new Australian
attitudes and common goals.
They are built on that sort of realistic faith in ourselves
and each other, on that mixture of common sense and
imagination I talked about earlier.
it is on that, I am convinced, that we will build the
recovery.
And I daresay that is what the success of tonight's honoured
guests was substantially built on.
I congratulate you all.
Thank you for having me. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ENVIRONMENT STATEMENT LAUNCH ADELAIDE, 21 DECEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
It's a pleasure to be in Adelaide. It always is.
As I have said before, it has always seemed to me to be a
brave city built in an environment which is beautiful and
benign, but very often not easy, and not infrequently
harsh. A city poised between the desert and the deep blue
sea. In Adelaide, one is always aware of both the natural
environment and the built one the natural and the human
heritage. It is the ideal place to launch this statement.
Ten months ago, in a completely different environment to
this one, with the birdcalls coming only from the
Opposition, I announced a package of Government initiatives
under the name " One Nation".
The principle of One Nation was strength through
partnerships. Partnerships of all kinds: between
governments local, State and Commonwealth between
business and government, between employees and employers,
between community and nation.
The idea of One Nation was to lay the basis of a stronger
Australia by calling on all our resources, human and
material, our social and economic strengths, our
intellectual strengths.
To include all Australians in the process of nation
building: and, immediately, in the great effort to bring
on economic recovery and the jobs that will go with it.
Today the effects of One Nation continue to be felt as the
projects we announced get underway.
Just as importantly, I believe, the idea of one Nation has
had some influence on the way we Australians think about
the future.
I think One Nation went some way to extending the idea of
cooperation which in the 1980s had developed so effectively
in important areas of the nation's life.
PRIME MINISTER 
I think it had some influence on the way we confront
Australia's problems and work towards our national goals.
I say these things today because I think this Statement is
concerned with one of our great national goals the
protection and rehabilitation of our environment.
I say it because in many important regards the Statement
embodies the idea and the aims of One Nation.
And I say it because the spirit which One Nation invoked is
already there in the national environment effort.
Today's launch is in part a celebration of the work already
being done right across Australia, by local government,
community organisations and individuals.
And I take this my opportunity to salute their work.
Nothing better illustrates the interdependence of
Australians and their communities than the environment.
Nothing more emphatically makes the point that all our
state borders and provincial differences still leave one
fact unassailable that this in one continent and one
nation. And, for good or bad, what we do in one part of it very
often effects another.
What one Australian does to the environment effects another
Australian. It makes the point very clearly what we do against each
other weakens Australia.
What we do in partnership strengthens us all.
If there is a dominant theme in this Environment Statement
it is Australia's soil_ and water.
Soil and water are basics of life. If we cannot guarantee
their ' integrity-we breach a fundamental trust to this and
future generations, and to the land we call our own.
In doing so, of course, we also deny ourselves the product
of the land. The degeneration of our soil and water has
already cost us millions of dollars.
Whether it is in the colour and taste of Adelaide's water,
or the blue/ green algae on the Darling, the consequences of
abuse and neglect also come at an incalculable cost to our
confidence and self-regard.
In truth, I don't think we can spoil the essentials of life
and degrade the land without depressing our spirit. 
By now everybody is aware that the main focus of the
Environment Statement is the Murray-Darling our greatest
river system, a huge national resource, and a part of
Australia indelibly inscribed in our history and culture.
Nothing better illustrates the network of environmental
interdependence than the Murray-Darling a national artery
which begins life in Queensland and sustains life in South
Australia. At present the Murray Darling is being seriously degraded.
No one should underestimate the environmental and economic
costs of this degradation.
As the statement says: " This has already cost hundreds of
millions of dollars, poisoned a wellspring of our heritage,
and destroyed huge areas of formerly productive land."
At present, ten towns along the Darling are responsible for
ninety per cent of sewage phosphate entering the river.
This will end.
With Australian technology we will eliminate these sources
of pollution and so improve water quality and reduce the
potential for blue/ green algae.
While the repair and protection of the Murray Darling Basin
is a centrepiece of the initiatives announced today, the
Government's Statement reflects the fact that the
community's concern and the environment's needs are broad,
and getting broader. The Statement announces:
Our intention to create a national system of marine
and land reserves.
A comprehensive study of the environmental and
economic values of the. Shoalwatez-Bay area.
The nomination of the Riversleigh fossil site and the
Naracoorte Caves for World Heritage listing.
More research into alternative energy sources, such as
ethanol and solar energy.
Four more Cooperative Research Centres with an
environmental focus.
An additional eight million dollars for the control of
weeds and feral animals, with another five million
specifically for the control of mimosa pigra which is
threatening to invade Kakadu.
Finance for the purchase of Calperum pasto-ral lease
near Renmark to ensure its protection and
sustainability. 
State of the environment reportinct and other
educatio-nal ti6oolsni-essary for Governments and the
community to make informed decisions.
And of course a great deal more.
Not all of these are high profile or controversial matters,
but they are all initiatives of substance, all initiatives
which build on what we have been doing, all links in the
environmental protection chain.
Of course there is more to be done than any Government
could do in a Statement such as this.
But you can be assured that we will keep working away at
the list.
For too long the myth that. jobs-and environmental
protection are incompatible has tended to govern our
thinking. In truth, while some conflicts will inevitably remain for
Governments and communities to resolve, it is increasingly
evident that the economic sustainability of Australia is
dependent on the environmental sustainability of Australia.
Whether you're talking about tourism or our rural
industries, or vital water supplies, we are all now
conscious of the need to maintain our natural resource base
to sustain them.
In other cases, like waste management and re-cycling, the
protection of the environment itself constitutes a booming
industry.
The point is made in the statement: " the drive for
environmentally friendly industries and the protection of
our environment is part of the economic drive part of the
international competitive drive in which Australia is
t engaged." So we will continue to look at ways to achieve the dual
objectives of _ environmental protection and job creation.
I was very pleased to receive recently a proposal for a
" green jobs" strategy jointly developed by the ACTU and the
Australian Co6nservatidon Foundation.
You can be sure that the Government is well-disposed to
this sort of initiative and we will be giving the proposal
our urgent consideration and expect to be able to help
bring the ideas to fruition.
Now no doubt there will those who say that an ACTU/ ACF
_. 1iaison__ 1s an unholy alliance.
But I would argue that in fact it is one of the natural
partnerships on which we can build a national response. 
0 Really, it is no longer acceptable, or even possible, to
retreat to ideology or prejudice or slogans as far as the
environment is concerned.
The environment is a central, main game issue in which all
Australians are involved.
Living in the built environment might lead most of us away
from this conclusion but in fact, as the people of
Adelaide would know very well, we who live in the towns and
cities do not escape our relationship with the natural
environment. We depend on it for our resources.
And for the national wealth in which all of us share.
For our recreational pleasure and spiritual inspiration.
For our soil, air and water.
The environment provides us with the basics of life.
This Statement is informed by that simple fact.
All our lives will be better and Australia will be stronger
for the things that it will do.
Thank you for having me today. 



TEL: 14. Jan. 93 15: 29 No. 010 P. 01
-7
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING, MP
FAREWELL REMARKS TO AUSTRALIAN CONTIGENT TO SOMALIA
TOWNSVILLE, THURSDAY 14 JANUARY 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
I am honoured to take part in this ceremony to farewell Australian troops dcploying to
Somalia. Tomorrow you will be in Somalia, joining colleagues who have gone ahead to prepare
for your arrival.
You will be part of an historic international undertaking, involving military personnel
from more than 20 other nations.
Never before has the United Nations sanctioned intervention on such a scale in the
internal affairs of a member state for humanitarian purposes.
The world has bccn appalled by the human disaster in Somalia.
A quarter of a million people havc dicd as a result of famine and clan warfare.
Last year Somalis continued to star,, c while food donated by the international
community was plundered by armed gangs or remained in warehouses because safe
passage could not b; guarantccd.
Operation " Rcstore Hope" is the international response to this terrible situation.
Its objective is to establish as soon as possible a secure environment for humanitarian
relicf operations in Somalia.
Australia's contribution to " Restore Hope" is a further demonstration of our support for
a stronger UN role in pcacekccping and humanitarian intervention.
We have a proud record in peacekceping. 
2
Today, Australian personnel are serving in UN-mandaced operations in Cambodia,
Iraq, the Red Sea, Western Sahara, Cyprus, Pakistan and Afghanistan, Israel and Syria,
as well as the multilateral operation in the Sinai.
when you join up with the remainder of the battalion group, you will become part of
Australia's largest contribution to UN operations since tbe Korean War and our largest
overseas deployment of ground forces in more than 20 years.
This deployment is also significant in providing an opportunity for Australia's infantry
to demonstrate the professional skills for which you arc so highly regarded.
I know you are well trained and cquipped for the challenging tasks that await you.
' The risks that you will face are real.
The Government is acutely awarc of what this means for you and your families.
Your assignment is limited to 17 weeks, and this is accepted by Australia's partners in
the operation.
We have no doubt you will be able to make a valuablc contribution to O9eratio
" Restore Hope" in this period.
It is appropriate that you have been assigned duties in the Baidoa area where Care
Australia has maintained a major relief operation in the most difficult circumstances.
You leave these shores with the full support of the nation as affirmed in the joint
resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament on 17 December.
On behalf of all Australians, I should like to express our deepest gratitude for your
service. You go to do what Australians want to see done:-security re-established;
humanitarian relief resumed.
Less suffcring. More hope.
I know that they arc proud of you, and that they wish you God-spccd and a safe return
to Australia.
I should now like to invite the Leader of the Opposition to join me in wishing you
every sucrCess in your important assignment.
CANBERRA 14 January 1993 TEL 14. Jan. 93 15: 29 No. 010 P-02,-



TEL: 1 i. Jan. 96 ' J NO . UU4 r
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECHi BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN TEACHERS UNION NATIONAL CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE 15 JANUARY 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
i am very grateful for the opportunity to address you even
though I am still officially of f duty.
This was supposed to be a Curriculum day.
But with our history being debated in the papers every day,
our national honour sullied again in the British press, every
day the expectation that one will be blamed for something else
going wrong over there, one is inevitably drawn back to the
world of controversy.
And what better place to re-join it than a teachers conference
an education conference?
Education~ will always be controversial. There will always be
arguentsabout it for the simple reason that it is so
important. It concerns the most basic instincts: to advance the interests
of our children. To give them a chance In a competitive
world. To assure their future..
Education is prone to passionate controversy because there is
so much at stake.
yet I imagine If the question were to be asked here What
should an education system aim to achieve? there would be
remarkably broad agreement.
No doubt there would be argument over emphases and over
details. But I don't think many people here would disagree
fundamentally with an ans wer along the following lines.
Our education system should prepare young Australians for
life and for the future. K. UUil// i. 11~) 
T1EL5:. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 02/ 13
2
Our education system should serve the interests of each
and every individual an it should serve the interests
of Australia.
It should be truly relevant: meaning it should instruct
young people both in those values we hold as universal and
unchangeable, and in the skills and knowledge they will
need if they are to play a rewarding role in modern
society. It should be both humanitarian and utilitarian: meaning
it should have a moral core it should encourage belief
and trust in the institutions, values and traditions of
Australia and in liberal democracy; and it should equip
students with a knowledge, including an historical
knowledge, of Australia and the world.
And it should teach the skills our country needs to grow
and succeed, and our people need to increase their life
opportunities and their material well-being.
It should be efficient and it should be fair. It should
deliver the best possible education to all Australians,
regardless of their parents' circumstances.
No doubt there are other useful aims and other ways Of
expressing them, but I don't believe many people here would
dispute them fundamentally.
And I think it's important to remember that essentially there
is agreement about education.
We should etch this in our minds, and when we start to argue
about the details or the best means of delivering education,
we should recall that we share the view that education is
vitally important, that It is a wellspring of useful, happy
lives and a good society.
Today we would add to this, I'm sure, our belief that an
education system should offer education and training not just
to the young but to people of aUl ages.
The modern world demands that education should not stop with
the end of secondary school or college or university.
Increasingly, skcill formnat -oin x will be a lifelong process: the
institutions will need to be there to provide them; and our
schoolteachers will need to be there, providing young
Australians with the knowledge and approach to learning which
will allow them to acquire skills throughout their lives.
The world of my own youth made no ouch demands.
I left school at fifteen at a time when a very small
proportion of Australians completed secondary school. In m-,
area, Bankstown, I doubt if one in ten did.
it was the norm to leave at fifteen in the 1950s.
TEL 
T1E5L:. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 03/ 13
3
Like other fifteen year oids I could leave because there were
jobs to go to.
But the job I went to no longer exists.
That is the crucial point to understand.
The systems and technology which have so remarkably advanced
productivity have come at the price of jobs.
Many of the old jobs are gone. The so-called dead end jobs
are largely gone.
In the new world that our children are now inheriting the
nation's wealth and life's opportunities will depend more and
more on the skills of our workforce.
it's been said before, but it was never so true education
and training are the keys to our success.
That is why in the past decade we have made the effort
necessary to increase the number of students completing
secondary school from 3 in 10 to 7 in
It is why we have created over 200,000 higher education places
the equivalent of twenty new universities.
And it is why last year we decided to establiSh the Australian
National Training Authority, as part of a wider process of
reform to raise the quality and status of vocational education
and training to the level of the other tiers of education.
it is also why such a great responsibility devolves on you
Australian teachers.
You have already borne much of the burden of change, and you
will have to bear more of it in future.
It is on you that our success substantially depends.
You will need assistance and today I pledge you that.
We realise that these great structural changes ultimately are
made by and affect people; and they will be made most
effectively by people who have faith in what they are doing,
and know that society has faith in them.
We recognise that you who teach are the building blocks of
educational achievement, and no reforms which fail to
recognise the need for your professional trust and enthusiasm
can hope to succeed.
Ladies and gentlemen
I said that there is general agreement about the aims of
education. TEL 
TEL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 04/ 13
4
The arguments generally concern the beat means of realising
our ambitions.
Most of these can be settled by discussion and negotiation. If
we never seem to get the perfect system, we do manage to
improve it.
But there is a point in this debate beyond which we cannot go
and that is the point which the Coalition presently
occupies. Our political opponents will probably not argue with the
higher purposes of education I spelt out a moment ago.
But they will tell you that the best way to achieve those
ambitions is to reduce the equity in delivery.
They say equality equals mediocrity they cannot imagine that
we can have excellence in a system which is fair.
I cannot imagine having it in a system which is not fair.
I say if we do not seek fairness and equity in something so
basic as education we squander the efforts of generations, we
betray our democratic values, and we condemn Australians in
the future to the social trauma which flows from massive and
deliberate inequality.
Equity and excellence are nQt incompatible concepts.
Nor do we accept the view which recurs so often through the
Coalition's policies: that if the strong are to prosper,
support for the weak must be diminished.
Dr Hewson has flip-flopped on F tjtback and is now doing an
exicriuciating imitation of a so'ft toy.
He is trying to speak a new conciliatory language. He is
talking about the need to put certainty in people's lives.
The kind of certainty Jeff Kennett has put into the lives of
Victorians. The kind of certainty which flows from the unfettered free
market of which the real Dr Hewson is an avid disciple.
The kind of certainty Mrs Thatcher brought to the lives of the
British people and Reaganomics brought to Americans. The
certainty which comes when the safety net is ripped away, and
the creed takes hold that fairness equals mediocrity.
The kind of certainty which the Federal President of Dr
Hewson' s Liberal Party described last week in a speech in
which he said one Nobel Prize winner is worth more than
hundreds of mediocre practitioners"
Worth more what? Worth more to whom? 
TEL: 15 . Jan .93 9: 59 No. 004
A speech in which he said, echoing the old or real-
Dr Hewson, that lifting the average meant dragging up
" laggards" and pulling down " leaders".
One week before John Hewson pledged himself to putting more
certainty in the lives of Australians, his Federal President,
Mr Goldsworthy said this:
Life has to become tougher with less security and
greater uncertainty.
Greater Uncertainty.
Dr Hewson'a idea of certainty is the kind which underpins his
education policy: that Is, the kind which flows from
unleashing theoretical market forces on education.
The kind which will follow from his policy of shifting
resources from those schools which have the least resources to
those which have the most.
I do not want to dwell on the Opposition's policies I would
rather talk about our own.
But Some remarks must be made about education under the
Coalition. The Coalition proposes a system of student vouchers for
vocational training. They would take the Government's growth
commitment of $ 720 million and re-direct it through a voucher
scheme: and, in doing that, they would remove the foundations
of our agreement with the States and Territories to establish
the Australian National Training Authority and a national
approach to planning.
These vouchers would be available to young people on or about
the youth wage levels of $ 3.00 or $ 3.50 an hour. Those on
higher wages would not be eligible.
To take advantage of a voucher, a young person would be
required to negotiate an employment contract involving time
of f for training, or find training opportunities outside of
working hours.
The voucher policy is both inequitable and unworkable. It is
an administrative fantasy. It raises doubts about whether the
growth funding would ever be spent. Certainly there must be
doubt whether it will be spent where it is needed.
Indeed it may be more than an oversight that the Coalition has
not included Sny funding provision for the voucher policy in
the coatings for 1Fightback Mark II.
The Coalition's policies on vocational training threaten to
give concrete expression to John Foward's fantasy about dead
end jobs. 
TEL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 06/ 13
6
In combination they would destroy our Chances of building 8
skilful society by removing the essential funding, structures
and incentives.
The same thinking governs their policy on University
education, and similar results would follow.
The Opposition want to allow those who can afford to do so to
pay for a place at University, even if they have not earned a
subsidised place on the basis of academic merit.
The cost of a university degree is between $ 25,000 and
$ 130,000.
Existing fee-free places would become subsidised places in an
ill-defined system of student vouchers.
We do not yet know what level of cost will be covered by the
voucher. We do know that universities would be free to set their own
fees on a11 courses.
And we know that students would be personally liable for costs
in excess of the voucher's value.
The consequences for equity of access to University are plain
and unmistakable.
As far as schooling is concerned, I suppose I could do worse
than simply ask for a minute's silence while we think of Mr
Kennett* You don't need me to tell you about Mr Kennett.
The alternative Commonwealth government has in mind
dismantling public education in Australia. They will achieve
this by a couple of simple policy measures, both of which were
launched in Fightback I and live on in Fightback II.
The only area of schooling which would receive any significant
increase in support under a Hewson Government would be wealthy
private education.
At the same time Federal grants to the states, and by
implication to State schools, will be cut. This is a blatant
shift of public resources from State to private schools.
It will be perceived in many quarters as an attack on
government schools and may well re-open the old State Aid
debate. The second major policy measure proposed by the Opposition
would involve a major re-distribution of resources between
non-government schools; the existing twelve categories of
need would be collapsed into six, to the overwhelming
advantage of those at the top. 
T1EL5:. 2Tan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 07/ 13
7
The type of private school which will benefit most from this
re-distribution will include Scotch College and Melbourne
Grammar, which are currently in Category One.
These schools will receive a funding increase of over fifty
per cent.
The schools to receive the lowest increase will be you
guessed it Aboriginal schools and special schools for
students with a disability. That is, those schools currently
in Category Twelve.
We are talking about more than policy differences here. These
are policies reflecting an ideological fixation with the
belief that to quote John Hewson Mark I the poor will drag
us down. The same school of thought which insists that equity
and excellence can't co-exist. That you can't raise the
average without helping undeserving " laggards".
In so far as the HewSon funding increases will provide for
needy private schools, the Federal Government's announced
increases will effectively do the same, and in a climate of
stability and certainty for the entire sector.
Under the Government's policy, schools in category 12 will
receive real increases in Federal funding every year until the
Year 2000. Schools like Scotch College and Melbourne Grammar
will simply have their much smaller grants maintained at the
some level in real terms.
If Hewson's promised windfall to wealthy private schools does
have the effect of re-igniting the State Aid debate, questions
about education quality, teacher training and schools reform
will be buried under arguments about resource allocation
acrimony of the kind which polarised the Australian community
for a decade in the 1960s.
if there is anyone involved in Australian education who
believes there is no substantial difference between the
Government and the opposition, they should think again.
As my colleague Kim Beazley has said, the Liberal Party's
education policy is a triumph of ideology over rationality.
I think it is fair to say that Government policy has tried to
attend to needs and facts.
In higher education, for instance, through a period of
exceptional growth we have been able to maintain a fair system
of student income support and provide undergraduate and postgraduate
courses without up-front fees.
The challenge now is to consolidate the expanded system and
improve its quality.
We will continue to provide for growth there will be a
further 25,000 increase in student numbers between 1992 and
1994. TEL 
EL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 08/ 113
8
And we will provide for exciting a= w forms of opportunity
through the development of the Open Learning Initiative.
I am well aware that, despite this growth, excess demand for
university places remains high.
The answer is not to provide a university place for all who
apply. Apart from being an unreasonable burden on taxpayers, it would
result in 8 major mismatch between the skills we have and the
skills we need.
The answer lies in the provision of fair access to a
comprehensive and balanced range of education and training
options. To achieve this we will need, not only measured
growth for universities, but a major expansion and improvement
of vocational education and training by which I mean both
entry level training arrangements and more advanced TAFE
courses. I am sure most of you are aware of the initiatives we have
taken last year.
Under a new national vocational education and training system
an additional $ 720 million will be provided over the 1993-1995
triennium. It will be a genuinely national system, with agreed goals and
priorities established through a Ministerial Council, end
planned and funded through the Australian National Training
Authority. The system will enjoy the close involvement of industry and
encourage the growth of a network of high quality training
providers. it is an historic initiative, and one of which we are very
proud. it's a rational, decisive and coherent response to-change. A
response to need. It will bring us, within the decade, up to
the level of the best in the world.
Considerable as the undertaking is, in a sense the development
of ANTA represents only part of 8 wider strategy of taking a
national approach to education.
This dates back to the Hobart Declaration on Schooling in 1989
when, for the first time in our history, Australia's eight
State and Territory education ministers agreed on national
goals. For the first time the development of frameworks for national
curriculum and assessment in Australian schools was set in
train. TEL 
TEL: 15.3an. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 09/ 13
9
For the first time employers were brought to the negotiating
table on education issues.
When all eight of the National Curriculum Statements on key
learning areas and their assessment profiles are completed in
June this year, for the first time parents and employers will
have access to common curriculum frameworks which relate to
all Australian schools.
We will be able to produce education resource materials to
support the national statements at a fraction of their present
cost: and these economies of scale will also make regular
curriculum review and renewal much easier.
Beyond the material gains there is, if you like, the national
one. As we approach the second century of our nationhood, we
will have at last an education system which can meet the
nation's needs and express its character and purpose.
Ladies and gentlemen
Earlier I said that the Government is aware of the change
teachers have had to accommodate in recent years.
And we are aware that change is going to continue in the next
decade. As Kim Beazley points out in his Ministerial
Statement, the prospect is daunting.
it will save you from an insufferably long speech if I simply
recommend his Statement to you, and progress quickly toward
the Prime Ministerial prerogative of announcing the good news.
It goes without saying that the success of our educational
endeavours depends critically on teachers.
The Government is of the view that the vast majority of
teachers are dedicated and well able to deliver the necessary
change. There is no doubt that not all the community is so well
disposed. There a belief that some teachers are not
contributing, and even though this may not be in proportion to
the facts, the hard truth is that the teaching profession
cannot afford to carry either the passengers or the reputation
that goes with them.
For while education depends on many players, it depends most
of all on teachers: on their skills and their understanding
of future directions.
This is an age when success depends on productivity
improvement and industry reform, and the education industry
can be no exception.
All parties involved, especially employers and teacher unions,
will have to take up the challenge. I don't believe that
should be a cause for anxiety: in my experience, those who 
TEL
have taken on the task of industry reform never want to return
to the old industrial culture.
We are aware that change is stressful both the experienced
of change and the anticipation of it. We are aware of the
absolute need for support.
The typical teacher today was trained twenty years ago when
only about thirty per cent of students Completed secondary
school. Support and training are required to meet the needs of the
extra forty per cent of students who now complete it.
Work is continuing on the development of the key competencies
essential for effective participation in the emerging forms of
work and work organisation, and these will require new
expertise from the teachers and trainers who will deliver
them. There will be increased demands on teachers to keep up with
developments in subject content, communications technology,
Interactive computer software; and in coming to grips with
the new structures which will integrate schools, TAFE and
higher education.
To help equip teachers for the challenges they face, to
encourage and increase their professionalism, to give them the
training and support they need, I am pleased to announce today
that the Federal Government will commit $ 130 million over the
next three years.
million has been allocated to support the development of
the seven key competencies to a stage where they can be
incorporated successfully into the school curriculum. About
million of this allocation will be earmarked for teacher
training. Up to $ 105 million will be available for new professional
development activities over the next three years.
At this stage I might make the observation that these measures
hold a particular significance for the women who comprise
seventy per cent of the teaching workforce.
Raising the status of teachers, as we are determined to do,
raises the status of women and enables them to contribute more
effectively to national objectives.
It is perhaps significant that this organisation has been the
means of career breakthroughs for two of your past leaders
Di Foggo, your former President who is now on the Industrial
Relations Commission, and Jennie George, another former
President, who is now Assistant-Secretary of the ACTU.
I might say also thiit these new measures of professional
support will assist women who need to refresh their skills on
return to the profession after a period of parental leave.
TL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 10,13 
TEL: 15. Jan .93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 11/ 13
Sixty million dollars will be provided over the next three
years to establish a National Teachers' Professional
Development Program to renew and increase teachers' knowledge
of their subject disciplines.
Some of the funds will go towards support for National Teacher
Forums which provide opportunities for teachers and university
academic staff to share information.
The Government will be allocating five million dollars towards
a Quality schooling Program which, in addition to funding
projects in the areas of school leadership, school
organisation and student welfare, will support the
establishment of the proposed National Teaching Council.
The National Teaching Council, we Sincerely hope, will be an
important step towards higher levels of professionalism among
teachers, and a vehicle for the greater involvement of
teachers in the reform of education and the teaching
profession itself.
if the object of providing these new funds can be summarised,
it is to allow teachers to play a central role in determining
their own professional development needs within the context of
emerging national priorities.
There is no question that our aims will not be fulfilled
without improving the productivity of teachers.
There will have to be changes in the way teachers work.
The National Project on the Quality of Teaching and Learning
has developed the National Schools Project which, in 150
schools across Australia, has introduced new ways of working
with the potential for real productivity gains.
These include greater use of para professionals; flexible
timetabling outside traditional school hours; and flexible
class sizes to suit the needs of schools.
Flexibility is the key in modern education, as it is in modern
industry and business and as it must be in government and
unions. it goes without saying that governments need to work with
teachers and their unions and with education systems to
develop ways of working which will create a more effective
teaching environment and a better quality education.
The need for teachers to renew and expand their knowledge and
skills, and to modify their teaching methods, presents an
obvious challenge for teacher education of all kinds.
The Federal Govern-ment recognises, in particular, the
important role played by higher education institutions in the
pre-service and in-service training of teachers. 
TEL: 15. Jan. 95 9: 59 No. UU
12
As the major funding source for Australian Universities, the
Federal Government provides over $ 420 million a year for
teacher training within higher education institutions.
Teacher education faculties have had their fair share of
change and uncertainty in recent times, particularly in the
wake of major reforms in the higher education system.
They have also had their fair share of criticism.
Not all the criticism is justified, but doubtless some is. It
is indisputable that staffing rigidities in many teacher
education faculties are an obstacle to the renewal of courses.
it is significant that fifty per cent of teacher education
academics were school teachers before 1973 and only twenty per
cent have taught in schools in the 1980s.
To their credit, many universities have established strategies
for the renewal of their education faculties, and others are
developing them. For those institutions the Government will
advance operating grant funding to assist in the early
retirement of staff.
Ladies and gentlemen
The announcement of this new funding package for the
professional development of teachers is just one element of a
comprehensive policy framework encompassing all the sectors of
school, TAFE and higher education.
Our goal remains to make education accessible to all, and, in
particular, to assist those people in the workforce who need
further training or re-training to keep their jobs and their
industries alive.
We say that a fair and equitable education system, especially
a fair and equitable school system, will as readily deliver
excellence and opportunity as an unfair one.
And we say that a fair one will deliver a good society.
We see our efforts in education as an effort to extend
Australian social democracy bringing our educational
standards up to those we have achieved in such areas as
health, social security, human rights including the rights of
women. We should be and can be as good at education as we are at
these things, which is to say as good as any country in the
world. And to be good at education is to be both excellent and
equitable. Education in the 1990s is the machinery which will deliver us
a prosperous, strong and good society In the twenty-first
century. 4 P. 12/ 11-
TEL 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 13/ 13
13
It is the Vehicle of change and there is no-one else to drive
it but you the teachers of Australia.
So we will support you, and work with you, and we will create
the education system which Australians have a right to and we
a11 want.
CANBERRA/ ME LEOURNE
January, 1993 



TEL: L 25. Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PLUME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES AUSTRALIA DAY COUNCIL LUNCH,
JANUARY 1993, DARLING HARBOUR CONVENTION CENTRE
I am very glad to be here, and particularly to welcome our guests from overseas.
This very large gathering is a measure both of your patriotism and your support for
A'd ney~ O01" ic bid.
For it is an Australia Day celebration and a great sporting occasion.
There is nothing unusual about that of course. Sport and patriotism have long been
virtually synonymous in Australia, and any Prli i-mMinister who does not know his sport
cannot expect to lead a happy life for long.
I won't boast. I will let my record this year speak for itself: I have addressed audiences
drawn from a wide and eccentric range of sports, including Australian Rules Football, and
I did it without causing the slightest embarrassment to anyone.
In fact Alan Border and Richie Richardson seemed genuinely startled by my knowledge of
cricket perhaps because they had adin the English press that I was Irish.
The fact remains that if Australians cannot bc fairly described as sports-mad, they most
certainly can be unfairly described that way.
For our overseas guests I should perhaps explain that our avid devotion to sport is believed
to derive from a long and intense contest with nature.
In the pioneering phase of our national life we were in perpetual competition with the
elements, and it is said that this translated culturally into an almost universal admiration
for physical prowess.
It is also said that our fascination with gambling has its origins in the game of chance
which the duel with nature always is.
That is how the story goes. In the great enpty spaces in Australia, men and women and
children had room to run and jump, and race their horscs, and kick balls around and
between gum-trees, and throw bags of wheat over fences and buildings. 
T2EL5: . Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 02/ 06
2
It was a physical culture and, of course, a healthy one which made our athletes all the
more formidable.
It is also suspected that our urge to compete derived in part from our status at first as a
colony, and then as a somewhat subordinate partner in the British Empire.
Such peoples thc New Zealanders provide another example are generally determined
to prove themsclves on playing fields. And battlefields. And throughout this century
Australians did just that,
Down here at the bottom of the world we're susceptible to feelings of inadequacy and
neglect. It is important to raise our self-esteem by beating the best in thc world.
So we have always made a great deal of what we do best: and it has long been said that
what we do bcst is sport.
That there is still some truth in this is undeniable.
Last year we watched with great pride as, in Barcelona, Australian athlctes won a swag of
medals quite out of proportion to the size of our population. But we reckoned it was about
the right number.
In the previous three or four Olympics we thought we did adequately when we did as well
or better than othcr comparable countrics.
In sport we expect nothing less than to be above the avcrage.
There were other sporting triumphs, the rugby union team among them. Like all other
Prime Ministers before me, I could stand here on Australia Day 1993 and read out a long
list of our sporting succcsscs in the past twelve months.
But I won't do that.
Instead let me mention a few other medals won by Australians in the past year. Medals
and awards in fields of endeavour for which we are less well known in the world. Fields
in which usually we have taken somewhat less pride than wc might.
But year after year Australian artists writcrs, dancers, musicians, film makers, actors
take on thc world and win.
Last year, for instance, a young Australian ballet danicer, Simone Goldsmith, won the gold
medal at the Royal Academy of Dance Gence Awards in London.
Another Australiani, Holly Smart, won it the year beforc. In fact Australians took all gold,
silvcr and bronze miedals in both years.
Last year a 26 year old Australian viol inist, Ben Lea, became one of the very few
forcigners to be appointed to wvhat many, people will tell you is the greatest orchestra in
the world the Vienna Philharmonic. Bcn's twin brother, Toby, is principal solo viola
with La Scala.
Last year an Australian, Jackie Farkas, won thc world's laT~ est prize of $ 250,000 for a
student film at the International Cincma Students Festival in Tokyo. While another
young Australian, Stavros Efthymiou was naincd Young Film-maker of the Year at the
Edinburgh Film Festival. TEL 
TEL .3
In the United States, Judy Davis won a Golden Globe Award, the Los Angeles Film
Critics Award and the National Board of Review Award for best supporting actres.
And last year a young Australian, Baz Luhrrnann, won the Prix de la Jeunesse at the
Cannes Film Festival for his film Strictly Ballroom.
Strictly Ballroom won a number of other prizes and many standing ovations around
the world. It also won thcrm here. And it was a huge box office success.
That, perhaps, is the most important thing not how much we impressed the world, but
the degree to which with our music, literature, opera, theatre, dance and sport we
inspired and amused ourselves.
I think all Australians should see Strictly Ballroom, including Australians who prefer sport
to art.
They will like it if only because Strictly Ballroomn is about competition, and sport the
most eccentric of sports ballroom dancing.
It is also about all those pioncering virtues of perseverance, and faith, and hope, and rising
above adversity.
The film is about thc need for things to change, the triumph of youth over age, of freedom
and self-expression over stifling conservatism, and of course the triumph of truth and
justice over villainy.
It reminds me of my own life, fighting those conservatives.
" Strictly Ballroom" is a film for our times. Or any other timcs.
It is an Australian fairy talc, both on the Screen and off it. The making of Strictly
Ballroom required those same virtucs of perseverance and courage as the film describes.
It is one of the curious things about patriotism that we all take credit for the success of a
few remarkable individuals. When our athletes won at Barelona we would say that " we"
won them.
When our artists perform brilliantly overseas we say that they are " ours".
Of course, we didn't win those medals. Our athletes did. And it was not our talent or our
perseverance which got their success in Barcelona or in Vienna.
Yet we did wvin. We won in the sensc that their triumphs strengthen our faith in Ourselves.
We also won in that their success was in some measure a return on the kind of society we
have ceated here. A society which does not stifle hope or excellence, but encourages it:
encourages it through the creation of institutions like the Australian Institute of
Sport, the National Institute of Dramatic Art, or the Australian Film and Television
school.
encourages it through a comnmitnmcnt to cquality of opportunity. T2EL5: . Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 03/ 06 
TEL: 25. Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 04/ 06
4
encourages it through commitment to the principles of cultural pluralism which we
have followed in the past 20 years. For while Strictly Ballroom is unambiguously
Australian, the cast and crew and themes of the film arc nothing if not
multicultural.
T'here will, no doubt, be people here who say that we do not do enough to encourage
excellence. There will be some who say we do not do enough to raise the level of
equality. I can only say we do our best by both, and most Australians are agreed that this is at least
the proper ambition.
So I'm inclincd to think that, so long as we foster talent and ambition, when Australian
athletes or artists win we have a right to say that " we" won too.
And, ladies and gcntlcmen, I would also say that if today we considered what all of us
have achieved in recent years, we might begin to feel even morc pride in ourselves.
Becausc what Australians have been engaged in for the past few years, and what will
engage us for the rest of this dccade, is a contest at least as great as our forebears' contest
with nature, and much greater than anything which happens on a sporting field.
It is a contcst, in one sense, with the rest of the world; in another, with ourselves.
It is the effort to transform our economy into one which is modern and competitive. It is
an effort to rc-direct our priorities. It is an effort to make an historic shift to Asia and the
Pacific. All this means transforming ourselves our habits of mind and work; the way we se
ourselves, and the way we sec the rest of the world.
We will nccd those qualities which great athlctes and artists have.
It will requirc confidence in ourselves, our institutions, our abilitics and our strength of
purpose. It will require a miatufe sense of identity.
I am one of thosc who is certain that the great transformation of Australia will occur.
I am confident becausc I know what changes have already been made. I know what we
have already achieved.
Therc has been a revolution in our thinking, and an irrcvcrsible re-casting of our
economy. Few countries, in fact, have moved so dramatically to restructure and rebuild.
Fcwer still have determined oni doing this without sacrif icing those principles of fairness
and equity which have always guided Australian democracy.
My point today is not to argue about who is most fit to lead Australia through thc change.
My point is that Australians have proved themsclves capable of making it. 
T2EL5:. Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 05/ 06
Today I could quote to you at great length the irrefutable evidence for this:
thc rise in manufacturing exports.
the increase in those exports as a proportion of GDP;
the increase in the proportion of exports going to Asia.
the number of Australian firms who have in the past few ycars achieved
international best practice.
the enterprise agreements which are transforming our workplaces.
This is not the place to make a speech on the economy.
But it is the place to talk about thc Australian people, and I mention these things as a
tribute to thcir achievements in recent years.
We are going through bard times. More difficulties inevitably face us. But I am in no
doubt that sometime in this decade the peoplc of Australia will be able to look back and
say that, confronted with the challenge of securing their future, they rose to meet that
challenge, And I say that because have seen it happening.
On Australia Day 1993 Australians need look no further than their own recent history to
find their inspiration and their pride.
We will need help, and no doubt our sports men and women will continue to lift our
spirits. And we will continue to see in them an image of what we would like ourselves to
be even an image of what we imiagine We are.
We do see in our hcroes an idealiscd reflection of ourselves, or at least a modcl for
imitating. I
An earlier gencration saw it in the likes of Donald Bradman. At other times people like
Dawn Fraser and Betty Cuthbert and Shirley Strickland have provided the inspiration.
Or Jon Konrads, or Rod Layer or Alan Border.
Or, ladies and gentlemen, Evonne Goolagong, or Lionel Rose or Mark Ella or Mal
Meninga.
That last list could be turned into a very long one the list of Aboriginal Australians who
have excelled in the field by which Australians so frcqucntly judgc themselves.
As it is, the l~ ist of four includes two world chamnpions and two national captains.
Four measures of our national achievement.
In this United Nations International Year of the World's Indigenous People we might look
harder at the idealised reflection of ourselves.
TEL 
I jj i~ i IU
6
And we might draw, perhaps, this conclusion: if we can share the inspiration, the pride
and the patriotism of Aboriginal champions, surely we can share the feelings of those
Aboriginal Australians whosc inspiration and pridc has been shattered, and who have no
reason to feel patriotic.
If we can take pride in what the champions have achieved, surely the same pride requires
us to take sympathetic understanding to their people.
If we can share the triumphs we can share the responsibility.
It seems to me that all great achievemients begin with an act of imagination.
Out there at Bowial in the twenties youn Donald Bradmani must * have imagined himself
making centuries at the Sydney Cricket Ground and somewhere else in New South
Wales the young Bill O'Reilly probably imagined himself getting him out.
I don't know whether Ben Lea cvcr imagined he'd play in the Vienna Philharmonic, but I
suspcct he did.
And against all the odds, thc young Lionel Rose no doubt imagined himself one day a
world champion and a national hero.
If thcy can do it, we can.
I have a feeling that thc solution to one of our great problems is, essentially, that act of
imagination. if sport can teach us that, I amn even more for sport.
If the arts can teach it, I am even more for the arts.
If this bid for the Olympics in the year 2000 can teach uis, I am even more for thc bid.
And if the personal triumphis of the past year, and this bid for thc Olympics in thc year
2000, help Australians imagine a modern, strong, competitive and fair society, those
people will have done their country a great service.
I see the Sydney bid playing a substantial role in the grcat challenges which face Australia
in 1990s.
Whether it succeeds or tails might, in the end, be judged less important than the
inspiration and confidence it gives us.
But like all Australians, I dearly hope that it succccds and sincerely bclicvc that it
should. Thank you all for coming and for the support you are giving this great project. ' V F . UV' L'V
ENDS nc 1 07 1 8 nn M n a D n r a 



Check Against Delivery
PRIME MINJISTER EMBRGOD NTI 177 pm 26.1.93
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP TO THE
1992 AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS PRESENTATION LUNCHEON,
26 JANUARY 1993 ADMIRALTY HOUSE
Ladies and gentlemen
On this, like any other Australia Day, there is a great deal to celebrate.
We might start with the most obvious, but perhaps the most often ignored: I mean the
continued good health of one of the world's oldest democracies.
Or a standard of living which remains among the highest in the world.
We might celebrate the enviable freedom and comforts of life in Australia. And the
degree of security with which only a handful of other countries compare.
We could begin by celebrating these things, and giving thanks to those generations of
Australians whose monumental labour and faith and love for this land bequeathed them to
US. On this Australia Day we might draw strength from their example and pledge ourselves to
match their inspiration.
And it is useful to look back for a moment. It will remind us that we are not the first
generation to be confronted by a great challenge, or the first to feel that the going was
tough, or the first to need a sustaining faith in their country and their fellow Australians.
This post war generation might be guilty of bearing a myth about Australia. Perhaps
because we inherited the post-war growth and stability I suspect it was we who allowed
the idea to grow that Australia's history was an uninterrupted progression to better and
better things. And perhaps we conveyed that idea to our children.
Possibly we lost some of the essential truth when, in our scepticism, we ceased to instruct
our kids in the pioneering legends.
Perhaps that is something we should remedy.
The idea that good fortune has nearly always smiled upon Australia tends to obscure the
fact that what has been built here the people have built. 5637 
Australians of any age woul d always tell you that it was their great good luck to live here:
but those who farmied in the Mallee, or dug coal out of the Uthgow pits, or worked in the
nation's factories in the earlier years of industrial capitalism were, more often than not,
creating a fortunate life for the next generation, not their own.
Essentially this country was conceived in the imagination of its people, and delivered to
us by their labour.
One hundred years ago Australia lay deep in drought and Depression. Out of that decade
emerged the Federation.
Thirty years later there was another Depression, and out of that came people with the
strength to fight a war.
Between the two depressions there was another war which took the lives of 60,000 young
Australians from a population of just four and a half million.
These were the legendary Australians: the pioneers, those who struggled through the
hardest of hard times, those who defended this country in 1942.
They have been enshrined in literature, art and monuments and we should never forget
them. In the past year two of the people who helped put those generations forever in the realm of
Australian legend, Sydney Nolan and Paul Hasluck, died. The year before we lost
Manning Clark..
Suddenly it seems the old generation is passing. It leaves a gap which we feel can never
quite be filled.
Yet it is also an unmistakeable sign that responsibility has passed into our hands. Our
lucky post-war generation now has to find the right direction. We have to make our own
history. That is the challenge that is the message, I think, for this Australia Day 1993: to make
sense of our history, make sense of who we are, make the most of our time.
No generation of Australians has faced a greater challenge than the one we face
certainly not in peace-time.
And I would say, as well, that none has shown a greater willingness to squarely face
reality and do what has to be done.
These are difficult times. Not so hard on people as those in the past I have mentioned,
partly because those events made us both wiser and more compassionate.
Today we do not have a third of the workforce unemployed, but a tenth. And we have a
social net in place which was not there sixty years ago.
This is not the challenge of war or depression.
It is the no less difficult challenge of maintaining the momentum of an economic
revolution while restoring employment.
5638 
3
It is the challenge of finding our place in that region which until now has been most
foreign to us Asia. And by finding our place there, securing the freedom comforts and
security our generation has enjoyed.
It is about managing a post industrial revolution and navigating a passage to the places
where our future lies.
These are not options, but imperatives.
And responding to them will require the same qualities of courage and perseverance, and
imagination and faith as those other moments in our history have demanded.
The tragedy of the recession has been the good work undone.
We created one and three quarter million and a half jobs in the eighties and we have lost
three hundred thousand of them.
We have to get them back.
With our tradingpartners either in recession or growing more slowly than we are, it will
not be easy.
It is now apparent that the wild lending of the late eighties and the subsequent collapse in
asset prices has left the banking system poorly placed to fund the production and
investment necessary to get the economy moving.
To compound the problem, Australian companies like those in other countries are now
seeking &amp; reterpToductivity through substitutingnew efficiencies for jobs.
In these circumstances there might be a temptation to think that the unemployed are the
casualties of progres as the environment was in the conquest of the land, as people were
in the industrial age, as cities have been in the rush to development.
But the sacrifice of people to the winds of change, or to ideological fashion is precisely
what Australians resisted in the 1980s, when other countries now manifestly to their
great cost allowed it to happen.
In my reading of the history of Australia this century it is precisely what Australians have
always resisted.
It seems to me it has always been the judgment of most Australians that a true democracy
has a social dimension. That governments have social responsibilities.
So the fight against unemployment will go on. The challenge to get those jobs back is an
imperative. The recession struck a blow at our confidence: all of us have felt it.
It did not strike us all equally, but it seems to me that it is our equal responsibility to strike
back: to re-group and re-build.
And the best way of doing that is to seize the opportunity which the past decade of change
has already delivered to us. ' 15639 
We have to continue the transormation of Australia from a country dependent entirely on
the export of commodities, to a country which also manufactures goods and services
which the world wants to buy.
And we have to continue to go where the greatest growth by far is, where the window of
opportunity is open, where we cannot afford not to go to Asia.
T'his is a fight we cannot afford to lose.
And I can say after ten years of fighting it, and watching Australians fight it, I cannot
believe that we will lose it.
As I'e said more than once this year, I know we can make the change because of the
change we have already made.
Yesterday I spoke at another Australia Day gathering one associated with Sydney's
Olympic bid.
It was appropriate to point out there that Australia had done marvellously well on the
international sporting scene in the past twelve months.
Nowhere did we do better than at the Barcelona Olympics, of course.
And we can perhaps learn from our athletes that the world should hold no fear for us. If
we wed talent with resourcefulness and dedication we can compete with the world and
win. In the same speech also pointed out that we had competed just as successfully on other
fronts where those qualities matter.
In the arts, for instance. Young Australian ballet dancers won gold medals at the Genee
Awards in London. They won all the medals gold, silver and bronze. They won all of
them in the previous year as well.
A young Australian achieved the rare distinction of being appointed to the Vienna
Philharmonic Orchestra.
An Australian film, Strictly Ballroom, picked up a swag of prizes around the world and
topped the box office both here and in Great Britain.
An Australian actress, Judy Davis, won three of the most prestigious American acting
awards and is widely predicted to win at least another two, including an Oscar.
The list of these artistic achievements is as long as those in sport and the lesson is the
same. We can win in the world.
What is true of these successes is true of business. And it has proven to be.
For among the prizes won this year we might also list BliPs successful tender to develop
the oil and gas reserves of Vietnam.
We might include all those companies which made things in Australia and sold them
overseas.
5640. 
That would be a longer list than anyone here would have the patience for. But the figures
constitute one very important reason why I believe that Australia will succeed.
Our total exports have increased in the past five years by more than 40 per cent.
Our exports of elaborately transformed goods have increased by more than 100 per cent.
We have increased our exports to Asia by 70 per cent.
These reflect the dramatic recasting of Australia's economy.
They reflect something else just as fundamental. They reflect a sea change in the way we
do things, the way we think about our future, the way we think about the rest of the world.
The change has occurred in boardrooms and on the shop floor. It can be seen in the
growth among Australian companies of a commitment to international best practice. It
can also be seen in the enterprise agreements which trade unions and managemern across
Australia are signing every day.
There is a new cooperative culture in Australia. There is a new recognition that our
success depends on a common effort. We have learned what the successful economies of
the world learned long ago, and we have learned it very quickly that cooperation is
more productive and more competitive.
There is another lesson that should be learned from those successful countries:
There is a role for government.
Care for people remains paramount even in times of transition especially in
times of transition.
The change we want comes most easily when it comes with the least damage to
the social fabric.
Yet while we can learn from these examples, they will not provide us with our solutions.
The way forward for Australia is not the Japanese way, or the way of Singapore, any more
than it is the British way, or the German, or the American.
What we do will be appropriate to our circumstances, our needs, our culture, our
character. It will call on our strengths and they are many: we are strong in education; in
democracy; in cultural diversity and social harmony.
We remain immensely strong in natural resources, including an environment which is
both unique and, by world standards, relatively undamaged.
The great spaces of Australia are a strength. So is the efficiency of our primary producers,
and the clean air, water and soil in which they grow their products.
We're strong in so far as we include in the dynamic of our country a very large proportion
of our people. We include a considerably greater proportion of our people in the
workforce than does, for instance, the United States. 5641 
We have taken in the past decade more women into the workforce, and we lead the world
in implementing the United Nations Convention on the elimination of all forms of
discrimination against women.
We are strong because we are a liberal democracy. We are strong because we are
progressive. And, as we make this great transition, the more we invest in the lives of our people the
stronger we will be.
For if there is one thing I have learned in the past few years it is that the people of
Australia are our greatest resource.
It is they who have adapted to the change, it is they who have risen to the challenge of the
future, it is they who have both borne the burden and not infrequently pointed the way.
I said yesterday that these difficult times are not yet over. We cannot realistically expect
to achieve all our goals before the end of the decade. We will have to continue to adjust:
by I mean all of us governments, business, trade unions, communities.
But change breeds change; and ingenuity fosters ingenuity and faith is infectious.
Ladies and Gentlemen
In this past year it has been my privilege to speak at a number of events commemorating
the deeds of Australians during the second World War: legendary deeds at Kokoda, Milne
Bay and the Coral Sea.
It was also the 50th anniversary of El Alamnein, Singapore and Darwin.
In this same year I was privileged to be present on the long overdue occasion of our
recognising the courage and sacrifice of those who served in Vietnam.
I spoke at events organised by the various and collective ethnic communities of Australia,
and there it was possible to get a picture of the extraordinary progress that we have made
towards an open, tolerant, pluralist society. A far richer society than the one in which I
grew UP.
I spoke at events organised by groups representing women in Australia, and could not help
but reflect on the advances we have made towards genuine equity and, therefore, more
genuine democracy.
Last year I had the opportunity to speak at several events about our great need to achieve
in this decade social justice for Australian Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders.
We are committed to a process of reconciliation. We are determined to end two centuries
of discrimination and injustice. The response since spelling out these ambitions in
Redfern Park two months ago convinces me that the great majority of Australians are
committed to them too.
Last year I visited Indonesia, Singapore and Japan. It was plain not only that an historic
opportunity exists for us in the region but that the region expects us to seize it. We are
expected to succeed.
5642 
Last year it was my duty to find the words to sy when men and women of the Australian
armed forces were sent to pursue the interests of democracy and peace in Cambodia, and a
few months later it was my gxeat privilege to visit them in Phnom Penhi.
Last month I went to Townsville to farewell our troops as they left for Somalia on a
similar mission.
What became apparent in the course of last year is that this generation of Australians is
carving out a place in the world. It is growing its own legends.
This generation of Australians is making its own history.
We Australians need look no further than what we have done and what we are now doing
to find our inspiration. We need look no further than ourselves.
There is no better message for Australia Day 1993.
Thank You. 5643 


STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP SIR SIDNEY NOLAN MEMORIAL
Ladies and gentlemen
My last conversation with Sir Sidney was midway through last year. We talked a lot about architecture, a subject on which I can generally hold my own. But this is not to threaten you with a discourse on art today.
I will leave the expert judgments to Elwyn Lynn and others.
This gallery like a couple of others around the country is one of my favourite haunts.
But just as you can enter a temple without knowing the rites, I know I can come here and pay tribute to Sidney Nolan without pretending to be expert on his life and work.
And that is really the point: the power of his work was such that it has influenced even the inexpert among us.
All of us have had our image of Australia in some way shaped by Sidney Nolan. All of us, I suspect have had our self-image shaped by him.
He was one of the great interpreters of our national life.
He painted the physical landscape and altered our mental landscape. Radical? different as his painting was, when we looked at it-we recognised ourselIves.
This will prompt some journalists to say -Keating admits resemblance to Ned Kelly but I am willing to wear that.
Go and look at the Kelly Paintings here or at Lanyon any~ day and there will always be someone gazing at them and the paintings, like a mirror, will be gazing back.
I've always thought it said something remarkable about Australians that in the 1950s they so quickly moved aside their Heysen gum trees for Nolans, Boyds and Drysdales.
As I have often said in other contexts, Australians have a remarkable capacity for change. And I reckon it is because they recognise the truth when they see it.
You'll forgive me for expressing the passing thought if only they had moved aside Bob Menzies when they moved aside Hans Heysen.
What Sidney Nolan and his colleagues did was just about as subversive I suppose: they took our landscape and our legends and somehow made them both more radical and even more our own.
Just when a generation of Australians had grown used to the Heidelberg school and its successors, and complacent in the thought that that was who were, along came Nolan and said actually, we're more like this.
As an Australian who has been concerned with change, I have to say that the paintings of Sidney Nolan and the success of Sidney Nolan has always given me heart.
His paintings expressed our essential difference - to me they say something about our potential.
It is true of course that Sidney Nolan became Australia's most internationally celebrated painter. He did us a &nbsp;service in that.
Yet his greatest service, I think, was to place before us in a period of pretty dull conformity some might even say regression images of this country which reminded us that our experience was at once unique and universal.
He startled us: in much the same way earlier generations had been startled by the landscape, or by Ned Kelly, or as a bushman might be on seeing his reflection in a Wimmere waterhole for the first time.
I think Nolan was among the poets of Australia.
He was certainly among that generation who I'm sure will in time become legendary themselves.
Those Australians who lived through depression and war and did not lose faith.
Twenty eight years separate Sidney Nolan's birth from the end of World War II in which, incidentally, his brother was killed. In least twelve of those years Australia was either fighting a war or a depression.
Whatever political path they took, or whatever their doubts about life here, they did not lose their love of this place and their essential Australianess.
I don't say this out of any form of jingoism. I mean only that Sidney Nolan was of that generation which kept the place going and of a genius which revived us, renewed us, kept alive the spark.
He was essential to the continuation of the national story.
The sad thing about today is that that generation is now passing. Just a week ago I attended the funeral of Paul Hasluck. This week it was Tom Fitzgerald. It is just eighteen months since Manning Clark died. A year or so before that, Patrick White.
The mantle has unmistakably passed to us - the lucky post war generation.
The life and death of Sidney Nolan is a reminder of how great the responsibility is.
It is also a reminder of how tragic it is when we lose our young artists: in the past twelve months Brett Whiteley, the dancer Kelvin Coe, and the conductor Stuart Challender have all died.
It is a reminder, especially for those who continue to peddle the idea that the right cultural policy is built substantially around starvation, that support for art and artists is an essential investment in the nation's life.
We are currently developing a new cultural policy for Australia. One of the essential elements will be a strategy for developing creative habitats for artists.
Habitats -like the one the Reeds -provided for Sidney Nolan.
That is another essential element in the cultural life of this country we need more private support for the arts. More private patronage. More John and Sunday Reeds.
We are trying to find the best way to create that support. Sidney Nolan certainly understood that, and in his later life he put a great deal back into Australia.
In honour of his brother, in 1974 he donated his Gallipoli paintings and drawings to the Australian War Memorial.
In 1982 he donated the Paradise Gardens series to the Victorian Arts Centre.
And the Kelly paintings have been donated to the ANG.
Today I am delighted to announce perhaps the most generous gift of all.
It is my pleasure to announce that a great project, dear to the heart of Sidney Nolan, has reached fruition.
For many years it was the shared vision of Arthur and Yvonne, Boyd and Sidney and Mary Nolan and their families that the Bundanon Estate on the banks-of the Shoalhaven River near Nowra be made a gift to the nation.
Indeed it was to talk about this, and not architecture, that Sidney Nolan came to see me last year.
The Government has reached an agreement with Arthur and Yvonne Boyd under which the beautiful properties of " Bundanon" and " Riversdale", and an extensive art collection owned by them, are to be given to the Australian people.
&nbsp;A public art gallery and performing arts Centre will be established, as well as facilities for walking and camping in the 1200 hectares of superb natural environment the environment which was the subject and inspiration for a great many Boyd and Nolan paintings.
I understand that there are some 2000 works of art in the Boyd collection, including works by John Brack, Leonard French, Charles Blackman and John Perceval.
Artists, musicians, film makers, performers and craftsmen and women will in future be able to live and work in Bundanon, and exhibit or perform the works created there in a new -purpose-designed gallery and performing arts area.
The gift includes the original sandstone residence dating from 1866 and its antique furniture, paintings and pottery.
In addition there is an important collection of art works, letters and photographs chronicling four generations of the Boyd family.
The Commonwealth has agreed to provide $ 5.43 million to the Bundanon Trust.
Contributions will shortly be sought from major education and government institutions, as well as the public.
This is a gift of profound significance, not to say great generosity.
It will ensure that the contributions Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd have made to our national heritage will live on: it also means that new generations of Australians will have their opportunity to contribute.
It means that a superb piece of our natural environment will be secure from the ravages of developers I know that is dear to Arthur and Yvonne's hearts.
I take this opportunity today to express our gratitude for this gift, which has required more than generosity it has needed vision and patience.
This is a rare gift to the nation.
The announcement today Is a fitting tribute to the late Sir Sidney Nolan.
It is also, of course Sir Sidney's tribute to Australia.
And Arthur Boyd's tribute, and I can only say to Arthur and Yvonne, on behalf of everyone here and the Government and the people of Australia thank you.
CANBERRA &nbsp;28 JANUARY 1993
&nbsp;



TEL: 1. Feb. 93 9: 31 No. 002 P. 01/ 05
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RON P. 3 KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF THE NATIONAL MEDICARE HOSPITAL ENTITLEMENTS
PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGN, SYDNEY, 1 FEBRUARY 1993
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Let me begin with a brief, real life story.
A little girl called Emily was born with a heart
condition. She had her first serious operation when she was only
five weeks old. She recently had a second.
She's had the best of care. A top cardiologist, surgeon,
and the best of nursing, medication twice a day.
Emily's parents were frightened not only about Emily's
welfare but about how much her treatment would cost.
They feared they would have to sell their home.
Had they lived in the United States. possibly they would
have. Emily's parents knew that in the United States families
are frequently crippled by medical expenses.
So, what did all of Emily's treatment cost? Apart from
the heartache nothing. Medicare paid for everything.
Emily's parents now know that Medicare has given Emily a
life she might not have had.
They say Medicare is a life saver.
Every Australian can take comfort and pride in this.
There is no better system of health care in the world.
it is fair as health care should be-. Like illness and
accident it does not discriminate between rich and poor.
it shares the risk among us all. And it delivers health
care of the highest quality. 
LL~ I . Fr_ U I 1N4U. VV( I l
2
Australia has one of the best public hospital systems in
the world. And you won't find more dedicated GPs an~ d
community health workers anywhere.
Medicare is simple and fair. Every Australian has their
own health Insurance pre-paid under Medicare it's the
care you're entitled to.
Under Medicare, every Australian is entitled to access to
hospital and GP services, and necessary medicines.
Under Medicare, Australians make 88 million visits to the
GP every year. Seventy per cent are bulk billed.
There are nearly three million admissions to public
hospitals. And over 160 million prescriptions are delivered by our
community pharmacists.
Medicare delivers high quality health care public
and private.
Public hospitals like Monash Medical Centre in Melbourne,
Westrnead in Sydney, R~ oyal Perth, Royal Adelaide -so
many. Under Medicare, some of our greatest hospitals -St
Vincent's here in Sydney, the Mater and Wesley in
Brisbane, the Mercy and Epworth in Melbourne, are private
not-for-profit hospitals.
They are run by people concerned about the quality of
health care.
Labor will continue to support our greath'o * spit as
public and private. But we reject the American approach
of handing over our health care to profiteers.
That's because Medicare is an acknowledgement that basic
health care is something every Australian is entitled to.
Today we are here to celebrate Medicare's ninth birthday.
It is the achievement of one of Labor's most cherished
goals fair and quality health care for all.
Because of Medicare, Australia has stability and security
in health care.
These nine year old Australians helping us celebrate
today have never known the uncertainty that Dr Hewson is
threatening.
Most of you have probably forgotten, and these nine year
olds have never known, that before Medicare, one of the
most common reasons for being jailed for non-payment of
debts was unpaid health bills. 
L' W*-Js
3
Under Liberal governments in 1971 and 1981, two million
Australians had no health insurance at all because they
could not afford i t
In the United States, 37 million Americans have no health
insurance and cannot gain access to health services.
Dr Hewson wants to take Australia back to the days of a
vwo classg-health system private care for those who can
pay and public care for the rest.
It is ironic that Dr Hewson is proposing a us-style
health system at a time when the US is looking to
Australia and Medicare as a way of ending the US health
nightmare. Dr Hewson's health policy contains the same elements that
are wreaking haVoc -in the US. He would replace public
facilities with private services, have health charges
dictated by doctors, and introduce tax rebates for health
insurance. It is no wonder the AMA is campaigning for Dr Hewson.
The AMA is looking forward to a billion dollar pay rise
for about 40,000 doctors courtesy of the Liberal's
health policy.
All of this would drive up the cost of health care for
each Australian and for the country as a whole.
The US spends twice as much per person on health care as
we do in Australia for less care.
Even cheap health insurance policies cost more than
$ 5,000.
Dr Hewson believes that health care should be subjected
to market forces, as if ill-health and accident obeyed
the same economic laws as the price of fish or tomatoes.
But there is clear evidence both here and overseas that
the market does not work for health care.
Health is not like other goods. we never know what
illness is going to cost or when an emergency or illness
will strike.
We need to band together to share the risk. That is what
Medicare enables us to do.
Dr H-ewson will make you take out private health insurance
-if the private insurer willacetou 
LL 4
One little noticed area of concern in the Fightback
health policy is that private insurance does not always
cover people for pre-existing serious conditions Such
a9 Multiple Sclerosis or cancer.
under Dr Hewson such people would be penalised through
much higher medical charges, through tax penalties, and
through refusal of insurance coverage.
Fightback could seriously penalise the chronically sick.
it is a case of your money or your health.
Dr Hewson will cut $ 1.4 billion out of public hospitals.
This will force the States to close more than 10,000
public beds. 450,000 fewer people will be treated.
Dr Hewson will take that $ 1.4 billion from public
hospitals and hand it to doctors and private prof itmaking
companies.
He will place profit before the interests of patients.
Under Dr Hewson, Australian families will pay $ 20 a week
more for health care.
The main reason some people are confused about the costs
of hospital care is because private insurance funds, the
AMA and private profit hospitals have generated
uncertainty and fear.
They want people to be fearful they have a vested
interest. They attack the Government for rewarding States which
improve access to hospital services for public patients.
The Government has a duty to look after the well-being of
the entire community; to maintain quality services for
everyone. These vested interests are looking after their profits.
Australians have every reason to feel proud and confident
about Medicare.
Dr Hewson does not believe in Medicare.
He is going to make sure you can't afford to go to your
GP. He is going to price sick people out of the market.
That is his policy.
He will abolish bulk billing for all but cardholders. He
will make you p~ y-your bill upfront. i r t u V 1. . L IIU 
Dr Hewson wants to rip the heart out of our quality
health care system.
Labor fought to introduce Medicare and we must protect
it.
Through Medicare, we are committed to building on the
strengths of our health system.
Labor recognises that the health need$ of Australians are
changing. Our population is ageing.
Hospital admissions will increase and there will be
greater use of high technology procedures.
We want to ensure that our hospitals are equipped to cope
with these changes.
That's why Labor Is spending an additional $ 1.6 billion
to strengthen Medicare and its guarantee to every
Australian of fair access to hospital services.
Dr Hewson will sacrifice the certainty and security of
Medicare for the cost and uncertainty of a privately-run
sys tern.
He will dismantle Medicare. He will make every
Australian pay more for their health care.
As Emily's parents now know, Medicare provides quality
care and pays all your costs.
I want the people of Australian to know what they are
entitled to under Medicare. AS long as it exists no one
should be fearful.
Thank you. 



IP D PRIME MINIISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 9 FEBRUARY 199
" INVESTING IN THE NATION"
When I opened this campaign on Sunday I said that the main issues were going to be the
economy, unemployment and the protection of our way of life.
The statement we have released today goes to the heart of those issues.
If we are to reduce unemployment the revolution in our economy must continue.
But we must take the people with us. Our ambition must remain a fair, just and cohesive
democracy. That is why we must confront the realities of unemployment.
But the reality is that unemployment will not be easily reduced.
Growth is too slow. It is slow here. It is slower still in most other parts of the world.
And at the same time our work places are changing.
Employers are replacing the people who once worked for them with new technologies and
new systems, more people are working part-. time, there are more -women in the workforce.
Confronting the reality of unemployment means providing a social net to ease the
hardship. It also means providing all the training opportunities we can.
But above-all -else it means we* must create more-growth.
Squarely faced, our problems are daunting, without question. 
2
But the same realistic appraisal of our position, gives every reason for confidence in what
we can do, and pride in what we have done.
We have real strengths on which we can build.
We have them particularly in the enterprise of private companies in the energy and
initiative of small to medium sized businesses who are now showing the way in
Australia's drive to develop an international export-oriented economy.
This is where we can provide a spur to economic growth and employment.
Today's statement offers new incentives to business in Australia small, medium and
large. It offers an environment for free enterprise as competitive as any in the OECD, and
competitive with most in Asia.
The Statement is modest in size but because it is so focussed, so targetted, it can mark a
new age for Australian business.
The One Nation statement we brought down nearly a year ago was designed to increase
investment through public spending on projects of long term value to the nation while
private investment was subdued.
One Nation reflected our determination to marry social and economic imperatives. To
meet short term needs without sacrificing our responsibility to the long term interests of
Australia. Today's statement reflects the same deermination.
The vast majority of the measures outlined in One Nation have been enacted or
implemented.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I am proud of the decisions we made in One Nation and at
other times during the year watershed decisions, such as the establishment of a National
Training Authority, the deregulation of civil aviation, the construction of a National Rail
Highway, an environmental overhaul of our greatest inland river system.
These are great projects of enduring value to Australia
I am equally proud of the decisions announced in the Youth Statement and the Budget that
directly assist the unemployed.'
-It-is partly as a result-of One-Nation that the Australian economy has grown in the past
twelve months, while other economies have slipped back.
Modest as the growth is, we might take some small measure of satisfaction in the fact that
what we achieved last year we achieved ourselves and against the odds: against the 
international trend and with much of our corporate sector concentrating on reducing debt
and cutting costs.
There can be no onc now wbo does not understand how imperative it is to be competitive,
to be international, to go into the world, and to go especially where the world is growing
fastest the Asia Pacific.
The truth is that the race for competitiveness never ends. This time five years ago it was
the goal. It is the goal now. It will be the goal, we can be sure, in five years or ten years
time. The thing to remember is that we are now in the race. Unlike a decade ago, we are
competitors. And each year we are doing better.
Amid the hardship wrought by the recession and the blow to our confidence it delivered,
in times when many of the signs are negative and might be read as indicating the necessity
for retreat there are also sure signs that we can advance.
We are more than twenty five per cent more competitive than we were a decade ago.
We have the lowest inflation in the world and, Victoria notwithstanding, the lowest
number of industrial disputes for thirty years.
These are the changes which have put us in with a chance a better chance in many
respects than Australia has ever had before.
The evidence is manifest. We produce one third as much again as we did in the early
eighties. Our exports have doubled and are now nearly a quarter of everything we produce.
More and more of them go to Asia.
We are now a much more competitive country by virtue of conscious decisions, by virtue
of conscious decisions by Government, business and workers.
It is the result of our choosing not to drift, but to take up the challenge. It is what
Australians have done by and for themselves.
A recent McKinsey Report to the Australian Manufacturing Council attests to the success
of a large number of Australian businesses which have grown up in the past few years.
McKinsey found 700 high value-added manufacturing firms in Australia playing a
significant part in Australia's exportgrowth.
The Report says: 
The entrepreneurship and ingenuity of these firms is exciting. Throughout the
study, we have been constantly amazed and inspired by the stories of these
individual firms, their determination and their success.
The authors point out their success has largely gone unnoticed in Australia.
Yet these firms were responsible for over $ 8 billion in exports in 1990-91 and
McKinsey's estimate the figure is likely to double by 1997.
These companies are exemplars of the change in the business and industrial culture of
Australia. They are marked by the dynamism of their leadership; by their flexibility; their export
orientation and their success in capturing niche markets, particularly in Asia.
These are the Australian companies of the future. The companies which will provide
work rewarding, interesting work for our children.
A large percentage of these companies were " born global", meaning that they considered
the world as their market from the first day of their existence.
There is no better evidence of the emergence of an international business frame of mind.
They are the off spring of a new export culture.
The McKinsey Report is a significant indication of the direction economic policy should
take. A sign that recovery will be hastened, and jobs created, by the rapid expansion of
vigorous and innovative small and medium sized businesses in the main, companies.
That is on the assumption that the number of these firms continues to increase at the
present rate.
A principal aim of today's statement is to Increase that rate.
The national quest upon which we are now embarked is for two things production and
employment. One Nation promoted these things with public investment through an ambitious program
of infrastructure spending.
But the private economy has been slow to respond and we have not had the large
ncemetsto production and employment which we need.
But One Nation never pretended that the large and continuing increments to production
and employment Australia needs could be delivered by or in the public sector. 
These things must come from the private economy, from private investment, from private
businesses like the ones McKinsey has described.
A large part of today's Statement focuses on this the role of the Australian company in
the dynamism of Australian business.
The measures I am announcing will make the Australian company a more effective
device, playing a more effective role as an instrument of national achievement and
enterprise. The Australian company, large and small, will be the basic device that powers our
innovation, marshals our capital and our productive power.
And we all know when that happens the other thing marshalled is employment.
We have decided that the simplest and most effective way to encourage Australian
companies to work for Australia is to lower their tax burden.
So, under a Labor Government, on July 1 this year the company tax rate will be reduced
from 39 cents in the dollar to 33 cents.
Coming on top of the accelerated depreciation allowances announced in One Nation, this
will make the Australian corporate tax system highly competitive within the OECD
countries. But, more importantly, we will also be competitive with the countries in our region.
Australian companies will thus be much better placed to trade with Asia the region
where it is going to matter most-
I might add that it should give Dr Hewson food for thought: under Labor a business tax
rate of 33 per cent, under Fightback a rate of 42 per cent, plus a 15 per cent GST.
in One Nation we introduced a Development Allowance for projects involving
investments of $ 50 million or more.
By the end of December 1992 we had received applications to a value well in excess of
$ 100 billion $ 130 billion in fact.
This of course is a wonderfully encouraging response.
We intend to bring forward -the development of as many of these projects as we can.
But we are also determined to enlist new ones. I-
To do this a Labor Government will establish a generalised Investment Allowance which
will help small to medium sized companies invest in job creating industries.
It will also help bring forward the enormous stock of projects which are already seeking
the development allowance.
Increased investment is the key to economic expansion and the key to higher employment.
But the corporate sector has not been investing enough.
It has been cutting costs at the same time as the banks have tightened their lending
guidelines. New businesses and businesses wanting the necessary finance to grow have been
subjected to more stringent tests.
As business stirs the banks must respond. Australian business must have access to finance
when it needs it.
In a speech late last year I outlined the need to encourage a new culture in Australian
banking.
The consequences of lending based on the value of security have been all too evident in
recent years, as first inflated asset prices saw credit expand rapidly and then collapse as
asset prices fell.
Instead, we need a culture which lays more stress on establishing close relationships
between banks and their customers.
I encouraged the banks to provide extra training for staff so that they can better evaluate
the risk and potential of proposals; and to be much more prepared to lend on cash flow.
If we are to develop and expand innovative small and medium business in Australia, this
sort of closer relationship banking is essential.
If Australian banks can develop their skills of evaluation and monitoring, the rewards for
business will be very considerable.
So too, obviously, will be the rewards for banks.
In this we have something to learn from the German and Japanese banking systems.
While we should not be imitating their systems, it does provide another lesson in the
strength to be derived from partnerships in the economy. 
In future, to ensure that our banking system is working effectively, under a Labor
Government the Reserve Bank will establish the machinery to regularly monitor the
conduct and patterns of bank lending.
In addition, the Reserve Bank will conduct quarterly surveys of small businesses to
establish a better understanding of their relationships with banks.
To provide the RBA with more detailed information and advice, the Reserve Bank will
also establish a large and representative Advisory Council whose members will be
principals of small and medium businesses.
To encourage banks to establish the appropriate structures and to increase the lending to
small and medium business, the Reserve Bank will pay market interest rates on bank
deposits it holds, thereby increasing the revenue of banks by about $ 140 million.
Mr Chairman
As you will see there are more measures in this Statement than it is possible for me to
address here. Let me mention just two two which illustrate the broad front on which we
have to work.
The solutions to our problems depend on both on our continuing willingness to change
and our ability to adapt to change.
Let me mention just two examples. There is a trend towards part time work in the
economy and there is a need to provide for unemployed people as much access to this
work as possible.
Consequently today's Statement changes existing programs of assistance for the
unemployed to provide greater incentives for recipients of allowances to take part-time
and casual work.
These measures have the dual purpose of enabling people to supplement their allowances
and maintain their links with the labour market, which means increasing their chances of
gaining permanent employment as the economy improves.
To become a truly competitive nation we must ensure that our workforce is adequately
educated and trained, and able to adapt to the needs of an evolving economy.
We must also recognise that in some cases it is appropriate to devise special policies or
programs which encourage people to look for work.
One such group is women with young children.
The level of women's participation in the labour market is remarkable: it ' has doubled in
the post-war period, and is now increasing at a faster rate than men's. 
These measures move child care into the 21st century.
8
The future growth of the Australian economy and the living standards of Australians will
benefit from the participation of women in the workforce.
But there are barriers to this.
For the more than 50 per cent of women with children under 12 in the workforce, child
care is a paramount concern.
Since 1983 we have increased the number of child care places more than four-fold, and
our program of fee relief has made child care affordable for low and middle income
families. Nevertheless almost two-thirds of working women who use child care use informal care,
often because they are unable to find, or afford, places in the formal child care system.
It is time we began to treat the needs of working parents with the same seriousness as
education or aged care.
It is time we faced up to the implications of child care as an employment related program
and recognised that it is a cost necessarily incurred by parents in the earning of income.
In recognition of this we have decided both to greatly expand our child care program and
to fundamentally reform its design.
First, we will dramatically increase the number of funded places with the aim of meeting
projected demand for work-related child care by the year 2001. We have set an interim
goal of meeting 84 per cent of demand by 1997.
Second, in recognition of the high cost of care, we will introduce a 30 per cent cash rebate,
in addition to existing fee relief arrangements, for all families using child care while in
employment, training, studying or looking for work.
This cash rebate, which will be claimable through Medicare offices, is vastly superior to a
tax rebate. The amount received will depend on child care expenses actually paid, and not
on how much tax is paid. And unlike a tax rebate which can only be claimed once a year,
parents will be able to collect their cash rebate as often as once a week.
The maximum cash rebate will be $ 1466 a year for one child, or $ 3182 a year for two or
more children.
-1Tdijto ensure that-child-careis safe and secure,. and that it provides children with a
stimulating envirornent, we have decided to introduce a system of national accreditation
of child care centres. 
Taken with other child care initiatives outlined in the Statement, they mean that Australia
becomes the first nation to put together a coherent and integrated program which caters to
the needs of the working parents.
It is a program to be proud of, and one that I hope will make the often stressful job of
juggling work and family responsibilities easier for working parents.
Ladies and gentlemen
As said before, today's Statement is modest in size. It will add $ 692 million to the
Budget in 1993-94, declining to $ 387 million by 1996-97.
We will achieve these modest costs principally by reorganising company tax
arrangements and reducing our holding in the Commonwealth Bank to 51 per cent.
We remain committed to maintaining a majority stake in the bank. We think there is a
place in the banking system for a majority Government -owned major bank.
Ladies and gentlemen
It remains to urge you to read the Statement. It contains much more than it is convenient
for me to talk about just now.
The salient thing is this. The Australian economy undoubtedly has in it the potential for
growth. Being close to the most rapidly growing markets in the world offers a potential we have
never known before. Already new Australian companies have emerged to seize the
chance. The Asia-Pacific region is one great advantage. Much that we have done here, as these
new companies testify, has created a number of others.
Having a robust democratic system, a broad consensus on the need for social justice,
including justice in the labour market, and believing as we do in social improvement gives
us an even greater advantage. It gives us both strength and incentive.
My belief is that these things must never be threatened that we will not make progress of
any kind by subjecting these values to attack.
GXood policy-freats -the economy and -society. in concert.
Today, I believ q, is an example of good policy. 
4. What we propose for the Australian company should help create levels of energy and
excellence we have rarely if ever seen in our history companies suited to the
opportunities available.
It should liberate the private sector for growth and employment.
By our radical improvements to our child care system we also recognise the social needs
which change creates.
That is the essential thing radical change where it is necessary, but always sensitive to
social needs and our social goals. 



01/ 09 * 94 13: 43#&amp; 06 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE 2002/ 011
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL AGENDA FOR WOMEN
BANKSTOWN TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
FEBRUARY 1993
Distinguished Guests
including the Mayor of Bankstown
Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues
Ladies and Gentlemen
I am very pleased to have an opportunity to address a great gathering of women so
early in the election campaign.
Of course, when this event to launch the New National Agenda for Women was
first planned, none of us knew it would take place during a campaign. Even I
didn't know!
But in fact it makes very little difference.
The thoughts I want to share with you today are not campaign-driven.
would have delivered the same speech had this launch been held two weeks ago.
But I nevertheless appreciate having the chance to address the women of Australia
in this election context because I suspect my remarks will get greater media
coverage than they otherwise might.
And I'm pleased about that.
T'here are things I want to talk about today which I know are very important to
women in this country, and it is important to me that as many women as possible
get to hear about them.
What brings us together today is the New National Agenda for Women the
government's approach to striving for true equality between the sexes by year
2000. 
PM PRESS OFFICE
01/ 09 * 94 13: 44 VB06 273 2923PM RSSOFC
2
It is a document that sets parameters rather than laying down a step-by-step
approach. It identifies the issues Australian women care most deeply about and thus provides
all Australians with guidance about how we should proceed in order that women
may participate fully in all areas of our society.
The framing of the document says a lot about how we in the Labor Party approach
important issues such as these.
The document is truly a democratic one.
In order to find out what women thought about the issues and problems facing
women today we listened, naturally enough, to the National Women's Consultative
Council and the many other women's organisations which last year participated in
a day-long " Renewal Forum" on the Agenda.
But we did more than that. We also listen to women who do not beong to
organisations and do not have a voice when documents such as National Agendas
are drawn up.
We commissioned research which sought the opinions of ordinary Australian
women.
We talked with waitresses, cleaners, primary school teachers, shop assistants,
mothers at home, office workers.
We asked them how they felt about their lives and we also asked them what they
thought of government programs meant to benefit them.
What they told us was not exactly what we hoped to hear.
Many of them felt that governments, state and federal, were not responsive to their
problems and needs.
We learned a lot about what women today are thinking and feeling and we took it
very seriously.
We already knew how concerned women ( and men) were about unemployment.
How they feel for those without jobs, and how they worry about maybe losing
their own.
We already knew this, but we had it reinforced for us. [ it003/ 0I 1 
Z004/ 011I
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 45 '&amp; 06 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE
3
We are doing what we can to confront the realities of unemployment.
We are providing a social net to ease the hardship.
We are providing as many training opportunities as we can.
Above all, as I outlined yesterday in my statement " Investing in the Nation" 1we
are doing all we can to create growth.
We learned something else from listening to Australian women.
We learned that women are very likely to make distinctions between the issues
that are important to them as Australians as citizens, if you like and those that
are important to them as women.
And it is on those latter issues that I would like to spend some time this morning.
There were three areas women unanimously nominated as being of pressing
concern to them; these were child-care, violence against women and women's
health. Before I set out how we intend to respond to these three subjects, I think it is worth
reflecting on changes that have occurred in the lives of women and men but
especially women over recent decades.
In fact if we look back over the past hundred years, we can take enormous pride in
a record of progress and achievement in the area of women's rights ( as they used to
be called) which very early on earned Australia a reputation as a world leader.
Next year all Australians will join South Australians in celebrating their women's
suffrage centenary.
South Australia was the first state to give Australian women the vote at a time
when New Zealand and two of the United States were the only places in the world
to do so.
Australia continues to set the pace for other democracies when it comes to status of
women issues.
Recently the International Labour Organisation singled out Australia's
achievement in reducing the gap between women's and men's wages.
Under our centralised wage fixing system, and with the protection of awards,
women's earnings are now 93 per cent of men's. 
L1005/ 011I
01/ 09 * 94 13: 45 ' 06 273 2923P~ l PRESS OFFICE
4
In countries like the US and Japan, without such protection, women still earn only
around 70 cents for every dollar men take home.
And the important point is, that contrary to the dire predictions when equal pay
was first put into awards, even though women in Australia are paid relatively more
in relation to men than women in most countries, their employment prospects have
not suffered.
On the contrary, growth in female employment has been exceptionally fast in
Australia. In the past ten years the number of women in the labour force has increased by
almost 40 per cent.
What has happened in Australia over the past decade has been a unique partnership
between the women's movement and the Labor Government, a partnership that has
achieved much of which we both can be proud.
Without it, we would not have our pioneering record of legislative achievements
like the Sex Discrimination Act and the Affirmative Action law.
Nor would 77 per cent of girls stay at school until Year 12. In 1982 only 40 per
cent did.
We can be proud that more than 52 per cent of enrolments in higher education now
are women, up from 46 per cent in 1982.
And that more women are being elected to public office and I see many of
Labor's federal and state parliamentarians here today, as well as quite a few who I
hope will be joining us in Canberra after March 13!
Indeed, when we talk about the dramatic changes in women's lives over the past
century, we must not overlook the even more rapid pace of change just over the
past decade.
Indeed the 1980s may well turn out to be the time when the revolution in women's
lives passed that point of no return, that point at which women decided they liked
their new found freedom and opportunities and had no intention whatsoever of
giving them up.
This certainly was the virtually unanimous view of the women who participated in
the research described earlier.
These women, no matter what their age, their education, their marital or maternal
status or their present circumstances, were totally agreed on one thing: they were
better off than their mothers had been. 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 47 ' 1&amp; 06 273 2923 PM PPREESSOSF COFFICE
They valued the choices women have today, including the greater economic
independence more and more women have.
Even though many women felt they paid a price in terms of the stresses involved in
trying to juggle their various roles and responsibilities, they wouldn't turn back the
clock for anything.
I sense that many women today have an enthusiasm for their lives and the
opportunities that are available to them that earlier generations lacked.
An event like today's is a case in point.
A day to think about the issues that as women you care about.
I'm not overlooking the men in the audience and I thank them for coming so that
I'm not the only male here today! but today is a day for women to take particular
pride in.
And a day to remember as the one when we decided to do something about many
of those issues.
Yesterday I released a major economic statement which contained, among other
things, a number of important initiatives on child care.
I included those initiatives in that statement, rather than the very tempting option
of " saving them up" for today, because think it is time that child-care was
included amongst our mainstream economic issues.
Child care should be treated with the same seriousness as education or aged care.
The time is long past, as far as I am concerned, where child care was tagged as " a
woments issue"~ or a " welfare issue" and only attracted the crumbs from the table
where the budget banquet was enjoyed.
I know how paramount an issue child-care is for women.
Without it, mothers have little choice about employment or study or training.
It really is the gate-way to choice, and to independence.
That is why have decided to give child-care such a big budget boost, to ensure it
is never again starved for funds.
For the first time in the history of child care policy we have addressed both the big
picture and the smaller details. L1 006/ 011 
01/ 09 * 94 13: 48 *&amp; 06 273 2923PM RESOFC 1O/ OI
6
We have addressed the three big questions of supply, affordability and quality.
We have also dealt with the smaller but no less important issues of arrangements
for sick kids, playgroups, and wholesale sales tax and Fringe Benefits Tax
exemptions for child care.
As I said yesterday at the National Press Club: these measures move child care into
the 21st century.
We as a nation can afford good child-care and the time has come to provide it.
At the same time, we need to recognise that women's child-care needs are neither
uniform nor identical.
T1here are new choices and new patterns in women's lives today.
Many women are choosing to stay home while their children are young, although
most will return to the labour market at some time in the future.
The point is, though, that policy needs to recognise and respond to these patterns.
It is no longer good enough, if ever it was, to say that any given woman is either in
the workforce or in the home.
Chances are these days, over the course of her lifetime, she will spend periods of
time doing both.
But during her period at home she is entitled to an acknowledgment and respect
that perhaps was not always forthcoming in the past.
At the same time, women at home often can do with some practical assistance.
The increased funds we have allocated to playgroups, and the occasional care
places will help provide a break for women at home while they shop or go to the
doctor. In time, I hope we might be able to take other measures to assist women caring for
children at home.
Perhaps the most sobering message to have come from our consultations and our
research was the level of fear felt by women in Australia as a result of violence on
the streets and in the home.
I find such violence appalling and intolerable. P51 PRESS OFFICEQ007/ 011 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 49 ' BY06 273 2923 PMI PRESS OFFICE
7
As a society we must do all that we can to eradicate it, but we also need to be
realistic and to recognise that we need to provide safe havens for women and
children while we work through ways to make this country less violent.
Today I announce several measures to this end.
Upon re-election, we will establish a referral program in each state for women
escaping domestic violence in rural and remote areas.
This special program would provide practical help to women and children in
remote areas in the form of a 008 phone number to call for help, and payment of
transport to escape violent situations.
We will also extend the life of the National Committee on Violence Against
Women. Late last year the Committee produced a highly praised report, the National
Strategy on Violence Against Women, and I believe that the work of this
Committee in maintaining a national focus on this issue is too important for it to
be disbanded.
Like many others, I was recently shocked to read that a judge, during a sexual
assault trial, had explicitly condoned the use of violence by a man against his wife.
I do not believe that reflects current community attitudes.
It is intolerable that women should continue to suffer prejudice or injustice of this
kind in our courts or anywhere else.
I am pleased to inform you that earlier this week, just before the Parliament was
prorogued, my colleague Michael Duffy the Attorney -General, took an initiative
which I trust will be the first step in ending such unfair and archaic attitudes
We are committed to ensuring Australia's laws and legal practices reflect changing
community attitudes and, to this end, the Attorney has asked the Australian Law
Reform Commission to report to him on ways of ensuring equality before the law.
Justice Elizabeth Evatt will head this inquiry.
Her widespread legal experience within Australia and internationally makes her a
most appropriate person to conduct this report.
I look forward to her Interim Report later this year.
am also able to inform you that the government has provided funds to the
Australian Institute of Judicial Administration to develop courses for magistrates 200O8/ 01 I
I 
LIMj009/ 0l 1.
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 50 * a06 273 2923PM1 PRESS OFFICE
8
and judges to help them identify prejudices that might impact on their judicial
conduct towards women.
' This program is to be developed by a Committee headed by Justice Deidre
O'Connor, President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
The third issue singled out as being of greatest concern to women was their health.
The Labor Government has had a good record in initiatives in women's health.
Overall, we have allocated $ 123 million to health services specifically for women,
especially in the area of prevention of breast and cervical cancer.
Today Brian Howe, the Minister for Health, informed me that the National
Women's Health Program will continue for a further 12 months at the current level
of resourcing.
He has also developed a National Osteoporosis Policy to meet the concerns of
women whose family history suggests they might be at risk of osteoporosis by
providing a Medicare rebate for a bone density test.
In an important, and unprecedented, step Mr Howe has also decided to institute a
major longitudinal study into women's health.
For too long, we have assumed that health studies did not need to be gender
specific. The result has been that we know very little about the medium and long term
effects on women's health of, for instance, the contraceptive pill or Hormone
Replacement Therapy.
Special studies of women of different ages will teach us a great deal and, in time,
give us a far greater understanding of the health needs of women at various stages
of biological development than we presently possess.
Finally, two measures to increase women's political and economic participation in
our society.
I know that some of the major women's organisations are concerned that women
workers might be disadvantaged by the enterprise agreements and workplace
bargains that are the new prototype for industrial relations.
Let me take a moment to state here that I am categorically opposed to the
reduction in women's wages that the Coalition's abolition of penalty rates would
cause. 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 51 % Y06 273 2923 P RS FIE~ 1/ l
9
And of course it is mostly the lowest paid women who would suffer, the waitresses
and shop assistants and hospital cleaners who are dependent on penalties to boost
their earnings.
But professionals like nurses would also have their earnings savaged.
I have seen figures that suggest that a RN Level I with one year's experience
working two ten-hour weekend shifts would lose $ 155.13 of her current total
wage of $ 403.33 if penalties were abolished.
This is unconscionable.
Making hard working and low paid women bear the brunt of Dr Hewson's IR
experiments. We will do everything in our power to ensure such women are protected.
We will spend $ 1 million to establish Working Women's Centres, initially in four
states, to provide advice and assistance to women on workplace issues, especially
on enterprise bargaining and access to training.
I hope these centres can be up and running soon after we are re-elected because,
with the Liberals gaining power in several states, women are going to need them.
I want to conclude by making one final announcement, one that I hope will be well
received by today's audience.
For too long the major women's organisations in Australia have had to struggle
along 0on paltry amounts of funding.
It is time to enable women's organisations to operate with the same
professionalism and expertise afforded to conservation, ethnic and other
organisations by dint of their receiving more realistic levels of funding.
I propose to increase the program of operational grants for women's organisations
to $ 1 million a year, a more appropriate amount in view of the important work
your organisations undertake on behalf of women.
The new National Agenda is an achievement of which we can all be proud.
It is a non-partisan document, one that sets out to articulate the various aspirations
of Australian women today.
Perhaps the overriding aspiration is the one that is expressed by the document's
title: Shaping and Sharing the Future. PM PRESS OFFICE9010/ 011 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 52' 06 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE
This title came to us from the women we talked to. It was their expression of their
desire to be part of the nation we are forging together.
While they and we recognise that often special programs are required to meet
special needs, at the same time all of us, women and men, want to join together
making a richer and fairer future for us all. Z011/ 011 



I I. ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
BEST7 PRACTICE AND WORKPLACE BARGAINING, INTERNATIONAL
BEST PRACTICE CONFERENCE, SYDNEY, 15 FEBRUARY 1993
There are people who say this country is not performing, that we are not making progress,
that if we keep going the way we're going we haven't a future.
Those people are not here today.
There are people who think that the way through the difficulties we still face lie in
radically regressive labour market policies.
There are people who think that the way to get the best out of your business is to knock
the stuffing out of your workers.
Those people are not here today.
There are people who think that Australian companies can never compete with the best in
the world.
Those people are not here today. And, today, if they were, they would not take up much
room. The people who are here today have proved that Australian companies can be as good as
any in the world; that our business leaders and managers have the will and the
wherewithal to compete with the best, that our workforce has the skills and the spirit to
do it, and that our industrial relations culture has the capacity to encourage and support
change while protecting everybody's interests.
This is the heart of the argument about Australia. This is where we succeed or fail in the
effort to be a great trading nation, a nation which can make and sell abroad the products
6290 
2
of our labour. our skills, and our imagination. This is where our ability to secure our
future will be determined.
Don't let anyone talk this country down. Australia is succeeding, and succeeding more
rapidly than any of us ever imagined was possible.
Let me start with a few numbers quite startling numbers. There are now more than 700
enterprise agreements registered with the Industrial Relations Commission.
These agreements now cover thirty per cent of all Australian employees under federal
awards.
That's in just 7 months since the Parliament passed the new legislation which encourages
the making of these single enterprise agreements which improve flexibility and
productivity. We have agreements in the construction industry, in banking, tourism, manufacturing and
the public sector.
Our industrial structure is rapidly changing, too. Australian manufacturing industry is
coming alive.
Manufacturing output is up by 25 per cent over the last decade.
Manufacturing productivity has increased at twice the rate for the economy as a whole.
In recent years our international competitiveness in manufacturing has increased more
rapidly than all but two of twenty three countries surveyed by the OECD.
We can see the results in the dramatic increase in manufacturing exports. They have
tripled over the decade, and manufacturing exports now match rural exports.
Over the last two or three years high technology manufacturing exports have been
growing faster than any other an average increase of 20 per cent a year.
For me, as no doubt for a lot of you, this is all tantalisingly suggestive of a dream come
true. In the 1970s I remember only too clearly being told that Australia could not be both a
successful exporter of raw materials and farm products, and a successful exporter of
manufactures. It was the prevailing wisdom of the ruling Coalition parties. It had long been an
Australian mind set. ( 3291 
3
1 remember thinking, as I'm sure some of you did: if this is true, how do we account for
the greatest manufacturing country on earth? How do we account for the United States?
In fact, it soon became clear, to me, not only that we could become a modem
manufacturing nation, and ani exporting nation, but that we had to. To preserve our way
of life, to seize our chances in the world, we had to.
More than anything else, that is what the last decade has been about. Changing the
prevailing wisdom. Changing our goals and the way we do things. Changing the stature
and identity of Australia in the world.
We have proved we can be both. In fact, we've proved we can do even better that we
can be a successful exporter of commodities and high tech manufactures and a successful
exporter of services.
Some of the numbers are so startling we've doubted they could be true but they are:
exports of office machinery and data processing have increased forty fold over the last
decade. exports of metal working machinery have increased 135 per cent over the last three
years. electrical machinery exports by 100 per cent.
motor vehicle exports by 73 per cent.
We have the enterprise agreements, we have the birth of successful export manufacturing,
and we have them both in an environment which allows us to get on with the job.
We have the lowest levels of industrial disputes for thirty years.
We have the lowest inflation we've seen for thirty years.
Two of the biggest problems we have had over the last 30 years have been beaten.
And both have gone because of the Accord.
Professor Bluestone remarks in his book Negotiating the Future that " teamwork,
co-operation and mutual trust are in; adversarialism is out" o.
Professor, you're right: and in this neck of the woods it's been on its way out for some
time. mean in both the wide industrial relations system and in the workplace. 
We camne out of the early 1980s recession with inflation running at 11.5 per cent. We are
coming out this time with inflation under 2 per cent. Industrial disputes today are
running at less than half the level of the early eighties.
We've emerged from the recession, with advantages we've never had before. But we'ye
also emerged with unemployment which is far too high.
All our efforts in the past year have been directed at curtailing unemployment. In the
One Nation Statement just on a year ago, in the Youth Employment Statement, the
Budget, and in the Statement last week, we introduced programs to assist the
unemployed, and to get a level of growth in the economy which alone will substantially
reduce the number of those out of work.
We got growth last year. Not enough, but more than virtually any other OECD country,
and the consensus of international forecasters in the Economist ast week was that we
would grow faster than virtually any other in the next year.
That is cause for hope. We're going to put all our efforts in the next three years to getting
that number down: to creating employment, and training people for jobs.
Unemployment is a matter of immense regret. But it won't be solved by mere
incantations of sentiment, or by the recital of hollow promises and so called " plans".
What the exports numbers, and the manufacturing output numbers, and the workplace
reform numbers, and the disputes and inflation numbers are telling us is that we are
heading the right way.
If we can accelerate the growth we will beat unemployment. This is the only way we will
do it: This, and by continuing attention to education and training to labour market
programs and by a sure knowledge understanding of where we are going, and faith in
our ability to get there.
The last thing we need, and the last thing that is justified, is a counsel of despair.
We are heading the right way, and if we keep going we can finish up with a country that
is not only a wonderful place to live, not only a good place to bring up kids, not only a
fair and decent and democratic society, but also one of the most dynamic and successful
economies in the world.
The Best Practice program run by Peter Cook and his Department provides outstanding
examples of the progress we are making and the reason why Australians should believe in
their capacity to succeed.
The Best Practice program is a way of giving recognition to companies that are doing
good things, so that other companies can learn by their example. 6293 
The program selects the best in management, industrial relations, and performance.
There are some outstanding examples. In 1985, the Australian Newsprint Mills plant at
Boyer was about to close. But management and the employees worked together on a plan
to turn the mill around.
Today productivity has improved by around 25 per cent and the mill is fast becoming
internationally competitive.
Then there is the paint maker, Dulux, at its Clayton in Victoria. Its reform program has
included installing leading edge technology, a Total Quality Management program, selfmanaged
work teams, extensive training and development programs and workplace
agreements which also guarantee employee participation in raising productivity.
As a result the proportion of orders delivered in full and on time has more than doubled
from 43 per cent to 95 per cent over the last three years, process time per batch of paint
has been cut by more than one third, and productivity is up by one quarter.
Other companies have chosen international benchmarking comparing their plant's
performance against the best plants in the world.
Australia's largest manufacturer of prefabricated timber wall frames and roof trusses,
Sterlands Pty Ud, benchmarked against Japanese standards.
It has cut its re-work costs by one third at its Gosford plant, and improved productivity
by 15 per cent. A few months ago they recorded their highest single months sales figure
in the 74 year history of the company.
Mobil's petroleum refinery in Adelaide was so successful in benchmarking it has now
become a benchmark itself for plants in the US and France.
Theme are countless examples throughout Australia of the quiet revolution that is
transforming our workplaces, our industrial structure and our exports.
A recent report of McKinsey and Company paints an extraordinary picture of 700
brilliantly successful small to medium sized Australian businesses. 700 companies
exporting to the tune of $ 8.6 billion per annum, and growing at a rate which will double
that figure in five years.
Of course there is always a close link between improving the industrial processes and
improving industrial relations. In the end the employees have to be willing participants
in reform or it just won't work.
An example is Sheraton Pacific Hotels which reached a workplace agreement for its
Sheraton Towers Southgate Hotel in Melbourne which is a model for the entire tourist
G) 2 9I4 
industry. It showed you could have a flexibility and productivity improvements by
employees and management working together to rearrange the award conditions.
These companies are showing the way: employees and employers jointly seeking
productivity improvements and sharing their value.
It is no accident that the question of industrial relations will be crucial in the forthcoming
election. It will be crucial in determining our future success and prosperity; because the quality of
industrial relations is becoming much more important as the whole world shifts to new
patterns of production and trade.
Today competitiveness and the wealth of nations is not determined so much by the
amount of capital or technology a country possesses, since they are both very easily
transferred. It is not determined so much by the amount of raw resources a country possesses, since
these are widely available and relatively cheap.
It is determined more and more by the quality of the workforce by the basic education,
the training, the skills, the flexibility and adaptability of employees, and the quality of the
relationships between employers and employees.
These are things we can't borrow, can't buy, can't import, can't dig up.
We have to create wealth together, Government and the people.
And this is an area in which we are becoming stronger.
For a decade we have run an Accord with the ACTU which now has as its fundamental
basis the idea that wages increases will be consistent with staying competitive against our
trade partners.
In the Accord we talk the issues through, so that we know the problems employees face,
and union representatives know the problems of governments.
There is now less reason for industrial disputes.
There is more understanding that we are all better off as inflation comes down.
There is more confidence that all Australians can benefit from change, and that one group
won't be able to rip off the benefit for itself.
Under the Accord enterprise bargaining is becoming the centrepiece of industrial
relations. 6295 
Over 700 agreements is a good start, but it's only a start. In coming years we want all but
a small fraction of the workforce covered by enterprise-related agreements.
We want to see the agreements becoming more and more comprehensive.
We want to see most decisions about wages and work arrangements made at the
workplace level between employers, and employees and their representatives.
We want to see a situation in which the Industrial Relations Commission continues with a
valuable role in settling disputes in conciliating, in deciding housekeeping issues like
union coverage, and in keeping in good repair the safety net of award minimums over
which bargaining will take place but making few and fewer decisions about actual
wages for most people.
You notice that I mention a safety net of awards and a role for the Industrial Relations
commission and a role for employees representatives unions.
These make a very important distinction between the track we are on, and the track the
Opposition wants to take.
Their commitment is to the complete abolition of awards.
But these awards are the safety net which assure employees that bargains can be made in
good faith, and in the knowledge that they can't be ripped off.
The Opposition not only wants to cancel awards.
When the award is abolished they will declare that each and every employee formerly
covered by an award is now covered by an individual contract.
The employees won't have any say in that.
They will wake up one morning, and they will no longer be on an award.
Each individual will be on an individual contract with the boss. If they don't like the
contract, or don't like any changes the boss wants to make in it, they can take the sack.
Under these common law contracts there is no such thing as unjust dismissal.
If you got a day's pay or a week's pay with your dismissal notice, that's it that's the
beginning and end of an employer's obligation.
I see today Dr Hewson saying that the system he proposes " provides workers with the
opportunity to get higher wages, more job security and more flexibility. It replaces the
' them' and ' us' features of the present system with a togetherness approach", he says.
6296 
Well, one could take pleasure in this, I suppose: to have one's opponents at last see the
light one has been shining for a decade.
If only there was reason to think that they believe it.
But, in fact, this willingness on the part of the Opposition to use language which
completely contradicts the substance of their ideology and their policies really should be
exposed for the shallow deceit that it is.
As far as industrial relations is concerned, there is perhaps no more effective antidote than
the simple memory of Jeff Kennett's pre-election cant in Victoria.
The Opposition system is not set up to reach collective agreements between the employer
and all the employees at a workplace, but to switch instead to individual contracts.
It is not work place bargaining. It's all one way. And if it's all one way, we lose the
participation the incentives to work together collectively which alone can transform
the work place.
I think that is the wrong track the low wage track, the track which belittles Australians
in their working lives.
But the best industrial relations in the world is not enough to guarantee our
competitiveness and our success in coming decades.
If we are to have the best trained and most competitive workforce in the most competitive
region in the world we need to do a lot more.
We also need strong, active and determined Government.
We need to keep up the effort on education, training and retraining and that's what we
are doing.
WVe need assured and affordable child care so that we can fully use the accumulated skills
and experience of women in the workforce and that's what we are providing.
That's why we will introduce a 30 per cent rebate of child care fees for working parents,
in addition to the fees we already pay for working parents on low incomes.
We need strong basic science and research and development to continue enhancing our
productivity and facilitating the change in our industrial structure.
We are doing that too, and given that last year Australia recorded the highest growth rate
in business research and development spending in the OECD over the last decade, so is
Australian business. 6297 
We need to give companies the financial incentives to save, invest and innovate and we
are doing that with our investment tax credits and the big cut in company tax we
announced last week.
This is the track which will strengthen our future as a high skill-high wage country.
This is the track we want to be on over the next three years and the rest of the decade.
There is no future in knocking down wages and conditions, or forcing employees to take
the contract or take the sack; any more than there is a future in going into the drudge
industries the rest of the world is leaving behind.
And it doesn't make these policies any more desirable to couch them in the language of
" togetherness"
I do not believe that a fifteen per cent tax on water, gas, electricity and phone bills, a
fifteen per cent tax on rail fares and bus fares and taxi fares, a fifteen per cent tax on
motels and hotels and meals out, a fifteen per cent tax on swimming lessons for our
children and on meals from their tuckshop, a fifteen per cent tax on shoes and clothes and
haircuts, on books, pens and pencils, a fifteen per cent tax on paint and wallpaper and
timber and building materials, a fifteen per cent tax on hamburgers and piza and
milkshakes, a fifteen per cent tax on everything in the shops except food on
toothbrushes, tissues, tampons, talcum powder, nappies I fail to see how this will bring
us together at all.
Dr Hewson's GST threatens our inflation performance. It is unfair. It won't help create
jobs. The accounting nightmare it involves won't help small business either.
Nor do I think wrecking Medicare will help bring us together.
The Coalition Health Policy has been written by the doctors, for the doctors.
If Dr Hewson were to be elected he would put us on the road to a US-style health system.
We have a system where everyone is assured of high quality health care on the basis of
medical need and where 70 per cent of visits to the doctor are free to the patient. The
entire system costs 8 per cent of GDP.
The US system has none of the universal benefits and costs 15 per cent of GDP.
There was a New YorkTime story the Other day which described how a man went to jail
for seven months in Louisiana because his friend falsely claimed he had private medical
insurance to get him into casualty in hospital. His friend had a crushed vertebrae. He got
a bill for S41,000 which the insurer wouldn't pay. His friend went to jail too, because he
gave the injured man his insurance card.
6298 
I don't think anyone wants to see a health system of this kind in Australia, and I think it is
a very good thing that President Clinton is determined to adopt a different system one
more like our own.
I do not believe a US style health system will help togetherness one bit. don't believe it
will make us stronger or give us a greater sense of common purpose.
I don't believe scrapping our award system and putting every employee in this country on
an individual contract will serve this purpose either.
We are showing now with enterprise bargains that we can make the system extremely
flexible; it can give us productivity gains, and give them along with most wages
increases through negotiations workplace by workplace.
Not only is there no economic gain in the Opposition alternative there is a great'social
loss. There is a price which one day must be paid. When employees know that they either take
the contract or take the sack, their dignity as well as their livelihood is threatened. They
arc belittled.
Far from the spirit of togetherness which Dr Hewson has recently begun to extol, we will
have the rancour and Iconflict of a decade ago.
Far from speeding the transformation of our workplaces, the process will be derailed.
Far from advancing the cause of Australia, these policies will stall it. We Will go
backwards. These policies were tried in other countries in the eighties and from that experience there
can be no mistake: they will change the character of Australia in ways which are hostile
to human dignity and entirely alien to our traditions of fairness and equity.
These three things, these three promises of the Opposition a 15 per cent tax on goods
and services, scrapping Medicare, and scrapping awards to put everyone on individual
contracts, are their kapolicies.
They are the solutions ( hey offer to our problems.
The Opposition is saying: we don't have any brilliant ideas on how to help our trade
performance or reduce unemployment and foreign debt, but, I'll tell you what, we'll give
you a 15 per cent tax on goods and services, we'll scrap your awards, and we'll scrap your
universal health system.
These are their brilliant ideas to impose a GST, scrap awards and scrap Medicare. 6299 
11
Thecn, they say, everything will be tine. These policies are not peripheral or additional to
their so-called " plan". They are the " plan".
[ f employees resist the impact of the 15 per cent goods and services tax on their wages,
we stand to lose over the next decade all the increased competitiveness we have acquired
over the last few years.
If we eliminate Medicare and the award system and impose a 15 per cent tax on goods
and services, what do we expect will happen to wages and inflation?
Certainly, sonmc wages and benefits will be cut. Many women will be worse off. Service
workers will be worse off. Young people will be worse off.
But in the factories and mines and construction projects of this country you will see
industrial war.
I can't think of a worse mix, a more lethal combination for this economy and for our
success in trade than to whack on a 15 per cent goods and services tax, cancel awards and
scrap Medicare, and at the same time cut the Reserve Bank loose and tell it to forget
everything else except keeping inflation under 2 per cent.
But even more fundamentally, policies of this kind put at risk the whole basis of
consensus and cooperation which has allowed us to successfully and radically restructure
ourselves. It remains to say the most important thing of all: and that is congratulations
congratulations to all of you who have been involved in the development of Best Practice
in Australia, and particularly to those companies who have committed themselves to Best
Practice. You are the pioneers of the new Australia. What you do is both the wellspring and the
measure of our achievement and our hope.
So I congratulate you all I know you will keep up the good work and please let no
one halt our progress.
Thank you.
6300 



II,
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TOYOTA AUSTRALIA LINE-OFF CEREMONY
PORT MELBOURNE 16 FEBRUARY 1993
Obviously this is a great day for the Australian car industry. We are here because
Toyota is here for the long haul.
It means1jobs. Long-term good jobs for Australians.
It means another step has been taken in the development Of world-class manufacturing
in Australia. It means another step in the integration of our economy wVith the world's,
and more especially with the region and Japan.
It means that the long relationship between Toyota and Australia continues to prosper
and grow. This is good for us. Toyota is, without doubt, one of the great companies of
the world. It is renowned for innovation, reliability and perfection.
Yesterday I spoke at the Best Practice and Benchrnarking Conference in Sydney. It
goes without saying that Toyota is a benchmark for any company in the world.
It is therefore automatically of great benefit to our manufacturing industry to have
Toyota here and expanding.
Of course the outstanding advantage for Australia in the present economic climate is
that Toyota's investment means long-term jobs for Australians.
Everyone here will be aware that it is my Government's great ambition to increase the
level of-investment -in Australia.
It is the most effective remedy for unemployment, indeed the only answer to the
entirely unacceptable levels of unemployment. we presently have.
6364 
2
That is why last Tuesday we announced that we will be cutting thecornany tax rate in
Australia from 39 per cent to 33, to make us competitive not only with OECDi
economics but with the economics of the Asia Pacific.
It was for the same purpose that we introduced a new investment allowance.
We are determined to bring forward the S130 billion worth of projects currently
claiming the allowance granted in the One Nation statement of twelve months ago.
We are also determined to get new investment going, particularly among small
companies of the kind surveyed in the recent McKinsey Company Report to the
Australian Manufacturing Council.
Small to medium sized companies charactrnsed by dynamic leadership, innovation,
attention to excellence, successful niche marketing and, no less, highly productive and
skilled workplaces.
There is no-one in this country, I should think, who does not recognise that we are
embarked on a course to become a successful, modern manufacturing nation.
I should think there is no--one who does not know that our way of life depends on it.
Equally, we know that our success in manufacturing. and in exporting the things we
design and make depends on new levels . of productivity.
We will not succeed by employing old patterns of production.
High levels of productivity, by definition, means fewer people making more and better
things. It follows that the answer to unemployment is growth a proliferation of
manufacturing effort and expertise. The key! 9ogrowth is investment..
won't today go into the details of the investment strategy we launched last week. But
I do want to talk about two broad related elements of Labor policy.
We take the view that Australia needs a car industry, and we believe that the car
industry in Australia needs an incentive to invest.
Dare I say it might come as a surprise to my opponents to learn that we in Australia are
not alone in the world in this.
We would be alone if we were to go to zero tariffs in the car industry.
We would be alone and without a car industry.
So let me say very plainly we are commnitted to a 15 per cent tariff for the Australian
car industry. 6365 
3
We are also committed, you will know, to that mode of workplace bargaining known
as enterprise agreements.
in this we also take a different view to the Coalition. But, surprisingly enough. I will
not expound on this today.
I do not feel the need to proselytise because this project is built on a model enterprise
agreement. An agreement signed in December 1991 with 6000 Toyota employees.
It's an agreement linked to obtaining international best practice, and delivering to the
company and its employees mutual advantages unimaginable under the old workplace
arrangements of Australian industry and Australian industrial relations.
Advantages, I venture to say, unattainable under any alternative scheme in which
relationships are adversarial or unequal.
700 new enterprise agreements have been entered into in the past seven months.
They seem to me, like this one, clear evidence that we can achieve high levels of
productivity, best practice, international benchmarks in other words the world-class
manufacturing industry we need through enterprise agreements such as these.
As I said in the speech in Sydney yesterday, what is unfolding in Australia now is
' something like the realisation of a long-held ambition.
I remember fifteen years or so ago, coming to the conclusion that the prevailing
wisdom about Australia was all wrong.
There was no need for us to always remain an exporter of commodities, with such
manufacturing as we had crumbling away behind giant tariff walls.
It seemed to me then that we could become a world-class manufacturer. It seemed to
me very soon after, that if we did not, we had no future. it seems to me now in fact
there is no doubt that we are becoming a world-class; manufacturer, and for that
reason there is no doubt about our future.
I could say a great deal more about the subject, but this is a day for Toyota's
management and workers to celebrate. There is doubtless much for Australians and
particuilarly the people of Melbourne to celebrate as well.
For my part, and for John Button's rm sure, there is some measure of satisfation in
having been involved in the creation of economic and industrial policy which has
yielded such results as this.
We are determined to continue the great drive to make Australia competitive in the
world and in the region.
We believe that the best way to do this is not by the imposition of a textbook blueprint
or strict adherence to economic theory, but by a range of measures designed to take
636C 
4
account of factors unique to Australia, to various industries and their comparative
advantages and disadvantages.
We want the most competitive industries it is possible to have.
But we are not prepared to have major industries disappear for the sake of some notion
of what constitutes pure theory.
-Economic ~ policvs not a death or glory game. It requires a measure of subtlety, a
recognition of differences, of the need for interventions.
We might begin by reminding ourselves at the outset that there is no competition
where there is no industry at all.
And it doesn't hurt also to remember that in the end we want industry because we want
secure, creative and rewarding employment for our people.
That is what this $ 400 million investment by Toyota is creating.
That, and further recognition that Australia has the investment climate and the
workforce to make it a place where the best companies in the world can thrive.
And those are reasons for all of us to celebrate today. 6367 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ABC AUSTRALIAN TELEVISION INTERNATIONAL
GORE HIL, SYDNEY
17 FEBRUARY 1993
EMB3ARGOED UNTIL 10.00 PM
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
T'his is an historic moment in our national life.
In the last few years Australians have heard a good deal about our need to go to Asia to
look to the Asia-Pacific, because that is where our great 2pportunity is. It is where our
future lies.
In the past twelve months the countries of the region have heard about it too. They know
that Australia is making the leap that we are siezing the moment.
The argument is an economic one and a geographic one. The Asia-Pacific is the
economic region closest to us. It operates within our time zone. It is the fastest growing
part of the world.
We have not just the raw materials, but the skills and services, the educators, and
increasingly the manufacturing, to become a dynamic partner in the region's growth.
Each month the success of our endeavours becomes more apparent. The Asia-Pacific and
particularly South-East Asia, is the destination for more and more Australian exports..
More and more Australian companies are finding markets in Asia.
And I might say, Asia is increasingly coming to Australia for goods and services
especially personal services.
6418 
2
I think it is true to say that even in the past twelve months our awareness of the Asian
opportunity has dramiatically expanded.
And in the same period, I know from my own travels, the countries of the region have
become more aware of our changed approach, and our new determination to successfully
do business.
The change is driven by a more fundamental change within Australia itself. This is a
much more complex and subtle society than it was a generofa 1 is a richer society,
more open and more worldly.
Australia's great achievement in the last generation has been the creation of a sophisticated
modern multicultural society. A society remarkable for both its diversity and its tolerance.
And this has made us stronger, more adaptable and creative.
We are now living through the second great change the change which will secure our
way of life and our standards of living for generations to come. That is the change to a
modem manufacturing society, integrated with the most dynamic region in the world
our own region.
I suppose no theme has quite so dominated the rhetoric of the past few years as this one.
But, in the last twelve months I have also had the opportunity to say from time to time that
our success in manufacturing and trade necessarily involves Australia's identity.
We will do best if we are confident, if we leave no doubt about who we are. We should be
projecting to the world the truth about Australia; this is a robust democracy, a society as
rich and diverse and unique as the continent itself. A people able to imagine what they
might be. Able to imagine their future in the region and the world. A creative people,
able to make things the world wants to buy. Able to deliver the information and services
which the world needs. Able to deliver the products of their imagination and culture.
That in essence, is the Australian identity in the 1990s and that is what the ABC is now
going to deliver.
As I said, this is an historic moment.
Great credit is due to Gareth Evans and Bob Collins. As good politicians and people of
imagination must, they pushed and cajoled and relentlessly persuaded others to get this
project through. I know they rankc it high among their many achievements, and so they
should. Credit must also go to Bruce Donald and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation for
bringing the project to fruition.
From now on the people of our region will be able to know us better, and that will make
all our other eforts that much easier. 6419 
Australian Television International will bring Australia and the South-East Asian region
significantly closer.
Tonight I am very happy to announce a new initiative with a similar and complementary
purpose. The Commonwealth Government has decided to conduct a study of the feasibility of
staging in Darwin a biennial festival of the region's indigenous arts and life sciences.
T'he festival would be created in conjunction with the Northern Terrtorv community and
private sector interests. Calling on the Territory's unique cultural strengths, location and
facilities including these new ATVI facilities the festival has the potential to become
one of the world's great cultural events.
As never before, it will provide a window onto the achievements and lifestyles the
genius, if you like of the peoples of the Asia-Pacific.
ibis initiative is more than symbolic of Australia's desire to engage with the region; it is
an example of how we can creatively engage.
So too, is the launch tonight of Australia Television International.
Once agin, it is my duty and my pleasure to congratulate everyone involved and on
behalf of the people of Australia, wish the venture every suces
Tonight we have taken another step along the road towards a closer relationship with the
region, and in so doing, another step towards the new Australia.
SYDNEY 17 February 1993
6420 



PRIME MINISTER
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEC BY THE PRIME NINISTER, TIE NOWI P J KEATINIG NP
WON= E IN SPORT
SYDNEY 18 FEBRUARY 1993
it is my great pleasure to be here again.
There's no escaping it if you hold events in election
time, you run the risk of a political speech.
I could spare you from this, and tell you everything I
know about Australian sportswomen.
This would take a little longer than the five minutes I
have been allotted; not because I'm expert, but because
the great traditions of Australian sportswomen go back a
long way.
This year, of course, the tradition has been added to,
particularly in Barcelona and partCicuiarly by Kathy watt
who is our quest of honour tonight.-
By contrast with our women's sporting traditions,
Dr Hewoon's Goods and Services Tax has had a very short
life: in fact, it is my sincere hope that it has no life
at all. Anyway, I have long felt that Australians
particularly Australian sportspeople are tired of
politicians pretending to be expert in sport.
So I'm not going to let you escape.
And just as there is no escaping politics, T might say
that there is no escaping the consequences for sport of
my opponent's policies.
This gathering tonight is a great illustration of how far
women's sport has progressed in Australia.
The Government is proud of the assistance we have been
able to provide through the huge increase in funding in
recent years, and through the work of the AIS and the
Australian Sports Commission.
But of course the Government is not the lifeblood of
Australian women's sport women are, and the voluntary
o rwaisations are. 6471 1 1 
I have to remind you that my opponent promiises to cut S7
million out of the Australian Sports Commission budget;
and to introduce a Goods and Services Tax that will make
it more difficult f~~ tpriia. asul voluntkary
organisations to function.
Sport is a perfect illustration of how the GST will
change the Australian lifestyle.-
All sporting organizations will be hit by the GST and, as
very few of them pay payroll tax, there is not even the
partial compensation which some other bodies will get.
There will be a 15 per cent tax on entry and registration
fees for competition, on admission charges, on air
travel, on basic services, on accommodation and on
uniforms. Sports equipment costs will rise, so will the cost of
remedial treatment. So will the cost of all health care,
of course.
The GST will apply to coaching courses. The price of
swimming lessons for instance.
I recently saw a letter from Forbes Carlisle in which he
pointed out that, with a GST, privately run swim centres
would lose both customers and income, and governments
would be forced to spend millions of dollars if the
public's needs were to be met.
He wrote, " Now with the prospect of 15 per cent added to
fees, many parents will be forced to drop out... There
is no doubt that a GST will result in many less pupils
and fewer children learning to swim..."
He goes on to say that * It is certain that sports club
memberships would be reduced so again the community would
suffer by the imposition of this tax.'
Sponsors wi 11 be hit by the GST. Sponsored sports
will7 receive 15 per cent less or the sponsor will have to
be asked for extra to maintain the level of funding.
Some sponsors will get rebates, but banks, building
societies and other financial institutions will not.
Sports clubs will not only have to wear the tax in dollar
terms, but in the extra time it takes to be a tax
collector and an accountant.
As I have said over the past twelve months and as I keep
saying in this election campaign, the goods and services
tax will change the lifestyle of Australia.
I happen to believe that it is a completely unnecessary
and grossly unfair tax. You don't have to agree with me
on that, but I urge you to give careful consideration to
6472 
3
the consequences for your own lives and professions
before you give it your approval.
In the last twelve months, Australian women ' s spowt has
thrived. many of the now or expanded programs at the AIS
and the Sports Commission have been in women's sport, and--
the participation of Australian women in sport in the
community continues to grow.
I thinkc our approach to sport should be guided by the
same principle of fairness and equality which leads us to
consider such things as education, health or social
security as an Australian birthright. The opportunity
should exist for all Australian women to participate at
the most basic or the highest levels.
And I think it w ould be a great pity if the great
progress we have made in the last few years, and the
institutions and mechanisms we have established, should
be undermined.
It remains for me to congratulate the sponsors, the
Sports Commission's Women in Sport Unit, the judge. and
of course, my colleague the minister, Ros Kelly, for
their efforts to develop these awards.
There is no doubt that they play a vital role in
encouraging the goals of excellence and participation,
not just in sport, but by their example, in other areas
of Australian life.
Thank you for having me along. 63473 



P7.
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEDICARE: KEEPING HEALTH CARE AFFORDABLE FOR AUSTRALIANS
Brisbane, 22 February, 1993
What a shame that we once again find ourselvcs fighting to preserve Medicare.
And let there be no mistake. Medicare is under attack.
If Dr Hcwson and his Coalition were to get their hands on our health system you know
what would happen.
They would dismantle it.
Don't isten to their " promises" to preserve Medicare. Just look at their track record and
the fine print of their policies.
Remember it happened once beforel
In the 1975 election campaign Malcolm Fraser said he would not dismantle Medibank.
And look what happened. Seven years later, when the Fraser Government was thrown out
of office, Medibank had gone and more than two million Australians had no health cover.
Do we want that to happen again?
I don't think so.
Do we want an Am. ican-stylc health system where public hospitals turn you away if you
don't have a Blue Cross card in your wallet?
I don't think so.
6058 
I
2
Do we want our health costs to skyrocket by giving doctors the power to set their own fees
while the rest of us will have to accept lower wages under Dr Hewson's individual
contracta? I don't think so.
Do you want to see bulk-billing abolished for more than 13 million Australians? Do you
want the Medicare relate for bul-billing to drop from 85 per cent to 75 per cent, thus
reducing the incentive for doctors to bulkbill even pensioners?
If doctors set their own fees, they are likely to increase by around 30 per cent.
This means having a baby would cost $ 1170 instead of $ 475 today.
A visit to the family doctor will increase from S24 to $ 32 with only $ 18 of it claimable.
This means every trip to the doctor would cost $ 14. If families wanted to bring this down
to only $ 5 they could take out gap insurance but that would cost $ 6 a week!
Does this sound fair?
I don't think so and rm sure you don't either.
Yet, make no mistake, this is what Dr Hewson has in store for you.
He may not be spelling out the details of what he has in mind.
He's a bit like Jeff Kcnnt in that respect. He hopes to get through the election ca= paign
without telqlingvW0iiaU the nastiea. He's refuaing to even release many of his policies.
He won't tell us the details of his industrial relationfolicy for instance.
Just like Jeff Kennctt. He didn't tell the people of Victoria either and look what
happened there.
Next Monday the award system in Victoria will come to an end and the working men and
women of that satc will be on their own.
Dr Hewson is just the same on a whole range of policies including Medicare.
He tries to make his plan sound a lot better than it really is. He docmsn't want us to read the
fin print and discover how much worse off most of us would be.
He says, for instance, that he'll give tax credits for private health insurance.
He implies theze will cover the cost of private health insurance. 658k 
What he dga^ tell you is that 60 per cent of families with children will get no tax credits
at all.
The few families who wiLbenefit will only get around $ 200 to $ 300 a year a long way
from the $ 1600 that pnvate insurance costs a family.
And Dr Hewson has the nerve to claim that families will be better off under the Coalition's
health care scheme.
This is simply not the case.
And you don't just have to take my word for it.
Listen to what the experts have to say:
Dr John Deebic, a health economist from the Australian National University, and one of
the original architects of Medicare, has estimated that doctors' private incomes would
increase on average by 60 per cent under Fightback!
And Professor Jeffrey Richardson, the Professor of Health Economics at Monash
University says the Coalition's health policy will lead to " major inflation in hospital costs
and medical incomes".
The Deptenigt of Finance estimates that health costs for the average family will increase
by $ 22 a week if Dr Hewson puts his plan into effect.
Why on earth would he want to do this when we presently enjoy one of the best health
care systems in the world!
We have a simple, affordable system of universal health care.
It means no one is denied medical treatment because they can't afford to pay.
And the government is doing what it can to improve Medicare.
We have committed an additional $ 1.6 billion over the next five years to increase patients'
access to public hospitals. And we are providing $ 70 million to reduce waiting lists for
surgery. What would Dr Hewson do instead?
He wants to take $ 13 billion out of the public hospital system. This would mean that
over 10,000 public hospital beds would Have tobe closed an estimated 1.730 of them
here in Queensland.
It wil mean 450,000 fewer people would be treated in public hospitals.
6590 
This is totally unfair.
It would force thousands of people into costly priyate P nrac Families would have to
find an extra $ 400 to S600 a year just to purchase h cover that is, Just to get cover as
a private patient in a qg= hospital.
This would not give them access to private hospitalsl
Nor would Dr Hewon's health scheme cover people with cancer or other pre-existing
conditions. The private health funds simply won't give insurance to people with Multiple Sclerosis or
-I1V or other conditions that require continuous and often costly treatment.
What is supposed to happen to these people?
How will they fund their treatment?
Do we really want to become the sort of society that abandons its sick and its weak?
I don't think we do.
The kind of society we cherish, and which the Labor Goverment has worked hard for a
decad to consolidate, is one which cares for all its citizens on the basis of their needs
not on the buis of their incomes.
I doubt if anyone he= today wants to put those values in jeopardy.
I am sure that you, as hospital employees, as dedicated medical professionals, do not want
to be in the hideous position of having to turn away seriously ill or injured people because
the= arm no beds for them or because they can't afford to pay.
Dr Hewson also claims that health services will be zero rated under the GST.
But why should we believe him?
The Cole Committee, which was set up to advise Dr Hewson on which items should be
included under the GST, has rcommended that health be taxed.
Just like it is in New Zealand.
But the Cole Committee knew how unpopular this recommendation would be. So they
advocated the Jeff Kennett option keep quiet about it until after the lewiont
Tax heaith. they said to Dr Hcwson. but only " when in Government". 6591 
In other words, don't come clean with the voters. Don't tell them what
new and nasty taxes you've got in mind.
Promiae them anything and then " when in Government' scatter the GST
around on every item you can.
Look at non-prescripton drugs for Instance.
Will the GST apply to aspirin and cold tablets and asthma puffers?
It will if the Cole Committee recommendations are taken up. They say
that only prescription drugs under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Schema
should be zero-rated. All other medical produaIiive a 15 per cent
GST. And that inciudes women's sanitary products like tampons items which
presently attract no tax at all.
Dr HawEon would make it more expensive to be a woman.
You can't get much more unfair than that.
When it comes to other areas of health services, he just won't let on
what he has in mind.
Will chiropractors be taxed? Speech therapsts? Midwives? Akmbulance
services? And what about medical products.
WhIch medicine will be zero-rated?
Dr Hewson has got to tell us.
He can't run around the country telling people they will be better off
under Fightback. when he secretly plans to tax every aspect of our
daily livas. He just won't get away with it.
I believe the Australian people value and appreciate Medicare.
I do not believe they want to return to the bad old days of a new
health scheme practically every year.
Remember during the seven years of the Fraser government there were
five different health schemes.
How many schemes would Dr Hewsn give us before the people said
Enough Is Enough! and demanded the return of Medicare?
6592 
6
I sbuddcr to think
All I know is that it's too big a risk.
Our health is too important to us to risk having it tinkered with in this fashion by an
Opposition which won't even come clean about what they want to do.
We have a system which works. Which is fair. Which we are committed to improving so
it meets the needs of all Australians. Let's make sure we stay healthy under Medxicare.
And the way to do that is to keep Medicare healthy! 6593 



o* l
. C. AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY POLICY SPEECH
1993 FEDERAL ELECTION
presented by
PAUL KEATING
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
At
Bankstown On
Wednesday 24 February 1993.
ADVANCING AUSTRALIA
Building On Strength 
Let there be no mistake. This IS the most important election in memory.
Today we stand against radical right-wing proposals which are hostile to fundamental
Australian beliefs and Australian institutions and all that we have achieved in recent
years. Not new proposals, but old ones.
Proposals which have been tried in other countries and which in every case have failed
at great social and economic cost.
Dr Hewson says these other countries did not try hard enough. He is nothing if not
zealous. In this election there is Dr Hewson Dr Hcwson and Tim Fischer or there is Labor.
I ask every Australian to think about this:
When you wake up on March 14, whoever has won the election, there will still be
unemployment. There will still be problems to solve.
If Labor is re-elected there will also be an Accord between the unions and the
Government, guaranteeing industrial peace, low inflation, and a continuation of that
spirit of cooperation.
There will still be Medicare, guaranteeing quality health care to all Australians
regardless of age or circumstance.
There will still be equity and access in education.
There will still be a social safety net providing care for the aged, the sick, the les
well-off and the unemployed.
There will still be social policies expressly designed to manage the change we are
going through, to alleviate the hardship and minimise the social damage.
And there will be every reason to believe that we will continue to succeed in our
ambition to become a great trading nation, a great Australian social democracy, a
proud and independent country, united and cohesive and able to deliver to all our
people living standards and a way of life unequalled in the world.
And there will be NO GST. No miserable 15 per cent tax on virtually everything you
buy. But if the Coalition is elected, within six months there will be no Accord instead
discord no universal health system, no safety net.
And there WILL BE a GST. 
There will be much less equity and access in education.
Workers will lose the protection of awards and be forced to negotiate individual
contracts with their employers or take the sack.
Everyone will be paying A 15 PER CENT TAX on virtually everything they buy.
And you can be absolutely sure, NOT ONE NEW JOB will have been created by these
measures. That is why this is the most important election in memory.
T'here really never has been a clearer choice: between the Australian traditions of
fairness and equity, and the economic and social jungle of Reaganism and Thatcherism
which other countries have just abandoned.
Fairness and equity have served Australia well, and never better than in this difficult
period of change.
We believe in change. To meet the national necessity we instigated it. But we believe
it should be managed: we believe it should be moderated by supportive social
policies. We think it should be calm.
Recognising, that all change should have a social purpose, we take account of the social
consequences. I lived here in Bankstown for forty years.
This suburb of Sydney had all the best qualities of an Australian community. It still
has. It is a microcosm of modern urban, multicultural Australia.
Now, as then, it draws its strength from the people, and the people draw their strength
from Bankstown.
Perhaps because Banlkstown was such a strong community, there was a certain
fearlessness about it, a great sense of security, a sense of self-sufficiency. One of the
home-truths I picked up was that the world owes no one a living.
Today a whole generation of Australians know that the world does not owe us a living.
We arce the first generation of Australians to really understand what it means.
I think I began to understand towards the end of the 70s it was then I began to form
what was for me at least a new idea about Australia.
The thought took hold of me that we could be a creative country, as well as a so-called
lucky country. 
I thought that we could become a great manufacturing country, a country which made
things for the world to buy. Things which bore the stamp of Australian work and
genius. I becamne convinced that Australia could be more than a quarry and a farm; that we
could find a place in the front rank of trading nations.
This of course was contrary to the prevailing wisdom.
Yet in the early 1980s it very rapidly became apparent that the idea was not an option,
but an absolute necessity. We no longer had any choice.
The story since then has been a remarkable one. The Australian people are bringing
into being a new Australia.
An Australia which has more than doubled exports in nine years. An Australia which
has tripled exports of manufactures and services.
We still export the raw materials and much more effectively than before. But we
also export high technology medical equipment and high-speed ferries, processed
food, cars, computers, electronic and chemical products information, education,
television programs, tourism.
And increasingly those exports go to the fastest growing economies of the world
those in our own region, Asia.
These things have happened with remarkable speed.
And so have these things: we have the lowest inflation in thirty years. The highest
productivity in thirty years. The lowest number of industrial disputes in thirty years.
We are far more competitive than we have ever been.
What is more, we have a population with a proven capacity for change, and a proven
willingness to meet the challenges Australia faces.
But in the face of this success, our opponents talk incessantly of failure. Where there
is hope they counsel despair. To sell their plan, they think it is necessary to talk
Australia down to extinguish people's faith.
My counsel is hope. These days it is more than hope it is belief.
Belief in what the 90s hold for us all.
rye always said that I wanted to be around for the 90s to see it all come true, to be
part of the transformation.
Our opponents say they have a plan. The word plan is forever on their lips. Their
pollsters demand it. But they have the wrong plan. 
Labor has more than a plan we have a whole national change a sea-change, born
of national necessity, happening now. A change sustained by faith in Australians.
A change not shaped by a computer model or a textbook, but bedded in reality and
commonsense. A change that does not break the mould of Australian society, but reshapes it by
drawing on its strengths.
One that does not look back to the values of Thatcher's Britain or Reagan's America,
but forward to the next century.
I see Australia growing on the dual foundations of energy and care.
Our energy flows from the genius and ambition of our people which the combination
of liberal democracy and free markets alone can deliver.
Our care flows from a spirit we have in common as Australians.
You can see the energy emerging now in those remarkable figures I have quoted.
You can see it in 700 dynamic small to medium sized Australian businesses, born of
this era, dedicated to innovation, earning last year $ 8.6 billion in export revenue, and
expected to double in five years.
The same energy is apparent in the $ 130 billion worth of applications received by the
Government for project development.
It exists in the new, much more clever business culture in Australia a culture we
ourselves have developed.
The " Australian company" is today a much more innovative, dynamic, export-oriented
entity than it has ever been.
It will be the engine of growth and the pacemaker of employment.
That is why two weeks ago we gave a further break to capital and innovation. We
lowered the company tax rate from 39 per cent to 33, providing Australian industry
with a business tax system competitive with any in the world.
This is where the energy will come from. And we will do everything we can to
stimulate it and, where necessary, provide strategic support.
We will make sure that Australia keeps its car industry.
Toyota has already committed itself to a new state-of-the-art plant at Altona in
Melbourne. Mtsubishi is poised to make major investments at its plant in Adelaide. The
Government I lead will work closely with Mitsubishi to bring this about. 
But no government incentive can match the opportunity offered to Australian
companies by the emerging markets of Asia and the Pacific.
Never in our history have we bad such an opportunity.
I have no doubt that if we are wise I mean governments, business and the people of
Australia we will see in the nineties manufacturing and trade on a scale
unprecedented in our history.
But it will not happen of its own accord.
As much as it will need leadership, it will need nurturing and encouragement.
We will need to grow companies committed to Australia, with workers committed to
Australia. Our success as a nation will depend upon our companies, but equally it depends upon
the degree to which we care about Australia and Australians.
In an era of change the watchwords of good government should be care, support,
cooperation. We must take the people with us. That is a Labor article of faith.
We also recognise that on the way to our great social goals there have been problems
as well as successes, and we recognise our responsibility for them. As Prime Minister,
I recognise My responsibility for them.
Governments in Australia in the eighties were not always as prudent or wise as they
should have been.
Nor were all companies: in the newly deregulated economy, a lot of their behaviour
was not in the best interests of Australia.
The excesses of the 80s must not reappear in the 90s. The last thing we need now is a
return to the 80s philosophy of " greed is good" and that the only useful interest is selfinterest.
As in other countries, in Australia a lot was wasted in the boom. And as in other
countries, the recession nearly stopped us in our tracks.
It is also true to say that even some of the gains we made had their social cost those
productivity gains of the last few years are now adding to the level of unemployment.
Industry is getting more product from fewer people.
Unemployment is the greatest problem we face. It is the problem of the era. It is,
overwhelmingly, the principal concern of the Government. 
We have managed to achieve more economic growth than most other comparable
countries. We have had four consecutive quarters of growth. But it has not yet begun
to create enough jobs.
And we're not helped by a sluggish international economy.
What then is the answer? What is Labor's jobs strategy for the 1990s?
Over the next three years Labor will place the emphasis where it has to be.
On business and on incentives to invest.
Labor's jobs strategy is ' designed to assist recovery in business. Under Labor, business
will pay a tax of 33 per cent on profits compared with 42 per cent promised by the
Opposition.
Under Labor, business will be able to obtain an investment allowance of up to 20 per
cent on all investment in the next two yea's.
An incentive the Opposition will not be providing.
And with Labor there will be no GST to weigh down business and depress spending.
No big new taxes, no industrial conflict just sensible practical things to help business
investment. But there is no doubting the magnitude of the unemployment problem.
It will not be easy to reduce and no one should expect speedy results.
But in the search for solutions, there could be no greater Moy than to proclaim the task
an eay one, as Dr Hewson did last week when he promised getting " jobs rolling from
day one".
And no greater shame than to throw away the progress we have already made.
It would be a tragedy if we let the recession crush our faith or ruin our work to date.
There is the other lesson I learned growing up in Bankstown. In hard times you stick
together. When you're confronted with a challenge, unity is strength.
Every time Australians cooperate, every time they form a partnership, every time they
agree on a common goal, every time they combine their ideas and their energy, they
make Australia stronger.
If one word describes Labor's policy for Australia, it is " cooperation'.
Our policy must never be to undo the ties that bind us but rather to strengthen them as
we did with the Accord between Government and the unions last week. 
A new Accord committed to jobs, but built on the same fundamental principle of
cooperation. Under the new Accord, wage increases will depend on progress towards creating jobs
and reducing unemployment.
This is what the Accord has given us. Our opponents in their anger will strike it down.
And as it goes, the century long protection of awards will go with it.
It is incomprehensible to me why anyone should wish to destroy it.
But ladies and gentlemen
Labor's quest for social equity goes on.
Our recently announced child care policy recognises that the future growth of the
Australian economy and the living standards of Australians need women's
participation in the workforce.
We recognise that child care is essential if women are to take a job, undertake training
or study or look for work.
Our commitment to meet total demand for work-related child care by 2001 will aid
women's participation in the economy, as our 30 per cent cash rebate on fees will make
child care more affordable especially for middle income earners.
It is not good enough to say that a woman is either in the paid workforce or in the
home. Chances are these days, in the course of their lifetimes, most women will spend
periods of time doing both.
The needs of mothers caring for children at home are often overlooked in the child care
debate. But we have not forgotten them.
I recognise and appreciate the important role played by women who choose to stay at
home while their children are growing up.
We propose to introduce a new cash payment of $ 60 each fortnight to be called the
Home Child Care Allowance.
This allowance is more generous than the Dependent Spouse Rebate it will replace,
and has the added advantage of being paid directly to the mother at home. This will
provide a source of independent income for women while they are out of the paid
workforce caring for children. 
In a further measure to meet the needs of women at home caring for children, we will
extend fee relief to occasional care. This is in addition to my earlier announcement
that we will double the funding for playgroups.
Labor's child care policies recognise the reality that different families choose to deal
with the responsibilities of work and family in different ways.
Medicare is another concrete expression of the quality of our society and of Labor's
commitment to it. Medicare is a statement as much as it is a system. It's a measure of
our social progress. A measure of our care for one another.
It is not yet the perfect health system, but it is without doubt among the very best in the
world. The Coalition will pull it down. They say they won't. But, as everyone here knows,
they will.
They will abolish the foundation upon which Medicare rests. They will abolish bulkbilling
for everyone but pensioners. 13 million Australians will have to pay their bills
up-front. $ 32 a visit.
The Coalition is determined to take our health system towards the American model
the model that costs far more than ours, delivers infinitely less, and which the
Americans are determined to replace.
The Coalition would cut $ 1.3 billion a year from public hospitals while they cry
crocodile teams over waiting lists. And they want to give $ 1 billion to the AMA
specialists. Three dollars an hour for Australia's youth, three dollars a minute for
doctors that is their policy.
We will never abandon Medicare we will go on improving it.
Today I announce an important improvement for Medicare. We will open Medicare
up to the private hospital system, so that it can purchase an estimated 10,000 private
hospital beds per year for people on waiting lists.
We will also fund post-acute and palliative care patients in private hospitals a step
which will at once increase options for palliative care and free up public beds.
In addition, a new Commonwealth dental health program will be established for
emergency and basic dental care for health card holders.
In education, we will continue to pursue the goals of access and equity which in the
last decade saw th e number of young Australians completing secondary school rise
from three in ten to nearly eight in ten; the creation of an additional 120,000 university
places; and, last year the establishment of an Australian National Training Authority to
provide vocational training of the highest standard for all Australians.
In doing this we met the challenge of the new economic order. Education is our great
comparative advantage. We must keep it and build on it. 
Thbese broad egalitarian goals create not only opportunities for all, they also create the
lift that Australia must have.
Not only are we raising standards, but the guarantee of fair access to education is a
principle from which we will never resile.
Under Labor, wealth will never determine one's chance to get a decent education.
We want our universities and TAFE to remain educational institutions not private
business organisations.
We will not introduce a voucher system for our universities. We will not put a tax on
books. We will not put a tax on knowledge.
We will not cheapen the values of education, or enlightened social democracy, by
making it subject to the principles of the market place.
In Australia we have built one of the best and fairest social welfare systems in the
world. in the next term, we will introduce new measures for unemployed people, including
older men, and today I can announce further initiatives to assist other older
Australians, including a more generous pensions assets test and a new seniors health
card. Looking after people in need has always been Labor's strength, and it is a proud record.
But we should never forget the people in the middle. Those Australians on average
incomes struggling to bring up their families, pay their bills and keep their heads above
water. I am referring to families whose total income is between $ 30,000 and $ 60,000 who
will miss out under Dr Hewson.
Who will miss out on the health care rebate, who will lose their Family Allowance,
who will have their Dependent Spouse Rebate income-tested, who won't get the
Coalition's child care rebate.
I fail to understand why the Coalition is so down on these Australians. Dr Hewson
cuts them out of his compensation package, yet they are the ones who will be most
affected. Labor stands in direct contrast to the Coalition when it comes to meeting the financial
needs of these people. Medicare, the award system, our child care rebate, our
education system and our 1994 and 1996 tax cuts. Our policies provide for the people
in the middle.
A tax rate of 30 per cent, not 38 per cent as now and all without a GST. 
For all pensioners, Labor will also introduce fringe benefits from April, giving 380,000
older Australians valuable discounts on everyday services.
There is one simple fact which all Australians should not forget: Dr HCwsoD intends
to cut $ 9.4 billion from government spending.
Almost half of this will come from social security, health, housing and labour market
programs. This was the level of Dr Hewson's cuts before he delivered his revised package in
December the package he funded with a proposed sale of Telecom for $ 20 billion.
Yesterday it was revealed that Telecom is worth $ 8 billion less than that, which simply
means Dr Hewson's plan is unaffordable.
1-us principal pledge to abolish state payroll tax cannot be achieved.
Business it seems is to get the booby prize. A 15 per cent GST, a 42 per cent company'
tax and no payroll tax relief. And timed local phone calls into the bargain.
As our success depends on the bonds between us, it depends on the strength of our
culture. Labor guarantees support for those great Australian institutions which preserve the
nation's heritage, encourage ideas, disseminate information and strengthen national
cohesion. I mean such organisations as the ABC, the CS[ RO, the Australia Council and the
Special Broadcasting Service. All on Dr Hewson's hit list. Labor will also extend the
services of Radio JJJ to Australian regional areas.
Our cultural life and our quality of life in Australia is uniquely determined by our
environment. Whatever separates us, we have this continent in common. We share
responsibility for it.
tn December, Labor delivered its Environment Statement, the centrepiece of which
was a major program to renew and revive our greatest river system, the
Murray-Darling Basin.
In Labor's next term, improving the quality of the urban environment will be a major
priority of the Government. as will identifying areas of habitat important to the
national estate.
Labor will not be joining the liberals in their rush to uranium enrichment and
engaging the nuclear fuel cycle.
This Government has long spoken of the need to address the historic and continuing
injustice done to Australia's indigenous people. 
Over the years a great deal of money has been spent and a great deal of good will
expended, but the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people continue to suffer the
consequences of two centuries of injustice, prejudice and neglect.
Any Government that I lead will be determined to complete the process of
reconciliation Labor has begun, and at last return to the indigenous people of Australia
the dignity, social justice, health, opportunity and living standards to which all
Australians are entitled.
To fail in this is to betray not just the Aboriginal people, but ourselves, all that we
profess to believe, everything Australia stands for.
We are determined not to fail this time.
It has been Labor's consistent theme that our success as a nation depends on our ability
to harness all our resources, human as well material.
It depends on having faith in our institutions and confidence in ourselves and in each
other.
As I have said, we need only look to the last few years to find the reasons why we
should have faith in ourselves. We need only look to the next few new years and the
opportunities ahead to see why we should be confident.
It is perhaps in part because Australians are growing in confidence that more and more
of them are questioning whether it is appropriate for Australia to have as its head of
state the monarch of another country.
Many Australians some surveys suggest a majority believe that we will be better
able to succeed in the world with the unique and unambiguous identity which an
Australian head of state, chosen by the Australian people, could provide.
While it is far from the most pressing matter facing the nation, it is nevertheless
important that we do not let this decade leading to the centenary of the Federation pass
without advancing the debate.
To do this we will set up a broadly based committee of eminent Australians, including
representatives of the States, to develop a discussion paper which considers the options
for a Federal Republic of Australia.
Any options developed by the committee would not seek to change our way of
goverrnent; only to have an Australian, chosen by Australians, as Australia's head of
state. I would like to extend an invitation to the Opposition to participate in the workings of
this committee.
It would be the intention that as a result of this committee's deliberations and the
public discussion that would follow, the Australian people would be in a position to 
decide by referendum later in the decade whether Australia should become a Republic
by the year 2001.
Early in the speech I said that this community was remarkable for being so strong and
so cohesive.
it has changed dramnatically in recent years, and no change has been more dramatic
than the arrival in Banlcstown of people whose culture and experience is so very
different. Bankstown has accommodated the change.
And just like every other community in Australia, Bankstown is accommodating the
economic change the nation is going through.
Bankstown has drawn on its people, it has drawn on its community spirit, it has drawn
on its sense of justice and fairness on those traditions common to all Australians to
make the transformation from one world to another.
We will only be strong, we will only be able to make the necessary change, and the
change will only be worth making, if we keep the bonds between us strong.
In the end, this is the only way we will get where we want to go. It is the only way we
will solve our problems. It is the only way to avoid creating new ones.
To my mind, it is because Australians know these things and for so long now have
practised them that Australia is a great country, and a country with great prospects.
It is because we have the wisdom both to succeed in the world and to live together in
Australia. And in the end I think that is at the heart of our pride, and why we love
Australia. And why we must make sure that the ties that bind us are never broken. 



C 1. 4.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB
CANBERRA 11 MARCH 1993
I thought he might have surprised us.
I thought, seeing that there is an election on Saturday,
he might have come along for a debate.
I thought he might have stopped impersonating American
Presidents, stopped running, and come along to answer some
questions from the people whose democratic purpose is to
ask them.
No such luck.
Dr Hewson has broken one of the traditions of Australian
-poltics:.. we don't have such a lot of home grown
traditions but one of them is that leaders make
themselves accountable to the press in the week before an
election. Dr Hewson has not answered a question of substance since
Christmas. Every time he has been asked a question of substance and
that is about three times he has fallen over.
Dr Hewson has not been able to accommodate anyone who is
asking for facts about his so-called " plan".
. His campaign itself has been a falsehOOd.
S1D 17nitation of Freaent Clinwios campaign disguises
c fact that QEhat rlinton standt for, Hewson despises.
U .* C14miCF ha% Vrn a mask in this campaign.
If W* AX ans have not seen behind it yet, they still
have two days.
Dr Hewson has been unable to provide 4= wAth facts on the
GST. 71 4F 
He has said it will create 2 million jobs. He has said it
consistently. There is not one person in this room who believes that.
I daresay, there is not one economist in Australia who
believes it.
I would venture to say there are a good many people in
this room and a good many economists who believe that it
will create no jobs or, wnrR, it will cost jobs.
I am one of the latter. I am sure I am not the only one
to have heard reports in recent weeks of companies in my
case some of the finance houses of Sydney and Melbournewhich
are planning lay-offs of workers when the GST is
introduced. That is the first great deceit of the Hewson campaign.
They say the GS'r will create jobs.
The GST will not create jobs.
I would also venture to say that there is not one person
in this room, nor I imagine is there one doctor in
Australia, who doesn't know that Dr Hewson is going to rip
the heart out of Medicare and leave it a universal health
care system in name only.
Dr Hewson would move the Australian health system towards
the American system.
The American strategy of publicly subsidising private
health care and insurance has left 35 million Americans
without insurance, and given doctors and private health
insurance companies the ability to unremittingly Jack up
health costs.
Just as they promise to do in Australia: in their own
journal. In the Sydney seat of Lowe 9 out of 10 doctors
promise to increase their fees.
It's your money or your health.
American health care costs are more than 50 per cent
gredftii'tiin-Kust-ral-j 850 per cent greater and a
fraction of the service.
Last year in the United States employer spending on health
care exceeded total after tax profits.
Last year in Australia employers paid nothing and were
that much more Competitive as a result.
In America a huge part of the population lives in fear of
being sick or injured because of the health bills they
would have to pay. In Australia the only thing to fear is the sickness
itself.
There are waiinlis-ts-it is true. In the campaign
speech I announced action to remedy it by contracting out
the treatment of public patients in private _ hospitals.
This is additional to the S70 million we have given the
States to shorten waiting lists.
But if those waiting lists were twice as long they would
not constitute a reason to adopt the American health care
system. That is the second great deceit of this campaign.
The Liberals say they won't destroy Medicare.
The fact is they will.
I am also sure that there isn't a single person in this
room who doesn't know that Dr Hewson's industrial
relations 2pgram will destroy the cooperative ethic on
whc ifER1naustrial relations are based; or that he will
throw people onto individual contracts and destroy thereby
their security, their wages and conditions, and their
dignity. That is the third great deceit.
Dr Hewson's industrial relations policy is not designed to
reduce unemployment but to drive wages down.
I don't believe there is anyone here who doesn't know that
Dr Hewson's plan for Australia is a plan of radical
regression. A plan conceived in the bowels of a computer in the late
1970s, using the Thatcherite software that was all the
rage at Johns Hopkins in those days.
Dr Hewson's so-called " plan" for Australia is an old plan
that has failed wherever it has been tried with
disastrous economic and social consequences.
My great fear is that the damage he could do in three
years, would take us decades to. jepair.
Then there is the one about selling Telecom to an overseas
buyer for S20 billion.
This is the one from the man who talks about national
sovereignty and creating jobs and funding promises.
On each of these counts, the Telecom sale is a fraud.
Does anyone think that Dr Hewson will get $ 20 billion for
Telecom?
7146 
Does anyone seriously think that there will be more jobs
in Telecom if it is sold?
The only way they could get anywhere near S20 billion
would be to sell it overseas and remove all protection for
Australian consumers and workers. It would have to mean
timed local calls. It would certainly mean huge job
losses. Creating jobs in Telecom by selling it overseas is about
as likely as creating jobs in tourism by making it cheaper
to holiday in Bali than it is in Cairns which is what
the GST will do.
So there is another great deceit.
And here is another little one.
On every Fightback pamphlet that has gone out in the last
12 months the Opposition claims that it will abolish seven
taxes. One of them, the coal -export levy, is a standing
joke because it is already abolished.
There is another one there under the heading " customs
duties". The Coalition says it will abnlish cus tom duty.
That means, unequivocally, zero tariffs.
But when it suits them, they say they are not for zero
tariffs not immediately, in some industries, in some
electorates. Both thin~ s cannot be true.
This whole ' plan" of Dr Hewson is a deceit.
He does not have a plan, he has an obsession.
He does not have facts, he has gimmicks.
He has only one fact at his disposal unemployment.
The one big negative of our national life at present.
Unemployment is the great curse of the nineties.
And it is apparent again in today's figures. Essentially,
they are " as you were" figures, which makes the point that
unemployment is going to be immensely difficult to deal
with and it won't be fixed quickly. That's why we need
the full focus of the nation's energies; and why we don't
need those energies dissipated in a divisive scramble for
a piece of the cake.
7148 The figures mean simply that unemployment is too high.
They also show that the unemployment rate may be
flattening out, which is consistent with recent statistics
showing that the economy is picking up.
But this is really beside the point. If unemployment has
in fact peaked, that is no reason for complacency. It is
certainly no comfort for the unemployed.
The central issue is which party is best equipped to deal
with unemployment, and that means which party will succeed
best at getting the economy moving.
It also poses the question which party is best equipped
to help the unemployed directly?
There is no simple answer to unemployment, but there is no
doubt that the best answer in the long-term and the shortterm
is economic growth. and the way to get growth is by
investing and our efforts are aimed precisely at this
point investment in Australian companies.
By contrast, it seems to me beyond doubt that Dr Hewson's
so-called " plan" will not be a remedy but a new disease.
If unemployment is our greatest problem now, how much
worse will it be if we stifle the recovery with a 15 per
cent tax on virtually everything we buy and everything we
use. How much worse will it be if we deal with the problem of
unemployment in an atmosphere of industrial and social
turmoil. How much harder will it be to find solutions, or to find
the concerted national will to solve the problem, if the
rest of the population is divided, insecure and rancorous.
If unemployment is a great problem now, how muc~ h worse
willitZ. P without a universal health care system, or with
an unfair education system.
If unemployment is a tragedy now, how mucrh worse will it
be with S10 billion taken out of the Budget.
How much worse will it be wit~ i social security spending
cut? How much worse with funding for regional areas cut?
How much worse with cuts to State services like State
schools?
How much worse with S800 million cut out of funds for the
unemployed and people left to wait much longer for their
benefits? 
6
If unemployment is the worst fact of our national life at
present, how much worse will it be if Government " gets out
of the way" as Dr Hewson says it should, and people are
left to fend entirely for themselves?
How much worgep will it he if we put inflation back in the
system? How much worge will it he if we add a tax burden and an
accountancy burden and a time burden to the small
businesses which we know are going to drive growth and
create jobs?
Since the campaign started, a raft of positive indicators
have appeared illustrating our economic progress.
Tuesday's figures on job vacancies and retail sales were
the most encouraging since 1990. Export figures have been
positive.% Today this very day if you distil the politics out of
this morning's press you will find unequivocally positive
economic news. There's a story about our continuing
export surge, another about our growing manufacturing
sector, another about an Australian company landing a Sl
billion contract in Laos. There is much more but John
Hewson of course won't tell you. For twelve months
wherever there has been hope, Dr Hewson has counselled
despair. That's why today I have released a document accompanying
this speech which describes some of the good things which
are happening in Australia, and which Dr Hewson refuses to
talk about.
There is no . quesrion that the direction we are going is
the right one. We are going too slowly to lower the
unemployment figure, but that is not a reason for changing
course. It's a reason for accelerating progress where we can and
we have done this by lowering company tax rates, by
introducing an investment allowance of 20 per cent and by
cultivating a.. nebankint _ culjture.
Every sensible thing that can be done to speed the pace of
recovery and long-term reform is being done, or is
proposed for a second Keating Government.
And the things we do are all directed at the goal of
creating employment and helping the unemployed through
with training and other forms of assistance.
Some of you will have seen the statistics released this
week on the success of labour market programs. They are
working. They are helping thousands and thousands of
Australians. 7
So why wreck the recovery? Why wreck the safety net, the
humane and constructive government interventions? Why
wreck the social fabric of Australia?
my message for those people who are presently wondering
whether to desert the Labor Government is think very
carefully. Think about what you would lose.
In an election the choice is not between one party and a
vacuum, it's a choice between two parties.
Ask yourself whether by voting for policies which are
proven failures elsewhere in the world, you won't be
punishing Australia and the next generation of
Australians. Ask yourself whether the absolute hollowness, the absolute
fraudulence of Dr Hewson's campaign is not an indication
that a vote for Dr Hewson is a leap in the dark.
To the people of Australia, between now and Saturday, I
would say, every time you hear Dr Hewson say he has a
plan, ask yourself do I understand. Has he explained it
to me. And if the answer is no or maybe don't vote for
him. In this forum this week, Dr Hewson had a chance to explain
his so-called " plan" a chance to explain how it would
create a single job, how it would not destroy the social
fabric of Australia, how it differs from the plans of
Thatcher, Reagan, Douglas and Mulroney he had a chance
to explain it in this forum and he refused. He chose to
play soccer and shout slogans instead.
Let me give the oldest advice in the world to the people
who are contemplating the big jump. Don't do it. For
your own sake don't do it. For Australia's sake don't do
it. For your kid's sake don't do it.
I have been to this Press Club 18 times in the last
decade. I've been four times in the past year. I don't
know how many press conferences I have given in the last
twelve months, or how many doorstops that my staff said I
let go on too long.
I don't believe it can be said that I've ever run away
from scrutiny, or from the opportunity to explain our
policies, or failed to face up to the ramifications of
those policies.
As Treasurer and then Prime Minister, I have taken full
responsibility for the economic and social affairs of
Australia. And all the responsibility that is mine, I
will shoulder. All the damage that the recession has
done, I will attempt to repair. Every sensible thing that
can be done, will be done. Much of it is already being
done and I want the chance to build on this.
7150 
AS I said in the campaign launch, fifteen years ago I
began to imagine an Australia which not only exported
minerals and farm products, but Sophisticated
manufactures. The thought occurred to me and a few other colleagues that
Australia could be what no one had really ever imagined it
could be that is. a country integrated with the world
( you've heard it before I know), focussed on the region,
competitive, creative, sophisticated secure.
And as every one of you know this is happening. Any one
who was old enough and compos mantis in the 1970s will
know what a huge change there has been.
You've heard the figures exporting nearly one-quarter of
our total product, exporting 70 per cent of it to Asia,
exporting quantities of elaborately transformed
manufactures we never dreamed we could make.
Some of you will have seen the McKinsey report on the new
breed of Australian company which is emerging. Some of
you will have noticed that in the last two months, a
S2 billion contract has been signed by BHP with the
Vietnamese Government, and yesterday a $ 1 billion
hydro-electric project in Laos one of the largest
construction projects yet in Indo-China.
These-things are happening as a result of a conscious
decision by the Australian people to change. These things
are happening because we intended them to hKappen.
The new Australia the Australia of the nineties will
be different from the Australia of any other era. And the
essential difference will be this: the Australia of the
nineties will be one entirely conceived by Australians and
brought into being by Australians and wearing the stamp
Aius~ tralija on everything it does.
Now I say that is at stake on Saturday. Our economic
future is at stake, and so is the quality of our society
the Australian stamp of our society.
So much is at risk. A society where chil~ d-Car -e is,
finally, a right. A society which believes women should
get equal pay and be able to participate fully in all
areas of work and life. A society which cherishes those
who spend part of their lives caring for children or sick
people. Those of you who know me will know what I believe.
Whatever my faults, I don't think hiding my beliefs is one
of them.
Very simply I believe in creating a high wage, high skill
and high productivity ' Australia. John Hewson believes in
a low wage, low productivity Australia. John Howson believes in dismantling the public sector he
hates the., public sector. I, believe in making the public
sector, as it is in every successful country, more
efficient, more people-oriented.
John Howson believes in fear in the workplace. I believe
in cooperation and creativity in the workplace.
John Howson believes in private health insurance. I
believe in sharing our personal health care risks through
a national public and private system working in
cooperation. John Hewson believes in zero tariffs as an end in itself.
I believe in using tariff reform as a fair benchmark to
improve our industry with long term plans and safeguards.
John Howson believes in American razzamatazz and hoopla
and carefully staged passion plays and bunfights, and
American advisers, and the constant reiteration of poll
driven phrases.
I don't believe in it, myself. I think it's an assault on
good democratic Australian traditions. I think it's
rubbish. I think one should face the music scratchy,
discordant, unpleasant music though it might be. I think
you have to say what you believe and be prepared to defend
it in detail.
This way at least, when people vote on Saturday they will
know what they will get with Paul Keating. To judge him
by his campaign, the same cannot be said of John Hewson.
Finally, let me say this if people are not convinced by
Dr Howson's intention to impose a GST, to make Medicare a
universal health system in name only, to destroy the basic
rights of workers and the cooperative ethic of the
Australian workplace, to turn our colleges and
universities into businesses, to set back our environment
programs a generation or more if they're not convinced
that Dr Hewson's policies represent a threat to our way of
life and our values, perhaps it will help to think of it
in philosophical terms.
Dr Howson's philosophy is based on the idea of selfinterest
and survival of the fittest. Remember what
Margaret Thatcher said: there is no such thing as
society, only individuals making their way. This is Dr
Hewson' s philosophy.
He wants to impose this idea on Australia. That's what he
means by breaking the mould.
What he doesn't like about Australia is the humanitarian,
community ethos the one that is there in Australia from
the beginning of our European history until now. Think
about it. The heroes of Australia have always been and
remain the champions of the underdog. 
Now this may not fit well with the economics that Dr
Hewson believes in, but it fits well with Australia. It
is what we are. It has sprung from our history. It is
what unites us it is the principal bond between us.
I hope I never see the day when our traditions are
subverted by the doctrine of unmitigated self-interest.
That is Dr Hewson's doctrine if I fought him on nothing
else, as an Australian, I would fight him on this.
So if you're not persuaded that ripping up the . social wage
and introducing a giant flat tax will irrevocably-dam8
the fabric and the way of life of Australia, be persuaded
by this.
Be persuaded by the philosophical change, the change in
the ethic be persuaded by all those statements Dr Hewson
has made in the last couple of years, the most telling of
which was that one in the Budget reply when he said, we
must not reach back for people because they will drag us
down. This goes to the heart of it. Ultimately this is the
nature of the risk. John Hewson has been projecting a
more temperate image in recent weeks of course but
perhaps the best reminder of John Hewson's old Fightback 1
persona came in January, in a speech byAshley_
Goldsworthy, the Liberal Party Federal President.
Goldsworthy said Australia needed a jolt. " Life has to
become tougher", he said " with less security and greater
uncertainty". Be warned:-this is the brave new world of Dr Hewson. Let
dog eat dog. Let the lucky and the rich prosper and the
rest gather the crumbs that fall. Dr Hewson is an
unashamed theorist of trickle down economics. If he is
allowed to become a practitioner of this theory, he will
turn Australia on its head.
Call it scaremongering if you like. I do fear for
Australia. I fear for the people. I fear for all those
things which bind us together, and in which I believe
above all other things.
But it's not scaremongering. It's factmongering.
Exposing the facts which Dr Hewson won't reveal.
I am absolutely sure that Dr Hewson will be bad for
Australia. His agenda is radical, disruptive,
destructive. I sincerely hope and believe that
Australians will recognise that they cannot take the risk. NE S L a AS
11 March 1993
COALITION WILL RUIN GAS INDUSTRY
Claims today by Tim Fischer about the future of gas in the Nowra region are a
cheap diversion from the Coalition's real agenda of ruiningthe gas industry
The Federal Minister for Resources, Alan Griffiths, stonglv refuted claims by
Mr Fischer that Labor would not build the gas p, eine extension to Nowra.
" Labor has committed $ 15 million to extende Moomba-Sydney pipeline to
Nowra, to ensure gas is supplied as cheaq as possible to the region, especially
the crucial APPM paper recycling plan ocated in Nowra," Mr Griffiths said.
" We stand by this commitment. T people of Nowra can be assured that the
pipeline extension will be deli ed."
The Coalition plans to sell o the pipeline, regardless of the consequences.
Mr Fischer is today ipdulging in pathetic politics to disguise the fact that the
pipeline extension to Nowra will not be built under the Coalition the pipeline
will simply be soldoff to meet the Coalition's unrealisable promises.
" Only last week, Mr Fischer spoke at the Australian LP gas conference, where
the Coalitio's GST policies were condemned as representing an end to the auto
LP gas industry.
" Furtermore, Mr Fischer knows full well that the Coalition's GST policies will
cripple attempts by the gas industry to extend gas pipelines which supply gas
to'more Australians," the Minister said.
/ Labor was the force behind the Moomba-Sydney pipeline, which now supplies
gas to Sydney and the many country centres Mr Fischer claims to represent,
including Wagga, Orange, Cowra and Young. Under Labor the Pipeline is
being extended to Griffith, Leeton and Narrandera.
Only Labor has a true commitment to develop Australian gas resources to meet
Australian energy needs.
Further information: Kristen Barry ( 06) 2777480
" 7 1. s A 



TEL: S P06---
WELL this is the * weetebt victory of All
-this is thes~ weret. This is a victory for
the true believers, the people who in
difficult times. have ke'pt the faith and to
the Austr-4lian people going throucih hard
time. It makebs tileir Ac-t Of faith All that
much greater.
It will be a long time before an
Opposition party' tries to divide this
Country again. 11 w~ ill be is lont time beforc
somebodyv tries~ to put one 970UP Of
Australians over here and another group
over there.
The public of Atustralia are tooo decent
and they awe too consacientious and the.%
are too interested in their country to wear
those sorts of things.
This I think has been very much a
victory of Australian values, because It
was Australian values on the line and the
Liberiii Party wanted to change Austria
from the coup try I is become, a coaperatie,
decent. nice place to live where
people have regard for ovie another.
Anid could I just say that this has been a
hard campaign and I can assure every
member of the public out there, when
they think we don't know In the political
system how tough it is. I can assure you I
can tell you how tough It was in those last
few weeks.
But can I say to you that I wanted to win
iigain, to be there in the 19905 to see
Australia prosper as it will.
The thing is. I said to the Australian
people ~ we've tu-nea the corner'. Can I say
now, after the election, let me repeat it:
we have turned the corner. The growth is
coming through. We will see ourselves as
a sophisticated trading country in Asia
and we've got to do It in a way where
everybody's got a part in it, where
everyone's In It.
There's always cause for concern but
never pessimism and Australia, wherein
for the first time in our history, located in
the region o( the fastest growth in the
world, and we've been set up now, we are
set up now as~ we've never been set up
before to be in It, to exploit. It, to be part of
IIt offers tremendous opportunities for
Autralans and now we have to do it. and
we havi. to do it comspas. sionately.
I give an assurance to the people that
this victory won't go to the heads of the Victory from
true believers
Government of the Labur Party. Well
take~ it seriously, we'll Wike it thankfully,
and well do a great deal with it.
The people of Austraia, have t" en us
on trurt. and we'll return that trust and
we'll care about those people out there,
particularly the unemployed we want to
get them back to work.
If we can't get them back to work
Immredilately. sune as hell we are going
to took after them. We are not going to
leave them in the lurch. We are not going
to leave them In the lurch and we are
going put our hand out and we are going
to pull them up behind u&amp;.
And we are going to move along, this
country is going to move along together.
We have such enormous opportunity. This
world recession is now starting to
dissipate, we've made the break out of It,
This is the text of the victory
speech by the Prime Minister,
Mr Keoting
America's starting to turn, it won't be that
long before the Japanese economy 5tarts
to turn, and hopefully well be away and
running In the 90s in a low inflationary
period of prosperity.
I can assure you the Government will
now be redoubling its efforts to be as good
a government iia you hope and expect we
can be. To be as Conscientious with this
mandate as we possibly Can be. to give It
our every ef fort our every shot, to see
that we recover quickly and we get going
and we put t'his recessionary period
behind us and we Set this country Of
opportunity off and running.
But keeping the opporteuity for
everybody keeping those preat
keeping those great..,. keeping those
great nostrumb of access and equity.
Getting people into the game. The
poliies~ of inclusion. The policies of One Nation. And that's what it,-g ot to be
about. So can I say Again. this is a tremendous
victory. It's a tremendous victory for all
those who have got imagination and faith.
The people who believe in things. who are
not going to let orood beliefs be put aside
for e. sentially miserable ideas to divide
the place up.
I mean. I think the Australian people
have always had such remarkable sense to
spot the value and to cut their way
through It.
Now part of this victory is our part of
it is them spotting what they think were
the dangers In the Liberal Party's policies,
What I hope in that the next election the
victory is 100 per cent due to the good
governiment of Labor.
Now. I'd like to start thanking tiome
people and the first person I'd like to start
with is my wife, Aurtita, who has helped
me right through the campaign. Thank
yout. Arid can I also say, can I give an extras
special note of thanks to the women of
Australia. who voted for us believing in
the policies of this Government.
I want to pay a paticular thanks also to
good on you mate I want to pay at
particular thanks to the architects of this
victory, my personal staff. Don Russell,
Mark Ryab. Don Watson. my press
sertaries and the rest.
And most partcularly to those people In
the Labor Party w-ho've never lost faith,
never iost heart. and are there at the
polling booths to work and to fight for
good things. Thank you. The people who
never give up but always keep on believing
and are always there no matter how heavy
the travails may be. to You I * Ay thank you
very, very much Indeed.
Thank You again and thank you for
believing. But could I most particularly, " nd again
finally, thank the Austrlan people
without whose faith and decency and
commitment to what's fair and what's
reasonable and what is decent in this
coUntr, without thoue conscientious
judgments this victory could not have
been consummated and put together.
Thank YOu.
And I concludle on this. note, to say we
thank you. we appreciate it. we won't let
you down. Thank you.
TE1L6: . Jul. 93 10: 45 No. 001 P. 01 



TEL: 7. Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 01/ 05 i
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRINIE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, ImP
OPENING OF MICHAEL LAVARCH'S CAMPAIGN OFFICE, STRATHPINE
QUEENSLAND, 7 APRIL 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you for that very gcnerous round of applause, and could I thank the Premier,
Wayne Goss, for that generous introduction, and say how pleased I am to be here with
Michael and Linda. My Parliamentary Colleagues, Party President and other members
who are supportive of the Queensland Labor Party, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is always interesting after an election to see what thc-published plls say, because they
are more likely to get it right after the event than before the event' pairticularly with exit
polls and the rest. What the last week or two has shown is that Government support has
risen and Coalition support has fallen remarkcdly. I think we are entitled to say, or to
conclude from that, the public have thought about the election in the three weeks or so
since, and have decided that they have done the right thing. They thought their decision
was right. These were not just confluences of circumstances which lead them to a
particular decision, that upon more mature reflection they might like to reconsider. I think
if the polls give us any indication, they arc only into indications and not levels, the levels
invariably are not that accurate. But as indications, it is an indication that the public had
thought that it was right. What we did was right. And that I think is very good for the
country, very good for the Government, because I think that for that sense of appraisal to
have taken place is important.
And of course they don't go against the background of a Coalition Party which has
literally dropped its bundle. We have seen in the weeks since the election, the Coalition
now without a policy, without any idea of'what basis of appeal they believe they should
have for Australia, let alone for themselves. So they have a candidate fielded in this
election for the electorate of Dickson who is a candidate campaigning on a policy that
doesn't exist, and the only policy tliat exists of course, as Wayne indicated in his speech,
one borrowed from Thatcher in the late 1970s, what was basically an agenda policy of the
Treasuries of the Western World in the 1970s the British Treasury, the Australian
Treasury and which where having the world moved on the Coalition picked it up and
ran mightily with it. 
TEL
1 2
But again, as Wayne intimated, their policies not only lack breadth and depth, but it
lacked any sense of charity. I[ think the public thought to themselves, there has got to be
more than one's nose to the grindstone, there's got to be more than this concept of no gain
without pain, there had to be something better, something broader, something deeper, a
greater sense of community than that which wc have been offered by the Coalition, and
one which is going to seriously disadvantage many Australians, particularly working
Australians. So it is very, in a sense, interesting that in one of thc fastest Vrowing ports of Australia we
are now going to have another contest, another election. An election for the seat of
Dickson, an election which has arisen in quite extraordinary circumistances and where we
are also proposing another quite novel feature of thc clection, and that is the Labor
Government of the Commonwealth is saying to the people of Dickson should you
consider our candidate, and consider him worthy to be elcted as Member for Dickson, we
will make him a member of the Cabinet of the Commonwealth.
This says a number of things. The first thing it says is that we would not have presumed
to have sworn Michael Lavarch as Attorney General, but rather made clear we would
nominate him upon the people's choiZac'flist poinf7 Second point is that he is coming as a
member of Parliament from the State of Queensland and as a very young man to a senior
ministerial job. The first law officer of the Commonwealth at the age of 31. Those two
points are very important. The third is, that he comes representing a community which is
growing very strongly, where there is a demand for services, whcre hc is perhaps as
representative as anyone might wish to be from one of the growing areas of Australia, and
saying we put a premium on that sort of an area in this country being represented in the
cabinet of the government of Australia. Because our Govenment is about governing
broadly and governiing for people who are not advantaged by wealth, and not advantaged
by great circumnstance and who often live with the vagaries and difficulties of a rapidly
growing suburb or region. Michael talked about the services which this area needs and
those which chc Commonwealth has proposed, and has introduced over time, but whcre in
an area growing twicc as fast as this, in a State which is the fastest growing State of
Australia, Queensland, that so typically chat we have chosen such a person to represent us.
I think on those three counts, I hope thc people of Dickson cake the view that they would
choose wisely in choosing Michael Lavarch, someone who has already served Queensland
in the seat of Fisher, who has served in local Govcrniment who understands the
community, is of the community, is from the community and will represent the
community. I don't think any party can offer much more than that to any constituency, to
any electorate, and I think that we are offering. We are offerig as well the opportunity
for the people of Dickson to bc part of the generational change in the Government of the
Commonwealth. TEL.: Rpr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 02/ 05 
TEL: . Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 03/ 0
3
This is an important thing. Governments, particularly governments that have had ten
years In office, need that change, they need that horse power, that charge, the energy
which comes from fresh ideas and fresh faces. Yesterday we had our first Cabinet meeting
of the newly sworn Cabinet and just the change in the composition and the relative age of
the members. I said to Brian Howe who was sitting beside mc, we are now a couple of
oldies in here. It was true I think, and the conversation had some zest. People had read
the brief and they wanted to put their view, and felt all of that electricity and charge that
one felt in the flush of the Government's clcction in 1983 through thc 1980s. Secing it
thcrc again really is very, very encouraging indeed.
That is why I think that Michael Lavarch's elect ion in Dickson can just accelerate that
process by seeing a Queenslander in one of the real jobs, the strong portfolio of the
Commonwealth, the Attorney-Generalship of this country.
We say that we would usc our mandate well, we will use it conscientiously. And
everything we have done since thc election should demonstrate to the public that that is
so. That nothing will be taken for granted, that the public have taken us on trust and it is
trust that we will return to them, and that we will use both the opportunities and the time
to the best of our advantage and theirs.
All of that augurs well for Australia, and I might it augurs well for Queensland. Because
always I get a charge from the throb of Queensland, you get that throb about the place
because it is growing, it is expanding, it is moving, there is optimism here. I just spent a
week in North Queensland, and I was making the point to the Premier on the way across
that coming through this electorate, the growing area, it's got all the buzz of a place on the
move as one gets right throughout Queensland. We do have great opportunities in
Australia and one of the places of opportunities is the State of Queensland, and it is
governed by a governmcnt which is going to be doing the same things and thinking the
samec way as the Commonwcalth Government so that we advance together, we use the
huge power of the Commonwealth with the co-operation of Wayne and his Government
in ways that I think Premicis like Joh Bjclkc-Pctcrscn and others just let opportunities slip
by, by naked, narrow, politicising of State and Commonwealth dichotomics, having
attacks upon the Commonwealth government, who ever it might be, which was not really
productive for the people of Queensland.
That has all changed. Wc have got a very co-opcrative relationship and one where the
Commonwealth today is doing things which formerly was the preserve of the States and
where the States were doing things for the Commnonwealth in areas which were only done
by us. I think the changes we made at thc Commonwealth Council of Australian
Governments, where we can sit down and discuss non-financial matters in things like
education, in railwvays, in coutis, in the micro-economy), in packaging, in standards and all
these other things, are things where co-operativc Fceralisni does mean something in the
hands of good pcoplc and pcopic who want to do things. 
TEL: 7. Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 04/ 05
4
So I am very encouraged, naturally I suppose, by the events of the last month, but I'm
particularly encouraged by the circumstances we find ourselves in with thc Government
here In Queensland and in Australia generally.
Let me say a few special words for our friends in the Opposition. don't want to leave
them out. TeNtoaPnyof course, laid a dead hand on Australia for most of the
post-War years. If there is one reason why Australia has got structural problems today it
is because of the hayseeds of thc National Party. Even those rare well springs of
inspiration that might have comne from Libcral Party ministers in Coalition governments
were extinguished by the dead hand of the National Party. Whose view has always been,
and it has been particularly true in education. Michael, Wayne, Linda and I were just at a
Statc Highi School and wvc were talking about the opportunities for kids and the
importance of higher education, tertiary and vocational educat ion. The National Party
were not big on education, they wanted people educated no further than primary school
and then happily voting for the National Party. That was thcir model, the model they
work In. Holding up a TAFE or a univcrsity to the National Party is like some institution
they moved back from. They just don't like what it stands for.
Thc National Party have bccn a force in Queensland. They filled a void, a political void
not a community void, and now their National Party in coalition with the Liberal Party
just don't know what they stand for. They have got no idca what they stand for, they have
not developed any model of Australian society, they don't know where thcy want to see
the place, they don't know how they want to sce it, they are still fighting reas guard actions
on cverything that you Imagine and adopting the most right wing ideology where ever it is
possible. John Hcwson said that if lie was forced to dump the GS1he would resign. Well he was
forced to dump the GST by his party and he is still there. So that means he never meant it
or the GST was just a device. Whatever it means, it means the L. iberal Party is in a state of
ideological and policy chaos.
And we say to the public of Qucensland in the electorate of Dickson don't elect a party
that docsn't know what it wants to do for you. Don't elect a party that not only doesn't
know what it wants to do for you, but of course is not going to be in office.
So this is a time when the conservative forces in this country have got to re-think a
position for Australia beyond thc morbid ideological positions thcy have thought in the
past. Let's hope that they understand that Australia is a country with great opportunities,
that it is a country that will always be best when people are looking up, ilot looking down,
that we can havc progress without pain, we can if we give people the opportunity and put
faith in them, thcy can do good things, and close as we are in the Asia-Pacific where such
opportunities abound and where we have already made inexplicable links, that our future
is as a country which is very proud of its identity and understands what it is and goes to
the world making that clear. 
TEL: 7. Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 05/ 05
I don't know whether you noticed two days ago in the international press one central
newspaper in China making this very point about Australia saying they are shaking off the
colonial yoke, in all ways Australia is now ready to join the region, we welcome them.
IThis is the point they don't understand. And there they all were the Nats, over at the
school waving their banners half an hour ago, and most of the slogans are all the remnant
issues that thcy will fight to the death as the country moves on.
I say this to the people of Dickson, let's move on.
Leave them behind, they have nothing to offer. Maybe at some point in the future they
will, it is going to be a long way off. The public have made a wise decision in re-electing
the Government, and as a result the Government has taken their mandatc conscientiously
and given them a young, vibrant Cabinct in return and comnmitment to the policies we
espouse and the philosophy of Australian life we espoused in the election campaign.
So I[ can only enjoin them to re-elect Michael LUvarch to the House of Representatives,
and on so doing it would be my great pleasure then to recommend him to the Governor
General as Attorney-General to the Commonwealth so that one of the fastest developing
areas of Brisbane, of Queensland will be represented right in the key forum of the National
Government the Cabinet -and where the State of Qucensland in gencral will find his
representation being enhanced by that very high office.
So to all of you who havc fought the last election and found that you were was scratched
just before the racc, my commiserations, but let's say it was the preparation for a bigger
event, another clection, pcrhaps a more meaningful endorsement of the Labor Party and its
young, talented candidate in the electorate of Dickson.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
TO THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS LUNCHEON, MELBOURNE
WEDNESDAY 21 APRIL 1993
Ladies and Gentlemen
The change in our circumstances over the last decade, even
over the last three years, has been profound so profound
it is likely that we have yet to completely absorb its
meaning. We remain beset by all sorts of problems yet the promise is
undeniable. We have never had such opportunities and in
the last decade we have put ourselves in a position where we
have every reason to believe that we can grasp them.
For all the failures -of the last decade we were bold enough
and conscientious enough to do those things which have given
ourselves a chance in the world.
For all that remains to be done the vision of Australia as a
successful trading nation integrated with the world and the
region is now taking shape.
For all the obstacles we still have to overcome, it is
possible that we are now within reach of a new era of
Australian prosperity of self-sustaining growth, of
saving, invest ment, rising productivity, rising incomes,
rising saving, and more growth.
We have eliminated inflation as a problem in the Australian
economy and we have a government, a trade union movement,
a community committed to preventing it ever coming back.
We have upgraded the skills of the workforce, and we have
put into' place plans to continue upgrading it. 
2
We have a much more competitive regulatory environment -and
we will do more.
We have cut industrial disputes to less than half their
level ten years ago, and workplace bargains now cover one
third of employees under federal awards.
Above all, we have begun to internationalise the economy and
change the pattern of production.
We have set ourselves on an irreversible path of winding
down the tariff protection which for so long fettered the
Australian economy. A practical, sensible and measured
program. We have shifted the trade deficit from over 3 per cent of
GDP 10 years ago, to a small surplus in the last financial
year. We have increased exports as a share of GDP from 13 per cent
to over 20 per cent.
The significance of the structura-lchanoe is underlined by
the fact that manufacturing exports are today consistently
equal to or greater than rural exports. Service exports are
now one fifth of our total exports.
We are exporting a higher and higher proportion of product
to the booming markets of East Asia. A higher and higher
proportion of it consists of manufactures. And thatexported
product is more and more coming from relatively
small, highly adaptable firms which depend upon exports for
their survival and growth.
These are big changes substantial, real, and irreversible
changes. There were also shortcomings in the eighties: they left us
with a million people unemployed.
In the course of the election campaign and on the night that
the votes were counted, I said that reducing unemployment
would be the first priority of a second Keating government.
It will be.
Unemployment is principally a result of the recession.
It is an undeniable fact that unemployment is not going to
fall dramatically in the next few years, and equally 
3
undeniable is the fact that longerm unemployment will
increase.
There are now more than 300,000 people who have been
unemployed for 12 months or more. As unemployment falls
over the next few years the number of long-term unemployed
will increase as employers often prefer to take up new
entrants to the labour market or those with only short
periods of unemployment.
But I can tell you now we will not be accepting long-term
unemployment as an insoluble problem, or as an inevitable
fact of life in the new economic order.
Over the past two years, we have greatly increased
assistance for the long-term unemployed and improved the
effectiveness of our labour market programs.
In my speech on election night, I renewed the Government's
commitment to helping those who are unemployed. In
particular, we are determined to reduce long-term
unemployment and assist people who are in this position. If
new policies and practices have to be developed we will
develop them.
The Employment, Education and Training Minister, Kim Beazley
is now examining the full range of programs for the longterm
unemployed to see where improvements can be made.
One thing I think we should now be asking ourselves if the
practice of wholesale retrenchment is really a synonym for
efficiency. We should ask if the human consequences and the social
consequences are not too great. If the economic burden on
the nation does not outweigh the benefits to productivity.
If the uncertainty and resentment retrenchments create does
not in fact reuc efficiency. And if the initial
improvement to the bottom line of balance sheets is not in
many cases more than offset by the resulting inability of
firms to gear up to meet opportunities as demand expands.
I think governments and business alike should be asking
these questions.
As I said during the election campaign: we got a lot right
in the eighties, but we also got a few things wrong. 
4
It is not right that the unemployed should alone pay for
these mistakes; any more than it is right that governments
should withdraw from the consequences of their actions.
The fact is we cannot separate economic ends from social
ones. It is expected of governments that they should seize
national opportunities, such as those which now present
themselves. They should seize them because the national
interest is at stake, the well being of the nation and the
people. The same is true of our social responsibilities, especially
our responsibilities to the unemployed.
I take the March 13 result as a mandate for an Australian
social democratic agenda for strong economic policy
married to programs which produce not just social justice
but social cohesion and strength.
In no way should that put the Government and business at
odds. The success of economic policy depends on the success
of business. The opportunities will have to be seized by
business. The national interest depends on business and
to a very considerable extent I mean small and medium sized
business. I am saying that we have mutual interests and mutual
responsibilities in the economy and society. I am saying
that we should work together for economic an oca ends. I
am saying that our vision should be broad, inclusive,
nationa. We should share it.
The prospect of a new era of Australian prosperity derives
from our having the preconditions of low inflation and a
restructured economy: yet we feel it is also within reach
because there is a new sense of national energy and national
purpose.
Business leaders should not be surprised that tangible
benefits spring from such intangible things as shared goals,
energy and purpose they have their parallels in every
decent management text book.
Ladies and gentlemen, the eighties were a time of real
achievement, but they were also a time of slow productivity
growth, slow income growth, and of national saving
inadequate to the investment task we faced.
The trick in the coming decade will be to keep all our gains
on inflation, on competitiveness, and on exports. 
To keep all these, and at the same time to increase our
investment so that productivity rises faster, and incomes
rise faster, and generate the savings out of which further
investment and further growth is sustained.
It can be done.
There Ja a new confidence abroad.
Already we can see that the expansion currently underway is
quality expansion.
Growth has now been posted for five consecutive quarters.
The current growth rate of 2. 5 per cent is slower than we
need to make real inroads into the numbers of unemployed,
but we need to bear in mind the context of a slow world
economy, where two of the three major world economies are
still in recession.
More importantly the recovery that we have seen over the
past five quarters displays precisely those characteristics
that are required if Australia is to achieve higher and
sustainable growth throughout the 1990s.
Our current inflation rate of 0.3 per cent is the lowest in
the industrialised world.
Net profits in the December quarter 1992 were 75 per cent
above the levels of a year ago.
Productivity in the market sector has grown by 2 per cent
over each of the past two years.
And by tying wages growth increasingly to productivity, unit
labour costs will remain competitive. We have already seen
real unit labour costs fall 0.5 per cent over the last year.
In the last three years only one country out of 23 surveyed
by the OECD saw its trade competitiveness improve more than
Australia's. The performance of our manufactured exports provides an idea
of how effective these trends can be. While world economic
growth has been slowing, Australia's manufactured exports
have continued to grow. In the current financial year, they
are nearly 20 per cent higher than in the corresponding
period for the previous financial year.
The characteristics of our growth provide encouraging signs
for the future. When the world recovery begins in earnest, 
Australian firms, operating in a low-inflationary, highproductivity,
competitive environment, will be well placed
to reap the benefits and create in Australia growth of a
kind which will mean long-term employment opportunities.
Success in the coming decade certainly depends on things we
must do in Canberra.
It depends crucially on Australian workers, who must
continue to adapt and change and win for themselves the
increasing incomes that are within their grasp. Under the
workplace bargaining system we have adopted and which we
will entrench this year, employees themselves are for the
first time in our history able to create the circumstances
of their own prosperity.
But its up to business leaders to now seize the
opportunities to take advantage of the new structure for
business which is now being laid down.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Investment is the key to economic growth.
The continuing opening of Australian industry to
international competition ensures that firms can no longer
afford to ignore advances in technical capabilities and the
competitive advantages associated with them.
We need to invest not just for replacement purposes, but
also for strategic purposes.
This requires our investing in our people, in ideas and in
physical capital.
It starts with a highly skilled and responsive workforce.
This has been the foundation for our successes in developing
new export markets, and it will continue to be.
The demand for a highly skilled workforce provides enormous
challenges for our entire education system, challenges that
are being met: first through our reforms to secondary and
university education, now through a major transformation in
vocational training.
Australia's record of investment in ideas has been mediocre,
but we have begun to develop an increasingly innovative
culture. 
7
The Government has provided direct grants and assistance
through the taxation system, especially the 150 per cent tax
concession, to encourage greater business contribution to
research and development. Direct assistance is also
provided to fund cooperative research centres to facilitate
greater collaboration between universities, research
institutions and industry.
The most pressing need today is to lift investment in
physical capital.
Many businesses and banks scaled back their operations as
they sought to strengthen balance sheets after the excesses
of the late 1980s. While addressing severe debt problems
was often necessary, the resultant fall in investment
spending cannot continue.
Business fixed investment increased solidly in the December
quarter, and I hope this is the start of a strong recovery
on investment.
The conditions are there for this to materialise low
inflation, good profits, industrial peace.
Moreover, we now have an extremely competitive tax regime
with the corporate tax rate at 33 per cent, accelerated
depreciation and incentives to invest through the
development allowance and the additional investment
allowance announced in " Investing in the Nation".
In addition, we are encouraging banks to get out there and
lend for worthwhile projects based on a close knowledge of
the firm's operations. The banks assure us they starting to
respond. As the recovery strengthens, we need as a nation to finance
expanding investment through domestic saving.
Saving is not a constraint on our economic recovery over the
next year or so.
And, indeed the recovery itself will lift national saving.
But increased national saving is a central goal for policy
in the 1990s.
That is why we introduced the superannuation guarantee
charge, and why we will increase its rate over the decade.
It is also why we are committed to bringing the deficit down
to 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97. 
You can be assured we will do it but you can also be
assured that we will not ignore other priorities as we do
SO.
We will also continue our program of micro economic reform.
We will build more competitive industries by strengthening
competition. The National Competition Policy Inquiry led by Professor
Hilmer will report shortly.
An immediate priority will be to improve the performance of
our trading enterprises. The reform of management
structures, pricing regimes and opening up these markets to
competition can achieve important gains for competitiveness.
The cooperation of the States is vital and we have
established processes through the Council of Australian
Governments to develop national approaches to reform. The
States have a lot at stake not only are they accountable
for the performance of their GBEs there is also scope for
reform to contribute towards the repair of their budgets.
one feature of the recession that has been of considerable
concern has been its impact on different regions. It is
inevitable that differences between regions will develop
from time to time, but the severity of this downturn in
parts of the country demands specific action by Government.
In Alan Griffiths, we now have a senior Minister in Cabinet
charged with regional development. As a result, the
regional dimension of all Government policies will come
under constant focus.
Existing programs will be reviewed, including to ensure
harmonisation with State programs.
More generally, any constraints on development in the
regions will be assessed with an aim of facilitating new
investment. There has been some speculation that this Government may
adopt a more interventionist approach to industry.
Let me say this.
Labor has always believed that Government has a pivotal part
to play in developing Australian industry, one where
sensible intervention is called for. 
Hiding behind the tariff wall was not sensible.
Handouts to favoured industries with little future in a
competitive world economy were not sensible.
Rather, we will continue to encourage our industries to
respond to competitive forces.
We will continue to foster responsive workplaces.
We will continue to provide support where the market alone
does not perform adequately, in areas such as research and
development, in export finance, in services to small
business. We will continue to encourage investment through the tax
system, and to foster closer relations between banks and
business. We will continue to improve the nation's infrastructure and
to press for the efficient provision of services like
transport and power.
All this is the basis for Labor's industry policy..
Where fundamental change is needed, we will provide
adjustment assistance so that our industries and businesses
can adapt to new challenges, just as we have in the rural
sector and TCF industries.
Where bringing major players together helps industries at
large to seize opportunities we will do so, just as we have
in telecommunications and processed food.
Of course we do not face a level playing field in the world
economy. But the answer is not to prop up industries that can only
survive in a protected domestic market.
Rather, the answer is to use dexterity and awareness to
ensure that Australian industry can compete effectively in
the world.
And, as our export performance demonstrates, this strategy
works. Ladies and Gentlemen, 
All these are important issues for the government, but there
is no economic reform more central than to complete the
construction of a system of industrial relations which will
enhance productivity, protect the weak, and distribute
fairly the rewards of cooperation in the workplace.
We have come a long way in a short time with industrial
relations. Since 1983 we have more than halved the days lost through
strike action.
We have dramatically cut real unit labour costs while
restoring the profit share.
Australia's union movement is committed to wage increases
consistent with maintaining our international
competitiveness. And we now have workplace or enterprise bargains
proliferating rapidly.
There has been substantial progress, but I think we need to
do a lot more.
Let me describe the model of industrial relations we are
working towards.
It is a model which places primary emphasis on bargaining at
the workplace level within a framework of minimum standards
provided by arbitral tribunals.
It is a model under which compulsorily arbitrated awards and
arbitrated wage increases would be there only as a safety
net. This safety net would not be intended to prescribe the
actual conditions of work of most employees, but only to
catch those unable to make workplace agreements with
employers. Over time the safety net would inevitably become simpler.
We would have fewer awards, with fewer clauses.
For most employees and most businesses, wages and conditions
of work would be determined by agreements worked out by the
employer, the employees and their union.
These agreements would predominantly be based on improving
the productive performance of enterprises, because both
employers and employees are coming to understand that only 
productivity improvements can guarantee sustainable real
wage increases.
We would continue to have an Accord with the trade union
movement, guaranteeing the safety net of the award system
and the steady accumulation of occupational superannuation,
with improvements to both the safety net and occupational
superannuation governed by a commitment to international
competitiveness. We would have an Industrial Relations Commission which
helped employers and employees reach enterprise bargains,
which kept the safety net in good repair, which advised the
Government and the parties of emerging difficulties and
possible improvements,-but which would rarely have to use
its compulsory arbitral powers. Instead, parties would be
expected to bargain in good faith.
We would have sufficient harmony between State and Federal
industrial relations systems to ensure that they all head in
the same direction and used the same general rules.
That is the goal we are working towards. So how f ar are we
from reaching it?
Whea enw enerprse brgans which cover one third of the
workforce under federal awards. Over eight hundred
agreements covering nearly three quarters of a million
employees. That is extremely encouraging, but its not enough not
nearly enough.
We want it to be close to one hundred per cent of employees
under federal awards.
And federal awards, of course, cover less than one third of
all employees.
In all of the six state systems only a small number of
employees are covered by enterprise agreements.
NSW, the biggest state, has only about 7,000.
Victoria has only about 80 agreements in total.
And of course there are lots of employees who for one reason
or another don't have a union to represent them.
We need to make the system more flexible and relevant to our
present and future needs. 
12
We need to accelerate workplace or enterprise bargaining and
this is as much a responsibility of employers as it is of
unions and governments.
There are not enough enterprise bargains and the bargains
we do have are sometimes not sufficiently comprehensive.
We need to find a way of extending the coverage of
agreements from being add-ons to awards, as they sometimes
are today, to being full substitutes for awards.
As we change to a national system of workplace bargiqning
our laws and institutions will need to be mo dified to fit
the system we are creating.
For example we have laws which give the AIRC a role and
powers that are not well suited to the system we are trying
to create.
My own view is that the government should provide the
direction and leadership necessary to ensure that Australian
industrial relations operate to advance our national
interest.
The Government should do this and we will.
It is our responsibility to work out a way in which the IRC
has suitable powers to run the kind of system we need not
the kind of adversarial system we have had.
The shortcomings in our legal structure go well beyond the
role of the AIRC.
They are also quite plain in the lack of credible means of
enforcing agreements.
Where agreements or other awards apply there should be
clear, substantial and easily enforceable penalties for
breaches. An integrated, comprehensive and simple framework for making
and enforcing agreements.
These are shortcomings which I have asked the industrial
relations minister Laurie Brereton to look into and remedy.
Over the next three or four months he will be consulting as
extensively as he can with employers and employees and
their unions, with the states, with the AIRC, with academics
and experts to come up with the best solutions. 
13
The solution will certainly include legislation implementing
our commitment to ILO conventions on minimum pay equal pay
and on redundancy.
I know Laurie Brereton will invite the liveliest debate and
I hope all interested parties will join it.
I expect that by the time we get to the Budget sitting of
Parliament he will have put together a package to renovate
the legal and institutional structure of Australia's
industrial relations and one that fits with the national
system of workplace bargaining we are already creating.
Ladies and gentlemen
Completing industrial relations reform is another link in
the chain of reform which began a decade ago. It is
important now that we accelerate the reform so that all the
other elements of flexibility in the economy can work in
greater harmony.
I am confident about success. As I said in the campaign, I
now dare to believe that the dream of decade or more ago is
about to be realised. That Australia will become a
creative, innovative, manufacturing nation in the front rank
of trading nations and the front rank of social democracies.
I now believe it will happen because there so many signs to
tell us what we have done is succeeding and that is the
best assurance that we will succeed in doing all that
remains to be done. 



TEL: 23. Apr. 93 12: 09 No. 016 P. 01/ i.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF THE BURMA THAILAND RAILWAY. CANBERRA
FRIDAY 23 APRIL 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you very much for inviting me here today, to say a
few words about this fascinating and unique book.
Last year, of course, it was the fiftieth anniversary of
many of the battles fought in defence of Australia, and
it was my privilege on several occasions to pay tribute
to those Australian servicemen and women to whom we owe
so much.
I visited some of the battlegrounds most notably, I
suppose, Kokoda: and I have not had a more moving
experience in all of my public life.
For a nation which has been so involved in wars this
century, we have also been a long way removed from war:
and I think that may be why these places like Kokoda,
or the war cem~ eteries at Boma outside Port Moresby, or at
Lae have such a disturbing effect when we first
encounter them.
My generation was profoundly lucky: we all knew, I think,
that our parents and our grandparents generations had
gone through experiences of a kind that we were never
likely to confront.
For instance, I knew about Singapore, and about Borneo
about Sandakan because my father's brother had been
there, arnd died there. But I was not taught about it at
school, and there was very little to read about it.
We knew the wars through legend and ritual.
And we knew World War I better than we knew World War 11.
But we really didn't know what it had been like.
And, in any case, the generations who fought in the two
World Wars tended to keep their memories to themselves.
We grew up aware of the wars but remarkably innocent of
the experience of war. 
TEL: 23Apr. 93 1-2: 09 No. 016 P. 02/ C
2
And that, I think, is why we are shocked when we see the
gravestones which remind us of how many died, and their
ages, and what they must have gone through, arnd the
people they left behind.
This is the 75th anniversary of the end of World War I.
Later this year I hope there may be an opportunity to
visit those battlefields in Northern Francs where so many
Australians lost their lives. I sincerely hope it is
possible to go, because these places are truly sacred to
Australia. But the battlefields of the Asian and Pacific war are
also sacred. In the next few years I hope the
battlefields of New Guinea, Borneo, Singapore and Malaya
and Burma and Thailand will become as important to
our historical understanding as the battlefields of the
middle East and Europe were to earlier generations of
Australians. Everyone should know about these battles.
Above all, they should know about the subject of this
book the prisoners of war who worked on the Burma-
Thailand Railway.
No Australian soldiers suffered more than these. Few had
more reason to feel betrayed or neglected before,
during and after their capture. None had to call on
such reserves of faith and spirit as they did: faith in
themselves;, faith in each other; faith I like to think
in Australia, what they had created there arnd what they
hoped to create.
Whatever they may have thought, in historical terms they
were doing more than Just surviving.
As Gavan McCormack and Hank Nelson point out these were
the first Australians to go en masse into South East
Asia. They saw it and dealt with its peoples as no other
Australians ever had.
They also saw the British empire as few Australians had
ever seen it and it led a lot of them to conclude that
we Australians had evolved into a different race. it
raised their sense of an independent identity.
So, it may be that in time the 8th Division will be seen
as something more than soldiers or prisoners of war but
as the first pioneers of Australia in Asia. The
frontiersmen. Somehow I think it would be the highest tribute we could
pay them both those who died and those who managed to
survive. 
T: 23. Apr .93 12: 09 No .01E P .03/ C
3
Such a tribute would depend on our succeeding in Asia, of
course. It will mean that we will have to succeed
economically as an entirely independent nation, aware
of necessity and confident of both our identity and our
capabilities. And that will depend on our developing greater mutual
understanding between the countries of Asia and
ourselves, greater mutual respect.
The men and women discussed in this book very often did
just that -they developed a deep respect for the Chinese
and the Malays, the people of Borneo and Ambon and
Sumatra who very often risked their lives to help them.
They found in all sorts of circumstances that they shared
common human ground with people they had, for cultural
and historical reasons, been inclined to patronise or
despise. There's surely a lesson in it we can come to terms with
the countries of Asia and in doing so, far from
sacrificing our identity or our principles, strengthen
them.
There's surely also a lesson in the accounts this book
contains: that so much of the unconscionable treatment of
prisoners came from what the Japanese had been taught.
My old friend, Tom Uren, might say it is lesson in the
nature of fascism and he's right. But it's also a
lesson in ignorance, and parochialism. It's a lesson in
culture and education.
That Is why we should teach the story of the war.
Because the men and women who fought In those battles and
suffered and died in those camps should be remembered and
honoured. And because there is great deal for us to
learn, both about ourselves and about Asia, in reading
about these experiences.
Which gets me back to the most important question to
confront us every Anzac Day: we are left to wonder what
they died for.
We say they died for Australia: the question is, what
sort of Australia? What sort of Australia is it
incumbent on us to create?
Tom Uren and Weary Dunlop would have very different
political views on this I'm sure.
Yet they would agree on some basic things: they would
agree that Australia will succeed best if it incorporates
into its daily life and the conduct of its affairs the
principles of fellowship and cooperation and care for
TEL 
TEL: 23. Rpr. 93 12(: 09 No. Ulb F. FA:
4
each other. Mateship Is as good a word as any other to
describe it.
It has been around for a long time, that word and those
principles. But I'm inclined to think that it is only in
the last decade or so that we have begun to realise just
what a powerful force they can be in the economic life of
a country and in seeing a country through great changes
and hard times.
Mateship was never tested so much as on the Burma Railway
and, for all the tragedy, nowhere was the triumph of
mateship so emphatic. Mateship and the human spirit.
if we imbue all our endeavours in the next decade with
those principles I am sure we will succeed and if we
succeed, we will have paid the prisoners on the Burma
Thailand Railway the greatest possible tribute.
we will have created a prosperous Australian democracy,
built on those values and one in which they are secure.
Hank Nelson and Gavan McCormack have done us all a great
service with this book. So have all the other
contributors -Australian, Japanese and Korean.
I congratulate them all and with great pleasure declare
The Burma-Thailand Railway the book officially
launched. 


28 APRIL 1993 
it is a great pleasure to be here tonight. 
Pleasure has not been an unfamiliar sensation since March 13, of course. But this is a particular pleasure, because I see a lot of well known supporters in the room and not a few who I suspect of being supporters. 
It is also a pleasure because the Evatt Foundation was very much a supporter in the election and I want to take this opportunity to thank them I know Peter Botsman, in particular, never left us alone, and his attentions were very much appreciated. 
It is an inescapable fact of Australian political life that no Labor leader goes through a year without making a speech In honour of a former Labor leader. We honour our dead in the Labor movement. It Is because we have a sense of being part of a great story. In any year it is possible to speak on national issues In honour of Curtin, Chit ley, Evatt, and Arthur Caiwell, among other legends. Lost year for me it was Ben Chit ley and Gough Whitlam, who Is far from dead, but Is a legend anyway. Tonight it is Bert Evatt. 
It is appropriate that we remember these people, as Labor heroes and as Australians. For their contribution was to both the movement and the nation. They were all nation builders. They were all distinguished by their vision and their ambitions for Australia. To lead the Labor party you nee~ d large ambitions. And just as surely you need courage, for it always Involves, in some sense, a leap of faith. 
You need a passion for reform; you need a belief in the capacity of human beings to organise themselves for the general good; a belief in the capacity of people to rise above meanness; to see further than the next obstacle; to imagine something better and to dQ something better. 
And with these beliefs has always gone a profound belief in Australia in an uncompromised Australian Identity, a sense of our own worth, of the great story which has been lived out by people who have made this lend their home. And in the future which we have to make our own. 
It is within that world view that Labor, when It Is in form and running as It should, conceives and executes its projects. In tune with a national agenda. It can be said of Chifley and Curtin and Whitlem and Hawke that they had a clear sense of whet needed to be dons In Australia and they did not shirk from doing it. if they had had their chance it would have been said of Evatt and Calwell. I should like it to be said of me: In fact with the March 13 victory we have the best chance In our history to shape Australia in the imals of modern Labor. Progressive, pluralist, fair, democratic unmistakeably Australian. Bert Evatt made his mark less as leader of the Labor Party than as minister for External Affairs in the forties, where his work was distinguished by courage, independence and flair. He brought an Australian perspective to the task. He stood for democracy and the rights of small nations. He stood for independence he stood for the rights of Indonesians against their colonial rulers. 
Bert Evatt never had any doubt that Australia had a right be heard in the world, a role to play especially a role in the region. 
You will have already perceived the the-me of Continuity: In 1993 we too assert Australia's need to go confidently into the world, and the role we can play and the rewards we can reap in the region. 
Just as we assert the need to raise the level of equality, increase opportunity, lift the standard of living and the life chances of all Australians. 
We assert this role for Labor and we take on again the challenge of nation-building. I mrean doing the things which will serve future generations of Australians and keep Australia in the front rank of the democracies of the world. Whether it's in education, or social services or a universal health system: or giving us an Internationally competitive financial system, or the sort of industrial relations system which will give us the flexibility, productivity and capacity for innovation that we must have In all these things it is Labor, as ever, with the shoulder to the door. And pushing. 
Continuity of effort and purpose is important to us. We are strengthened by the understanding that we are part of the story the Labor story and, because we have always been the change-makers and the true believers in Australia edAustralians, Labor's story has always been very such Australia's story. 
That is the big difference between us and our political opponents. They struggle to find continuity. They are at best reactive and St worst prey to fashion and extremism; and when the fashion passes they unfailingly go to the only place they know back into that gloomy cave of cobwebbed memories of days when the Liberal Party was an extension of the country's semi-hereditary elite. They retreat and rejoice in the memory of the founder and oracle Robert Gordon Menzies. 
And they ask what will put them In touch With a contemporary reality which does not include a communist can to kick, or a Labor Party divided, or a feigned external threat or a cultural cringe to exploit? And they are met with an embarrassing silence which, for all his efforts, even John Howard is unable to fill. 
For you see, on their side of politics, between the Menzies Government and John Hewson's Opposition there is nothing or, to give John Gorton his due, very little. 
They have all in their own way been good little Horatios and held the bridge against national progress. 
Well they no longer hold the bridge and we have had a decade re-building it, strengthening It, broadening it and there is no reason now why the whole nation can't cross It into the new Australia of the twenty first century. 
For all our differences of opinion In the Labor movement there is a thread which runs through us all; there is a bond between us: we are bound by the common goal of social improvement and the reolisation of national aspirations. These things have bound us for a century, and the record of our progress towards them binds us tighter still. 
So tonight we pay homage to a Labor man who believed in these things, who worked for them, and contributed more then most to achieving them. 
But let me also say, as I said in Bathurst at the Chifley lecture last year, the truth Is that this Government has done More. And we will do more still. Much more than Ben or Bert ever imagined. M~ ore in the way of extending opportunity, more in the way of nation building, more In the way of securing the. country's future and delivering Australia to that place in the world the people of Labor have always dreamed could be ours. 
This country, like all new world countries, has always called on people's courage. On their faith and their belief. I'm Inclined to think that, in truth, nothing good and long lasting was ever done that did not need these things. They were present in every act of exploration end settlement, in every enterprise which went into the building of this country. Between the conception and the execution there in faith, hope -and courage. 
Countries are built on this. They fail for the lack of it. And I believe that it is never the people who let their countries down It is their governments. Governments which lack heart. Politicians who imagine things but don't do them. Bureaucrats who take their power to mean the ability to thwart initiative. 
I take the view -and the longer I am in politics the more I take it -that the minimum responsibility of government is to at least have the courage of the people. I mean the courage of a person who starts a business or a farm, or the person who migrates end makes a home here, the people who have gone to war for us, or in peace laboured to create the wealth we now enjoy. The ultimate responsibility of government I think boils down to this: to live up to the same faith, to invest in the future with the same courage. 
I take great heart from the 1980s when the Labor government, trusting to the courage of the people, took on the pioneering changes the nation needed. The people responded. The changes were made. 
That is what gives me heart in the nineties. 
If we Australians are bold end determined and faithful to our beliefs and aspirations I believe the 19909 will be a great watershed in our history. As the 1890s was a watershed so will this decade be. I believe we will emerge a robust social democracy, a player of substance in the world, integrated with our region and prosperous in a way that we have never been before: I mean prosperous not only in material comforts but prosperous in ideas and innovation, in our capacity to make things and to sell them to the world, in opportunity, prosperous in our faith; our faith in ourselves and the life we have created here. 
To do this, it seems to me, we need to be a Country at peace with itself. And being at peace with ourselves I think depends on making stronger than ever the principles of egalitarianism. I think the vote on March 13 confirmed this: whatever else may have motivated the electorate they rejected the Idea of " trickle-down" economics and the new elite and the underclass which have followed from that idea wherever it has been tried. 
And I might say nothing made me more confident of victory than my belief that Australians would not embrace that Idea. Nothing made me more confident of winning, and nothing so re-affirmed my faith in the continuing strength of Australian democratic traditions as the victory itself. 
For the government, of course, that implies some obligations: to keep opening up the avenues of participation and opportunity, to maintain the safety net, and to keep as our by-words Inclusion, unity, cohesion, loyalty. 
We in the Labor movement know that it is easy to say these things, something else altogether to make them happen. 
We also know that these things ring hollow when more than per cent of the workforce is unemployed. 
The principal aim of this government will be to reduce the number of unemiployed Australians. And so long as there is a pool of unemployed, of whatever dimension, the aim must be to decrease the amount of time people are spending in it. 
Long term unemployment threatens to grow in Australia as it is growing in comparable countries. 
How we deal with it will be measure of our success as a society: how well we care for those who are out of work, how well we manage to staunch the flow from the workforce, how well we revitalise the economy and create job growth, and how well we succeed in training and retraining. 
We will need from all the players in the employment equation recognition of our profound responsibility, not only to the unemployed and -those facing unemployment, but to Australia as a whole. We simply cannot allow so many Australians to be permanently alienated from the workforce and, with that, from the mainstream of society. 
It is for the very same reason that a primary goal of the Government in the 1990s will be to remove the stain of dispossession and social injustice which attaches to the relationship between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. Indeed it will be a goal of all governments. 
Some of our opponents insist on devaluing the cause of reconciliation by calling it the product of guilt. But It is not guilt which motivates us in this, it is responsibility. The legacy of injustice towards the indigenous people of Australia shames us in the eyes of the world. Yet feelings of shame and outrage are not necessary to feel that things have to change. Pride should be all it takes. 
Not merely our reputation, but our self-esteem depends on our finding answers to the prejudice, Injustice and despair which Aboriginal Australians continue to face. 
Now, vith the Mabo decision, there Is a unique opportunity. Mabo present. us with a more substantial and binding basis for reconciliation -a legal and historical basis which goes well beyond those pious and well-meaning sentiments whose history is just as long as the prejudice and dispossession they seek to correct. 
We now have a chance to do something real. Because land goes to the core of the dispossession, Mabo may have the potential to work the miracle. 
The High Court has declared that a natire title exists in common law a declaration which has profound consequences not just for land management, but for contemporary issues of social justice and for the process of reconciliation. 
The Mabo judgement constituted recognition of an historic truth and in so doing created, in my view, the best chance we have ever had for 8 notionally agreed durable settlement. it should mean indeed it has to mean that we will enter the twenty first century with the fundamental relationship between the nation and its indigenous people re-constructed on just foundations. 
I think progress has already been made. The cultural shift is occurring. I was enormously heartened by the response to the speech I made in Redfern last year, which indicated to me a genuine desire among the majority of Australians to get these matters set to rights.
 I think the Aboriginal comm~ unities are determined to take up the challenge as well: determined to raise themselves by their own efforts from the social trap into which Aboriginal Australia has for so long found itself, and increasingly determined that -white Australians will not through prejudice or neglect deny their progress. 
They are determined to succeed. I do not think they can any longer be denied. And they won't be if we have the ingenuity and the good will to build an appropriate framework around the central seminal truth of native title. There will always be some who say that we can never overcome the prejudice and brutality, and the alienation and degradation. They have been saying it since 1788: but in truth we have never really tried. We have never made a concerted national effort. 
There were plenty who said our immigration scheme would never work. That cultural pluralism would never work. But it has worked. We made a national effort and it worked. 
There were some who said we couldn't change Australia Into a manufacturing country a competitive manufacturing country, an exporting manufacturing country. They soid we must always be essentially a sheep run end a quarry. Well we made a national effort and it's
working. 
Some said we'd never reform Australia's work piaces. There has been a dramatic change and with the now charter for industrial relations we announced last week the change will be completed. Australia v11l have a flexible Industrial relations system, and we will have a faIr one a late twentieth century system, not late nineteenth. 
We can make these big changes with Aboriginal Australia. We can do the same with unemployment. 
We can do all these things but we will do them better if we are united as a people, confident of our identity and what we stand for. That is why we need to be in every sense, including the symbolic one, our own masters. It is why the affirmation of our nationhood is central to our psychology. 
I believe it Is also why the time has come to start the process of creating an Australian republic. 
There have been some who have said that this is not the right time that there are more important things to do right now. 
People might well have said the same during the movement for Federation. 
I take the view that, far from being the wrong time, there has never been a better time. 
it is not simply because we are approaching the centenary of Federation, but rather because we are undergoing a revolutionary change both in our consciousness and in our situation in the world. 
It is important that the reality of our having to go it alone is matched by our abIlity to go it alone: and our ability depends to no small extent on our confidence, our self-esteem, our reputation, our faith in each other, our cohesion, our shared consciousness of the task before us, our belief In our democracy, our sense of responsibility to the nation. 
Australia therefore has very clear domestic reasons for wanting to define more clearly and in more confident terms its national identity. 
But we should not underestimate the importance this also has for Australia's engagement with the Asia-Pacific region. 
The fact is Australia wJll be taken more seriously as player in regional af fairs if we are clear about our identity and demonstrate that we really mean to stand on our own feet practically and psychologically. 
These things will help us to succeed. 
It Is important to get our democracy right at the same time as we get our economy right. 
That in why I think we should Start now on the journey to the creation of an Australian Republic. 
Last year my canvassing of this subject was frequently described by our opponents as a diversion. It was said to be not the right time. my argument has always been that if the creation of a republic served to heighten our confidence and our sense of ourselves, If it helped create a new and stronger sense of Identity, then It would be 8 maiterial aid to our economic future and lifting the quality of our national life and that alone made it an important subject of discussion. 
Whether or not it was for these reasons I do not know, but it is plain now that there Is increasing interest in, and support for, a proposal to amend the current constitutional arrangemnents so that our affairs are no longer presided over by the King or Queen of the United Kingdom. Our Head of State, the British monarch, cannot in the nature of things ever be a purely Australian head of State since she holds that office in relation to a range of other countries. 
And the monarchy being hereditary, gives us no choice about who the person might be. 
It implies no criticism of the monarch to question whether this arrangement remains meaningful and relevant to Australia today:
- where a growing proportion of the population has few if any ties with the United Kingdom
- where our future increasingly lies within our own region, and
- where our Identity as a nation is no longer derivative but our own 
Clearly, the debate has come a long way In recent months. 
Many of those who might have been expected to oppose change in this area have indicated support for change. 
Others, while not advocating change, agree that debate is desirable. 
John Howard, three weeks ago and running hard for the Liberal leadership, said that debate on the Republic was desirable. 
In fact he went further, bless him, and said:
"I think the Liberal Party has got to be part of that debate, and I would bring my contribution to It. I think there are strong intellectual arguments that can be made on both aides of the Republican Issue and I think what the Liberal Party ought to do Is to become part of the debate." 
We do, of course, welcome the debate. And we particularly welcome John Howard's willingness to put the conservative view though, like many others, I am sorry that since making those remarks he has sounded rather more like a spoiler than a true voice of conservatism. 
At any rate, my position is clear. 
I would like to see the Australian people demonstrate our social and political maturity by voting at a referendum for the establishment of a republic. 
I am an advocate of what has become known as the minimalist approach. 
My view is that the Constitution should be changed sufficiently to replace the hereditary monarchy with a non-hereditary, Australian Head of State. 
But I do not know what the detail of such changes would be, and what range of options might exist within this minimalist approach. 
And although commentators and constitutional forums have dealt with many of the issues In reports and learned papers over time, there has not yet been an officially sponsored study devoted solely to this question. 
In my election policy speech, therefore, I pledged that the Government would establish a broadly-based committee of eminent Australians, including representatives of the States, to develop a discussion paper which considers the options for a Federal Republic of Australia. 
I said it would be the intention that as a result of this committee's deliberations and the public discussion that would follow, the Australian people would be in a position to decide by referendum later in the decade whether Australia should become a republic by the year 2001. 
We have now taken the first steps In this process. 
I have invited Mr Malcolm Turnbull to chair the Republic Advisory Committee and he has accepted. 
The other members of the Committee are: Mr Nick Greiner, Mes Mary Kostakidis, Ma Lois O'Donoghue, Ms Susan Ryan, Dr John Hirst, Professor George Winterton. 
I have written to the State Premiers and Chief Ministers inviting them to choose 2 members of the committee to represent the states and territories and to lot me have their nomination@ as soon an possible. 
I have also asked that the Premiers and Chief Minister. ensure that one representative be fromm'ne of the most populous states and the other from a smaller state. 
in my policy speech I said I would like to invite the Federal Opposition to participate in the work of the
commiittee. 
Although this invitation was refused at the time, I am determined to encourage a bipartisan approach and have therefore written to Dr Hewson today asking him to reconsider and to nominate a representative. 
In keeping with the bipartisan nature of the debate on this issue, I have asked that none of these representatives be practising politicians.
I have also made it clear to Mr Turnbull that he should seek expert advice beyond the committee, including from the Constitutional Centenary Foundation, if he believes this is warranted. 
I expect the committee to start its work by the end of may with my department providing the necessary secretariat support. After discussions with constitutional and legal experts I am confident that such a paper could be completed by early September. 
The terms of reference of the committee ask it to prepare an options paper which describes the minimum constitutional changes necessary to achieve a viable Federal Republic of Australia, without examining options which would otherwise change our way of government. 
The establishment of an Australian republic must be an inclusive process which involves all Australians. The governent does not seek to include any other constitutional changes with the republican proposal. That Is not to say the government is opposed to other proposals for reform but they should be considered separately and on their own merits. 
Even with this relatively limited purpose, however, it will be necessary to examine a variety of practical possibilities. 
The terms of reference therefore require the committee to describe these, and the main arguments for and against them, but without indicating or recommending preferred
choices. 
Before I go into the reasons for not seeking recommendations from the committee, and the further steps which might follow the committee's report, let me briefly describe the things we are asking the committee to
address. 
The first is removal of all references to the monarch and the Governor-General as the Queen's representative in the Constitution. 
The second is creation of the new office of Head of State and consideration of what the office might be called. Heads of state of republics are generally called apresident", but the committee will be at liberty to Identify other possibilities for Australia. 
The third question is that of provisions for appointment and removal of the Head of State. 
As matters stand, we do not have to worry about appointment of the Head of State. The Governor-General, as the Queen's representative, is appointed, and could be dismissed, by the monarch on the recommendation of the government. 
If we are to have a non-hereditary Head of State, there are a number of possible methods of appointment, nomination and selection. 
There are also questions about the length of an appointment, such as whether the appointment should be for a fixed term and what the term might be, and the removal of a Head of State. 
The next matter about which the committee will report is the powers of the Head of State. At present the Constitution Is silent about the s0-called reserve powers of the Governor-General. 
The committee will be asked to consider how the powers of the new Head of State, and the exercise of these powers, can be made subject to the same principles and practices ag apply to the Governor-General. 
The committee will identify the nature of the necessary constitutiona~ l amendments required to implement the options it lists. 
The committee will also report on such Implications as there might be for State Governors if Australia becomes a republic. Obviously the States will be very much Involved in this Issue and I look forward to hearing from them.-
The reasons for not seeking recommendations from the committee are simple. 
First, while description of the options should be relatively straightforward, there may well be legitimate scope for disagreement in the committee about which options it should recommend. 
We want a paper which the whole committee can endorse. 
Secondly, while the forthcoming debate will inevitably focus on options and while the paper will provide the necessary information base for that, the primary task is to establish whether we can achieve consensus about the principle of a move to a republic along these lines. 
Settlement of the detail of what might be put to the people in a referendum should, in my view, be a matter for a different body. 
There will be discussion and debate in the community both before and following the committee's report. 
There will need to be discussions in the Council of Australian Governments, and probably in Commonwealth and State Parliaments. 
If out of such discussions there emerges a developing consensus, it may well be appropriate at some future point for there to be a constitutional conference or convention. 
The task of such a conference could be to deliberate and decide upon the precise options to be put to the electorate. 
The Government would not be interested in putting referendum bills to the Parliament and the electorate unless it was clear that there was this degree of
agreement. 
I do not expect all Australians to agree with the view that a republic is a desirable goal. 
What I do hope for is a mature and sensible debate, in which both supporters of the current system and those who would advocate change will explain positively, clearly and honestly the benefits of their preferred system. if that happens, then whatever the end result, we will at least be seen to have conducted ourselves with the maturity we are entitled to claim after a century of living together as a nation. 
An associated matter In the question of how we commemorate the centenary of federation the year 2001. 
The Goverrnent believes that the opportunity exists to use the occasion, and the years leading up to it, in a constructive way. 
There will be plenty to celebrate, but it will also be an
opportunity to take stock. 
The key Issue In the Immediate future will be how to develop goals and strategies for the years leading up to and including the centenary. 
The states will have an important role in this process and I Intend discussing this whole question with Premiers at the Council of Australian Governments in June. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
This is a crucial decade. The prospect of success Ii real: I mean success in carving out a prosperous future. Tonight I have said very little about the economic future. I could quote you the evidence, the unmnistakeable evidence of the sea-change which has occurred in Australia. 
It's enough to say now that we are becoming a different country a manufacturing nation; a nation exploiting its intellect; an exporter of things we invent, develop and make. The dream some of us had in the late seventies shows many signs of coming true. 
Already the sceptics and the cynics have begun to lose their doubts about our ability to find our feet in Asia, 
And now many of them are losing their doubts about the not unrelated subject of our becoming a republic. 
Our success In the world does depend on our strength as a nation, on our faith in ourselves and the way we represent that faith the way we symbolise it. 
It might not be too much to say that the faith is spreading. Armed with it, I believe we can in this decade marry a new era of economic success to a new era of social justice. 
it will take an act of courage, as all these things do but we won't be found wanting, and the reward will be a11 the richer because we Australians will thereafter always know that we rose to meet the challenge. 
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTERI
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIST'ER, THE HON~ P J KEATING, HP
DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER MIYAZAWA
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 30 APRIL 1993
( PLEASE CHECK AGAINSTr DELIVERY. EMBARGO 8.30 PM)
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you,
Prime Minister, to Australia.
I understand this is your fourth visit to our country.
We offer an especially warm welcome on this occasion
because you are the first head of government to visit
Australia since the March election.
This is fitting given the very close ties that have
developed between our two countries.
The Australia-Japan relationship is longstanding and
mature. It is based fundamentally on strong trade and economic
relations which serve our two countries very well.
But these days the Australia-Japan relationship goes well
beyond our economic links, important though they are.
By any standards, the quality of cooperation that has now
been achieved between our governments in regional and
international affairs is remarkable.
And the range of people-to-people contacts which flourish
between Australia and Japan attests to a high degree of
mutual interest and friendship.
All this is the more striking considering the different
racial, social, religious and cultural backgrounds of the
two countries.
Prime Minister, I appreciated very much the warm
jiospitality I received from you and your Government
during my visit to Japan last September. 
I am delighted that so soon afterwards I have an
opportunity to receive you here in Canberra.
Though your visit has been short, I hope you have been
able to learn at first hand today something of our
current priorities and preoccupations.
Australia has achieved important progress over the past
decade in making our economy more internationally
oriented, more open, more competitive, and better able to
take advantage of the economic dynamism of East Asia.
But there is still more to do in this regard.
Last week I announced our goal of making our labour
market more flexible, by switching to a national system
of enterprise bargaining.
And this will help us to become more competitive, more
able to take our place in the region.
on that point, the Government is determined to encourage
Australia's closer integration with the region.
Australians know this is where our geography is and where
our concentration must be and that-. we need to outfit
ourselves properly to participate.
On that score, there Is also wide support among the
Australian public for us to define our national identity
more clearly and more confidently.
Earlier this week I announced the appointment of an
advisory committee which will examine options for making
Australia a republic without altering our existing
parliamentary system or Commonwealth-State arrangements.
I personally believe Australia will become a republic by
the centenary of our federation in 2001.
This, as I say, will help Australia's relations with the
region by demonstrating that we are standing on our own
feet both practically and psychologically.
Prime Minister,' I was pleased that today we were able to
carry forward the very productive dialogue we started
last September on regional and international affairs.
As we address a very fluid outlook in the Asia-Pacific
region, Australia and Japan share many important
interests and perspectives.
Neither of us belongs to a trading bloc, and we each
depend vitally on the maintenance of an open and
non-discriminatory trading system-
17)*-1rt7 K 77 , OT CC.-ir4W-jOC-v-73 
Both of us have important security and economic
relationships with the United States and we both strongly
support the long-term engagement of the United States in
the Western Pacific.
I listened today carefully to your account of your recent
meeting with President Clinton and the outlook for Japan-
US trade relations.
As a friend of both Japan and the United Staten,
Australia respects the difficulty and complexity of some
of the issues that you are now grappling with in the
Japan-US economic relationship.
We have been heartened by your assurance today that Japan
will not engage in managed trade with the United States.
This is an important assurance.
The outlook for the international trade envirornent is
uncertain and troubled.
We have to do all we can to remove that uncertainty.
In that sense, it is imperative that political leadership
be applied by all the main players to restore momentum
towards a successful conclusion of the6 Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations.
Similarly, within the Asia-Pacific region, we face a
decisive testing period for th e APEC forum.
To demonstrate the usefulness of APEC as a force for
trade liberalisation and facilitation, it is important to
achieve concrete results at the Seattle ministerial
meeting in November..
As I explained in a speech on 8 February, I believe we
should seek as our goal an integrated market which
includes Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Korea,
North America, China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and the ASEAN
countries a market of 2 billion people producing half
the world's output, bound together with harmonised trade
rules, harmonised investment rules, harmonised standards
and certification, and an agreed way of settling disputes
between members.
As we move along the path towards this goal, there may
come a point where we decide to use the APEC acronym to
stand for both the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
prneAn as well as the Asia-Pacific Eooi m~ i~
To succeed, such a community must be founded on respect
for the cultural diversity of the Asia-Pacific region and
the different levels of development of member economies.
Our own experience, the Australia-Japan bilateral
experience, demonstrates that cultural differences are no
?-41 
barrier to successful cooperation provided it is based on
shared interests.
As Australia and Japan have found, successful cooperation
leads to trust and mutual confidence.
Because of our shared interests and perspectives,
Australia and Japan are well placed to work together in
promoting the concept of an Asia-Pacific Economic
Community based on principles of openness, nondiscrimination
and practical cooperation.
This is an Important way in which we can use the strength
of the Australia-Japan partnership to promote open
regionalism In the Asia-Pacific.
Prime minister, let me conclude by saying how much I have
valued your visit and our discussions today, and again
how pleased I am to see you in Australia,
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition, Dr Hewson, to
join me in welcoming you and your delegation. 



TEL: 7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 01/ 07
' Asr zic 4"
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY T11 E PRI MN' ~ 1N ISTER, TitE [ ION P J KE~ ATING, Mip
ADDRESS TO illlEAUSTRALIAN MINING INDUSTRY COUNCIL
ANNULAL DINNErR
6 N1AY' 19,9,
1E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you vciy mu1Lch, Campbel and congratulat Ions to Peter Barnett oil his election
as President of AMIC over the next two years. Ladies and gentlemen, well thank you
for having me along here tonight to sp~ eak to you.
I have had a very long asSOCiation Awith ALM1C twenty years this year, in fact, and
barring the last, I suppose six or seven years, qu) ite a close association as many of you
probably know. For nearly a decade I was the Shadow Minister lbr minerals and
energy and I emerged from the shadows in 1983, of course, to becomne Treasurer,
leaving that particular interest not behind, but to one side for others to handle. But I
have always had a great regard for the industry and a great respect for its capacity to
earn for Au~ stralia and to play a role as Australia's, at least equal to any other, leading
and competitive industry.
Campbell's made tonight a number of challengs flor me. He has got me in running
races on wet tracks and all sorts of things fie has given a big challenge to
Governments in this country and I am -sure that we have all taken note, Richard Court,
and Marshall Perron, 1 am1 sure have triken nlotes at the table as well. But there are
challenges for all of uis and 1 think, certainly the Government looks forwvard to the
challenge's which C'ampbell mentioned, but they are also challenges f1or the industry, I
think, to acknowledge that much has changed and moved favourably for it and also the
challenge to take advantage of the environment which is now here.
SO Much has changed and the Governmient has done a great deal. The mrninn industry
has been internationally competitive, buit the g1reat agent for change in the 80 s was no~ t
the private sector of'AuIstralia, it was the public sector. That's the truth of it. It took
Australia firomn basically an inidustrial backwater to a moudern country again, started to
open it uip. That change has continued and muILch Of it. Of course, has been a benefit to
the mining industry. ' Ihere wats a time when you used to talk to ining companies and
. they Would say, look we are quite elflcient, we are at least, in terms of best practice, 
7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 02/ 07
2
up with other companies around the world, price is not bad, but profits are lousy. The
profits are lousy for two reasons, because the exchange rate was wrong and because
wages were too high. These were the things which were holding the industry back,
and both of those very major variables were dealt with in the 1980s, and the cost of
that adjustment was borne by the community at large to set the industry up to become
an internationally competitive world player.
When the Government dc-regulated the exchange rate in the early 1980s the
adjustment burden of that change had to be borne by the community and wage earners
in particular, because we knew the exchange rate was substantially over valued and
when it finally fell to recover our compctitiveness that shill to inflation, in inflation,
which was about 5 per cent had to be cut from wages and the burden of that fell on
wage and salary earners, and the political burden of that fell on the Government. Not
just the Government but the trade unions, and of course given the fact that we couldn't
have accommodated such a change as easily as perhaps we did without fiscal policy
and without tax cuts So in the 1980s we produced these fast fiscal surpluses, while at
the same time paying $ 5 and $ 6 billion tax cuts to take the inflationary surge from
wages to see that the ieal exchange rate was competitive to see that the mining
industry could keep its head luapn d earn profits from its own efficiency.
Now, one can't just put in one's pocket changes like these and say the track has been
pretty soggy, I mean the track has been pretty good for a long time. We have had our
soggy spots, but one of then wasn't in macro-economic policy where that huge
change, and you can see it now, commodity prices have fallen in the last year of so, the
exchange rate has gone down, it has equilibrated and I think if you look at the
adjustment in commodity prices via the exchange rate it is about 1 per cent over the
year. In other words, you have got a mechanism now that is working for you which is
maintaining your competitiveness and you are doing it in a wage environment where
the wage share in the economy today, the average of the 1960s and the profit share is
all ready at this stage of the business cycle at the average of the 1960s, and where we
have seen a substantial shift in profitability, indeed, profitability, net profits in the
December quarter were 75 per cent above levels of a year ago. So profits are
recovering, inflation is low, we have broken the back of Australian inflation The great
threat to the mineral industries competitiveness, the greatest threat, a desperate out of
line infation rate has been brought into line at substantial cost to the community and of
course that means working people in general
Not only that, but the one thing, the one claim that the mining industry used to make in
the years when I had close associations with it was that Governments take the monkey
of tariffs, off the mining industry's back. Now, of course, that never happened until a
Labor Government came along From 1988 through to 1991, and then the adoption of
phasings from 1991 through to 1996.97 will see the tarilf wall in Australia
substantially reduced to an average manufacturing tariff of 5 per cent by 1996-97 and
commensurately lower tariff rates for the plan areas of the economy like motor
vehicles, textile clothing and footwear So, in terms of setting the industries agenda,
seeking to have in ollice a Government which first gave it a competitive exchange rate
mechanism broke the back of inflation, carried the huge adjustment costs of
competitiveness like a ball and chain around its neck, and then smashed the tariff wall 
TEL: I 7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 03/ 07
3
down, they are the things that the mining industry in the ' 70s used to dream about, and
they were all done.
Now, Campbell was waxing lyrical here about whether political expediency will return,
well let me tell you this, Campbell, there was nothing politically expedient sitting with
18 per cent interest-rates three months from an election, I can tell you. There is
nothing politically expedient about bringing down tariffs in a recession. But I am quite
sure you are referring to things like Coronation Hill. Coronation Hill became a totem
issue for the mining industry, where in fact the things that mattered, I think, beyond
Coronation Hill, that is, the things that mattered in terms of the big macro picture of
competitiveness, whether it be by way of exchange rate wages or inflation, other
competitiveness issues generally. These are the things which have had greater weight
and I think people in the industry know that. Coronation Hill had its problems, as a
mine, frankly you could tit it in your eye, the size of it, in terms of the size of
Australia's mining produce it never really mattered, it was some of the principles in
there about how it was treated and whether in fact it was a place that should have been
reserved because of Aboriginal interests. I don't really think that expediency is an issue
in Australian public policy today. I think this Government has been prepared to take
issues on which othci Governments haven't. and not only take them on but continue to
go through them.
One of the other things that Campbell put to us, will our tax regime be adapted to be a
truly world competitive one? Well we have just introduced legislation this week to
reduce the company tax rate from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. When I became
Treasurer in 1983 the company tax rate was 46 per cent and there was a 60 per cent
marginal tax rate on distributed income So, there was 78 cents of tax paid in every
dollar of company income. That today is 33 per cent or if you distribute 47 per cent.
So, 78 to 47 if you distribute, but for private companies as well as public companies
they are no longer forced to distribute they can retain earning in a business, so a
business could retain 67 cents of every dollar of company income after tax today and
before a distribution where that was 22 cents years ago. Now that is a very large
change, and coupled with that of course is dividend imputation. Dividend imputation
is a huge tax break for domestic investors. What it essentially has done is make the
company tax a withholding tax for domestic investors If anyone at an AMIC seminar
in the ' 70s said, I will tell you what else we will do, not only will we give you a
competitive exchange rate, but we will knock tariffs over, we will get real wages down
and profits up, we will radically change our industrial relations scene, we will remove
the double tax on dividends, well I amn quite e sue tlht everyone would have fainted at
the tables. But lthioe things have been done and I think dividend imputation is a great
reform and it has been a great thin tfor the companies.
I just tonight picked up just some graphs of the capitalisation of some of the major
companies in the period, in 1983-84 BHP was capitalised at $ 3 billion, today it is
capitalised at $ 23 billion. So someone is doing right somewhere and I don't think it
was all the BHP Board's doing. CRA was capitalised at $ 2.7 billion, today it is nearly
$ 8 billion. Western Mining, all those lefties down there, they were capitalised at $ 1.1
billion and they are at $ 5 billion, peaked at $ 7 billion in ' 87, but held most of it and
have sort of travelled in the area of $ 4 to $ 5 billion since. Now part of that is the
. enhanced profitability of industry, the enhanced competitiveness of the industry which 
cr . Y H -Ll T in; 9 a x n o v v r v
4
has come of course through investment and good management, but it has also come
through macro-economic policy, it has largely come through macro-economic policy,
and that dividend imputation and that more attractive share price, attractive
profitability for shareholders took our stock market index from about 1200 after the
stock market crash back to about 1500 and it sort of oscillated in that 1500 now to
1700. So, par of that market capitalisation is dividend imputation which is another
leading tax change. We have got a 10 per cent investment allowance there for projects
over $ 50 million, halfofthe projects in the $ 130 billion of registered projects are
actually mining projccts. There is a 10 per cent investment allowance for projects over
million, there is another 10 per cent investment allowance for those projects, that's
both under $ 50 million and over $ 50 million, but for any over $ 50 million it is 20 per
cent and we have got now a very competitive schedule of depreciation, I think it is
competitive as anybody we trade with. Which sees, for instance, forty year assets
written off in 15 years, 20 year assets written off in 7, 5 year assets written off in 3
years. So rapid acceleration, a 33 per cent company rate, full dividend imputation, an
investment allowance of 20 per cent, I don't know what else we have to do for you,
Campbell, in terms of a tax regime which is truly world competitive. This is, in OECD
terms, outrageously comlprtitive. In Asia-Pacific terms very competitive, I think we
are one ofthe very few countries that has a dividend imputation regime.
Now, as well as that, you quite correctly pointed out that the Government needs to
keep the progress up, in terms of micro-economic reform, and I agree with you, I think
that is one of our challenges, it is one of the challenges we all face, it is certainly one
we face and I am quite sure that Richard, and Marshall Perron, who are with us tonight
would agree it has won the States faith as well. But much has been done and we are
seeing for instance in our waterfront reform program productivity in our ports have
been boosted by 127 per cent in recent years. Telecoms productivity has increased by
98 per cent over the last five years, reforms to electricity generation and transmission
have seen productivity increased by 41 per cent over seven years, and more is
happening, we are trying to put together an East Coast electricity grid so that
industries can get the benefit of that coal seam down the East Coast of Australia. We
have set up a competitive modelling in telecommunications with Optus and now a third
cellular mobile carrier. We are continuing of course with water front reform and we
have now got OECD crew manning levels, or actually better than OECD crew
manning levels, on our ships. So, that change is continuing and in the course of this
Parliament we expect to do more about that as well, and of course the largest perhaps
of those changes in the micro-economy is in labour market reform, which you correctly
identified, and in that we are now conducting a comprehensive consultation on a
reform package to consolidaec our gains there That is, to spirit along enterprise
bargaining so that we can see productivity, the production of productivity and the
sharing of productivity between prolils and wages, where we can see that
accomplished as an enterprise where it couldn't be accomplished from the decision of
the central wage bench. The central wage bench will be there for the weaker areas of
the labour market to be setting appropriate minimums, but in the other areas of the
economy, which is most of them, we hope to see a structure for enterprise bargaining
go through. That will mean that employees and owners of businesses will be able to sit
down and do something interesting and clever to make the business better, and tonight
at the table, Campbell, was telling me of his own e\ perience at Renison Tin Mine in
Tasmania where the same thing has happened, that very thing has happened between 
*'^^^ ilyepy~ Ii. t
his management and his employees to see a large shift in productivity. This is
occurring acuoss the country but there is not enough of it and we want to speed the
process up. But it not though. people are saying I noticed my colleague, the Leader of
the Opposition, chiding me yesterday, saying, well you are following us on that. Well I
haven't followed John on many things, and I am not following him on labour market
reform because what the Coalition had in mind was basically a single wage contract,
individual wage contracts, what we have got in mind is the collective bargaining of the
employees of an enterprise with the owners and operators of an enterprise. It is a
wholly different thing. You could never get that cohesion and sense of common goals,
shared goals, and common commitmenis while each person is basically sliced off
individually into a common law contract. It is not the same, and it won't produce the
same results. But it is important to get the problems ofa business identified and to
have them repaired and the make the business more efficient and that can really only be
done on the spot. It can't be done by someone at a hearing in one ofthe central
business districts of the country, and that's why I think the progress now, the
opportunity now, now we have got inflation low to be able to lock that low inflation in
and with high levels of productivity. not only keep it down but also enhance profits on
the way through. So, I think, this is one of the areas where we do want to keep that
progress up
We have been trying to facilitate major projects, and we have got a unit in my
Department which has been involved in expediting projects worth over $ 4 billion in its
first year of operation, and we have been quite successful there I think, and that
coupled with the investment allowance has brought a number of projects forward and I
think we are going to make progress on them, but more needs to be done to
consolidate them.
The other important issue. I think, is the question of Mabo and where it goes. I have
said to Campbell and his colleagues who saw me last week with APEA and the
National Farmers Federation that I think Mabo is a distinct opportunity for Australia,
and one that should be pursued ambitiously. That is something now which the
Government is seeking to do. That is, to talk to all the stakeholders, the organisations
I just mentioned, as well as the Aboriginal community itself, and to see that we can
reach a regime which will be one which is such that we can put to the States at the
Council of Australian Governments in June or July some proposals where we can
advance the whole establishment of a regime to do justice to the High Courts decision.
There is a bit of a view in the industry that this is something the Government has
brought on and it is something the Government is quite happy to deal with, to wrestle
with, it's a decision ol' the I ligh Court of Austiralia of a case which was heard over
many years and the High Court has turned over the concept of Terra Nullius and has
said there is a native title right in common law, it hasn't said what the title is, how it
should be established, who has the title, or how it may be used or exploited, and we
are as a Government saying, well look, we will try and establish a regime here, but we
have to talk to all the stakeholders, and they are principally the States, the industries,
pastoral, mining, etc and of course the Aboriginal community. This won't be easy, but
it will require a mature set of judgements to reach a package which I think is possible
and which will do more in the event for a true reconciliation between the Aboriginal
and non-Aboriginal communnities in this country than perhaps any other thing has the
immediate opportunity of so loing So, we have already started in those negotiations
49 
TEL 7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 06/ 07
6
and we are continuing, but we are of course in entirely new territory with this, there is
no structure at all, it has got to be all put into place, and the High Court has only but
given us clues as to what, that is, beyond saying that there is a title, a native title, given
us only clues about what they think the character of the title should be.
So, it is not going to be an easy matter, and it is not going to be a matter where
sloganeering has any place, or incantations, because that could be a pretty expensive
exercise, I think, for all of us. But again, in a consultative, cooperative environment
between ourselves and the States, yourselves, the pastoral industries and the
Aboriginal community itself, I think we can do a great deal.
Let me just perhaps close and sum up on a few of these points. In this year we expect
mineral commodity exports to increase by 9 per cent to a record high of almost $ 31
billion. Total new capital in\ vestment we expect in this year to reach a record of about
billion and over the next five years the AB ARE forecasts the total value of mineral
commodity exports will increase by 22 per cent in real terms and the production of
metallic minerals will increase by 25 per cent. So, commodity exports this year up by
$ 9 to $ 31 billion and total capital investment reaching records of about $ 5 billion.
That is not too bad, a pretty good result, and the key thing is, I think, to keep all those
elements and competitiveness in there so that we can maintain this kind of an effort.
This is what the Government is committed to and of course as you know this week I
had the pleasure of seeing Prime Minister Miya7awa in Australia and that raises the
other prospect of Australia finding itself in an even better position in this part of the
work, bearing in mind 72 per cent of our exports go to the Asia-Pacific area, that we
have a unique opportunity I think with the region, with APEC, this body which we are
now using in a fledging way to develop an open liberalised set of markets in this area,
the interest in APEC by the United States, Japan, China, Canada and most of the
countries of South East Asia, it gives us an opportunity to perhaps find a place for
Australia, an enhanced place, again, not just for manufactured exports or services, but
also for our traditional commodities such as mining. Campbell made the point that we
are also shipping products to the old world and I think that says a great deal about the
entrcpreneursllip and competitiveness of the industry that that is so, but we have
always tended to be most competitive in the area of our immediate region and the
possibilities of us finlding belter markets in this part of the world, are I think, have the
potential to be quiet substantially enhlanced if we kick tile foreign policy and trade balls
in the right way. So, I think that is another challenge we could perhaps add to
Campbell's challenges as well.
All in all could I say that I have always has a great respect for the mining industry. In
the 1970s when I first had contact with it, apart from some segments of our agriculture
industries it was the only internationally competitive industry. It lead the way in
developing new markets in new areas of financing. it had the entrepreneurship the rest
of the country needed In those days we had people like John Stone giving us the
dismal lesson that you couldn't have a malnuflacturing sector sitting beside an efficient
primary export secito that was part of the Treasury orthodoxy of the day. Well I don't
think it was the Treasury I think it was his, but it was his anyway. Of course as you
know in the end commodities couldn't cut the mustard. When John Howard finally
toddled offinto Opposition in 1983 we were running a current account deficit of 6 per
cent of GDP, because e t terms of trade have shifted so dramatically on us that the 
TL-7. May. 93 14: 31 No .004 P. 07/ 07
' 7
world wasn't paying us the prices for raw materials it used to pay us twenty years
earlier, and we lefl it too late to adjust Australia Without a fair bit of pain. But we are
now a long way LhroULgh that adjustment task and we can now have an efficient
primary expoi-tirig sector sitting beside an etlicient manufacturing sector and effcient
tertiary and serv'ice seetoirs So thlt dismnal legacy of'those views has now passed there
is no more Gregory Iflisis tryinlg to rocket our exchiinge rate oil the back of the
mineral industry while ninlcuighas been CutI to pieces. We have got all these
things musch more nicely in balance Lcause thle country. thle Government, thle
industries and the community have had the Courage to face the challenges and meet
them. We are a long way down tile road. We have got a long way to go.
But this Government is goin", to Use its mandute to advance it further and it will be
doing it in those areas which do mnatter in the miicro-economy, in wages, in thle
maintenance of a lo~ v inflation rate ard doin-all those sensible things to facilitate
project developmnt. be it in the Iiining or in other sectors of Lhe economy.
Could I again thanlk you l'ur haviniig ine a ) ln tonighit. I appreciate this contact with
the industry, I thought it % vas a good opportuniity so closely following thle election to
come along at Campbell's invitat ion. I am pleased to be here and say that we will be
keeping thce dialog~ ue with the induIstry open, perhaps more fulsomnely in thle first
instance on Mabo, which I think is a huge challenge for all of us and will test our
ingenuity, I ami certain. Thank you very much for having mie, I ani very pleased to be
here in the comipany of my colleagules, Richard Court and Marshall Perron.
Thank you.
ENDS 



1~ 1 PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THlE HON P J KCEATING MP
TO THE AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND BUSINESS COUNCIL
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND THE REGION
AUCKLAND FRIDAY. 21 MAY 1993
Few relationships between countries are as close, with s0
much mutual benefit and so few differences. as the
relationship between Austral * ia and New Zealand. It is a
relationship in which we literally take each other's good
will and candour for granted, as I believe we should and
always will.
But where once our fellow feeling arose out of a shared
sense of Isolation In this part of the world, my
discussions today with your Prime Minister and Cabinet,
and with your Opposition leadership, confirmed the
thought I've had for some time: the basis of our
relationship is rapidly changing.
Today we share not a sense of isolation but a knowledge
of opportunity.
Not a suspicion that we are in the wrong part of the
world, but a conviction that we are In the right one.
Not a sense that we can depend only upon each other, but
that we are both part of a great web of production and
t rade f rom your South I slIand up through. East As ia to
Japan's northern islands, and from Indc China to the East
coast of the United States.
You with your Asia 2000 program, we with the rapid
reorientation of Australian Industry, are finally coming
to terms with geography. We both remain determined to
integrate our economies, but we are now conscious that
our future lies not with each other, but In the wider
region not separately, not jointly, but companionably.
Like most Australians, I am well aware of the energy and
rapidity with which New Zealand has been restructuring
its economy, and I have followed your national debates on
economic reform with great interest.
And as New Zealand has changed, so too has Australia. Ii 
2
It is most visible in our trade performance. Over a
decade, exports have more than doubled. A decade ago
barely one dollar in eight in Australia came from
exports. Today it is one dollar in five, and climbing.
Today manufactures and services each rival rural exports,
and both are growing. The fastest growing manufactured
exports are elaborately transformed goods and New
Zealand is our biggest ETM market, as we are yours.
As our exports have grown and the nature of our exports
has changed, their destination has also changed. A
decade ago less than half of our merchandise exports
went to East Asia. Today nearly two thirds do and our
exports to Asia are far and away the fastest growing part
of our trade.
The ASEAN countries are now a more important export
market for us than either the US or the EC.
Behind these changes in our trading performance are the
efforts of Australian industry, and deliberate changes to
government policy.
We have opened up the economy by floating the dollar,
abolishing capital controls, and putting in place a
sensible, consistent program of tariff reductions.
We have doubled productivity on our wharves, and reduced
crew levels on coastal shipping to the OECD average.
We have introduced competition into telecommunications
and deregulated air transport.
We have introduced a national system of enterprise
bargaining, which we intend to sustain and encourage
through comprehensive legislation later this year.
We have over a decade maintained an Accord with the trade
union movement which has been a significant factor in
reducing inflation to one of the lowest rates among
industrial countries.
And as a result of tax refo-rms we now have one of. the
lowest ratios of tax to GDP in the OECD.
The change continues today. we are cutting the company
tax rate f rom 39 per cent to 33 per cent. We have
liberalised depreciation provisions to encourage
investment in long lived plant and equipment. We have
Introduced a conditional 10 per cent Investment allowanc6
for plant and equipment, and an additional 10 per cent
development allowance for approved projects with a
capital cost over $ 50 million. 
After the recession of the late eighties we are advancing
Into the nineties with consistently higher productivity
growth than we have had for a generation, low inflation,
arnd the lowest level of industrial disputes for decades.
We have a trade surplus, and manufacturing production is
rising.
There is no doubt the structure of the Australian economy
is changing, anid that we have the policies in place and
under development to maintain the pace.
But change is easier and faster when the entire economy
Is growing rapidly, when young people are confident they
will be able to find jobs and older people are confident
they will keep theirs.
Our growth Is still not fast enough to generate the jobs
we need to rapidly reduce unemployment, and I am more
than ever convinced that the package of investment
incentives and company tax cuts and of jobs programs,
together with an Accord which focused on employment, was
the right package to put before Australians in our recent
election.
We are not doing as well as we need to; and the world
economy is not doing well enough. It is troubling to see
Europe doing so little to move out of the economic
trough. It is troubling to see growth moderate at best
in the US and very slow in Japan and Mr Bolger and I
warmly welcomed Mr Miyazawals recent package to stimulate
the Japanese economy.
If there is one thing which I believe can increase
confidence and optimism worldwide, it would be a
successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round this year.
This is Australia's single most important trade
objective. President Clinton has made reaching an agreement a top
priority and asked Congress for an extension of-his
authority to conclude-the negotiation.--
The French Government appears to have recognised the
importance of concluding the round. And I particularly
applaud the decision of the Japanese Government to offer
last weekend a significant package of tariff cuts as part
of the round.
It defies logic that the US and the EC and Japan. so
close to agreement, with so much to gain and with a clear
choice between cheering on a world recovery and
stimulating their own trade, or puncturing recovery and
encouraging the decay of the trade rules which have
created the modern world economy, will let the
opportunity pass them by. 
But we cannot take a successful completion of the Uruguay
Round for granted. In fact, there are forces at work
which may mean that the Round will simply fade away.
Certainly we will do all we possibly can to advance an
agreement, and already our Trade Minister Peter Cook has
arranged a meeting of the Cairns Group at the end of June
to register the concerns of fair traders in agriculture.
But the deadlines are now real ones and there Is no
guarantee that they will be met.
We must have by the end of this year an agreement which
can be submitted to the US Congress, which effectively
means we need to see real progress by the G7 meeting In
Tokyo in July.
Over the last decade both our countries have greatly
benefited from the mutual tariff reductions and other
liberalisation undertaken as a result of CER.
In the decade since we signed the agreement trans-Tasman
trade has tripled. The total value of Investment between
our two countries has Increased nine fold.
We have continued to benefit from the free movement of
people between our two countries, based on the Trans-
Tasman Travel arrangement which does more than anything
else to unite us.
Today several hundred thousand New Zealanders are living
in Australia, and might I say, -the issue Iof social.-
security accounting asid e, they are contributing a great
deal to the economic and social life of Australia and
strengthening the bonds which bind us.
In the development of our economic relationship we are
now entering a highly significant new phase.
We are still working towards greater economic
integration, with important achievements in prospect in
areas such as the recognit ion. of occupations and mutual
recognition or common standards In goods. We have also
made substantial progress in developing new arrangements
to facilitate trans-Tasman passenger movements.
But we both recognise that the main game is now our
integration in the Asia-Pacific region a point which Hr
Bolger put forcefully and succinctly in his Tokyo speech
earlier this month.
The new CER phase of integration of standards and
certification has Important implicaio6ns for our
iiif_ 4giia~ tT~ nith the region, as I shall explain later. 
My conviction that the 15 member APEC group, which
comprises the major economies of the Asia-Pacific region,
is the right vehicle for Asia-Pacific integration is
based on a few fundamental facts.
The first is that North America anid the Western Pacific
are infinitely better off if they work together than if
they drift apart.
North America is still East Asia's biggest export market.
And East Asia is rapidly becoming more important to the
United States.
At the same time the East Asia region Is accounting for
an increasing share of both world trade and world output.
This has been an extraordinary, historic shift one of
inestimable importance for the conduct of world affairs.
Yet it has by and large occurred in advance of the
sustaining net of understandings upon which trade
conflict can be controlled.
This is why we see today a great contrast between the
mutuality In the actual trade pattern, and the acrimony
in the trade rhetoric.
In reality it is a great cooperative enterprise which is
lifting us all up.
In the rhetoric it is a bitter battle for crumbs.
Given enough tfmte. ' enough ill lull, enou~ h
misunderstanding, and the rhetoric will threaten to
overwhelm the fact.
So there is a contrast between the sophistication of the
success of commerce in the region, and the rudimentary
nature of the political nets which sustain it a
contrast which threatens some day to threaten the
underlying process of integration, and which gives life
to the mistaken Idea that East Asia can go Its way
without North America, -or North America without East
Asia. This is the fundamental reason for the importance of
APEC. But there is another reason too; and that is that
APEC alone is capable of becoming the forum for arranging
the next great leap In trade In the region, for improving
on Uruguay Round outcomes to enhance trade in the region. 
As I told a conference in Sydney in February, we should
be seeking as our goal an integrated market which
includes Australia and New Zealand, the ASEAN countries,
the three Chinas, Korea. Japan and North America a
market of two billion people producing half the world's
output, bound together with harmonised trade rules,
harmonised Investment rules. harmonised standards and
certification, and an agreed way of settling disputes
between members.
It would be a market where trade between its members
already accounts for two thirds of their own trade and
where the total exports of the region already account for
per cent of world exports.
It would be an integrated regional market which had a
place for inner markets like the CER and ASEAN's AFTA,
and the North American NAFTA, but which nonetheless works
towards commonality and minimum restriction in all areas
in which these can sensibly be advanced.
We could look at the possibilities for sectoral trade
liberalisation, when the results of the Uruguay Round
become clear.
But quite apart from tariff changes, we ought to be able
to achieve progress towards harmonisation or mutual
recognition of food standards, consumer electronics and
labelling.
We ought to be able to work towards an arrangement where
our different approaches to competition, compan-Y law and.
business practice -are less of a hindrance to trade.
We ought to be able to agree on investment principles to
encourage and facilitate the vast growth of investment
between APEC members.
And we ought to be able to set up a mechanism for talking
through trade conflicts between members.
We should be able -to do all these things and more because
they all share this characteristic it is very easy . to
imagine how many -industries and how -many mil1lions of
people will be better off if we do them. It is much more
difficult to imagine which industries and which people in
the region will be worse off.
All it takes is mutual agreement that it should be done,
and the time and intelligence of governments to decide on
appropriate standards, the appropriate forms of mutual
recognition, the appropriate harmonisation of conflicting
rules. It is something Europe is already successfully doing.
And It is something Australia and New. Zealand are
beginning to succeed in doing. 
while the task is obviously much easier for our two
countries, New Zealand and Australia can be a model for
this process of APEC-wide liberalisation and
harmonisation. We have already come a very long way since 1983, not only
in terms of reducing bilateral barriers to goods and
services trade and Investment, but also in creating an
appropriate business environment for Australian and New
Zealand companies.
For example, under CER we are undertaking a significant
business law harmonTiation exercise and we are actively
harmonising our customs and quarantine arrangements. In
some areas such as our 1988 Trade in Services Protocol
CER is at the cutting edge of International trade
pol icy.
A particularly good example of the way in which CER can
reinforce what we want to do regionally is in the area of
standards. Five years ago we signed an agreement on technical
barriers to trade which encourages the harmonisation of
standards and certification procedures.
Further work is underway between our two countries.
Our Cabinet decided at the begi nning of this month that
we should go ahead and do more work on the mutual
recognition of regulations relating to goods and
occupations and on the development of joint standards.
Our National Food Authority and your New Zealand
counterpart are now actively working towards the
establishment of a single standards setting system for
Australia and New Zealand.
So Australia and New Zealand have shown that
administrative impediments to trade can be reduced or
eliminated, and-that It. is worthwhile to do so.
When completed, our integration will be a model of the
success of two countries in making trade between them
nearly as simple and uncomplicated as trade within them.
We can bring to the APEC group some of the lessons of
negotiated mutual recognition and harmonisation of
standards which we are learning in the CER.
These are our intermediate goals, and the APEC countries
have put in place processes which can help us realise
them.
We have established an eminent persons group, for
example, for which New Zealand has provided a
secretariat. 
I understand It Is the intention of the group, which is
chaired by Dr Fred Dergeten of the United States, to
produce in good time for a meeting of APEC Ministers in
November In Seattle some thoughts about how regional
Integration should proceed.
Then there Is the preparation for the Ministerial meeting
itself, which many APEC governments are giving a good
deal of thought. My own feeling is that we need to adopt
at that meeting some sort of framework agreement which
outlines our goals, and also an action plan or schedule
which will guide our work over the next few years.
Last year I suggested that a process of periodic meetings
of APEC leaders would also help to stimulate a stronger
sense of regional commonality and mutual interest, and I
have been delighted by the positive response of many APEC
members. I think these are good medium term goals, and of course
they beg the question of what our longer term goals
should be. As I say, we would certainly encourage
progress towards an integrated market. and an integrated
production zone an Asia Paci-fic EconomicCommunjty.
Perhaps some day It will be relevant to think about a
regional free trade agreement and by this I mean an
agreement open to all APEC members, which covers a high
proportion of our trade, and which commits all of us to
substantial liberalisation beyond that already agreed
globally in the GATT.'-
As parties to a very successful preferential arrangement
like CER neither of our two countries can claim to be
opposed to preferential agreements in principle. The
United States, Canada and Mexico are building their own
preferential free trade areas, as are the ASEAN
countries. But I do think the issue of whether a regional
preferential trade arrangement-could one day be given
serious consideration can be postponied uiij we are very
much further down the path of open econoic integration
and of creating an Asia Pacific Economic Community.
The practical and theoretical problems of creating a
region-wide free trade area would of course be Immense.
We need a good deal more practice in economic cooperation
before we contemplate something so ambitious: something
that would change the political as well as the economic
configuration of the globe in fundamental ways. 
I remain utterly convinced however, that a gelectiver
trans-Pacific free trade area would fatally undermine the
most fundamental reason we are pursuing KPEC, which is to
knit together the North American and East Asian
economies. The sort of thing I am arguing against is the idea which
the United States seemed to be seriously considering last
year of a network of bilateral preferent~ al trade
agreements which would align some Pacific trading nations
against others.
Whatever slight trade advantages there might be for
individual players on this side of the Pacific a link
with NAFTA would to my mind be at the expense of and
completely overwhelmed by the strategic damage to APEC.
Earlier today in Wellington I said that Australia and New
Zealand stood on the threshold of a new era in our
history. We have the opportunity in this decade to
integrate ourselves with the fastest growing economies in
the world, and in so doing lay the basis for long term
prosperity. As never before it seems to me very much a matter of
making our own history, seizing our time, in our part of
the world.
In Australia more than a decade ago 1. and some of my
colleagues, began to imagine that Australia could become
a successful manufacturing and trading nation: that we
could develop a creative and co-operative industrial
culture: and that we could seize our opportunities to be
a substantial player in this most dynamic region of the
world. It seemed to some of us that, contrary to the wisdom of
generations, Australia need not remain just an exporter
of commodities that we could do both: we could continue
to export the agricultural and rural products and the
minerals, and we could make things for export.
These thoughts -very. rapidly _ moved from the realm of
imagination to that-of necessity.
Like you, we learnt in the 1980s that there was no choice
but to radically change our financial and industrial
culture, to re-orient ourselves to Asia and the Pacific,
and open ourselves to world at large. To add value to our
products. Our economic survival depended on our willingness and
capacity to do these things.
This is the story of the last decade. It will be the
story of the next.-In my view no previous generation of
Australians or New Zealanders lived in a more exciting
era, or one on which their countries' -future so depended. 
Along the way New Zealand and Australia have at times
chosen different paths. But the goal has been the same.
And it remains the same. It is no less an imperative now
than It was a decade ago.
Yet for all we do as Governments, our success or failure
ultimately depends upon our people the degree of their
enterprise, the level of their imagination and skill,
their willingness to co-operate, their capacity to
change. In Australia it is the changes we have already made which
convince me of our capacity to change in the future.
Our successes in the arena of industrial relations, the
transformation of workplaces, the move from an
adversarial culture to a co-operative one these have
been revolutionary changes in Australia.
That Is one example. The proliferation of new dynamic
small to medium sized businesses is another. McKinseys
recently identified In Australia 700 companies born of
the new manufacturing and export culture, making products
Australian companies have never contemplated making,
succeeding in markets where Australian companies never
contemplated going.
I have no doubt that New Zealand could point to similar
achievements. On both sides of the Tasman it seems to me
we can take considerable pride and confidence from the
proof of the changes we have made, and the rewards which
are now beginning to f low our way.
And we might also take as a measure of our capacity to
meet the challenges we face the progress we have made
towards Closer Economic Relations between Australia and
N~ ew Zealand. CER, too, has been a response to the
challenge.
CER will give us a better chance in the world. And if,
taking heart from our success with CER, we push on with
the task of creating an Asia Pacific Economic Community,
It will have ' given us much more than that.
It will have given us the basis of prosperity and a good
society: it will have given us the confidence that comes
with knowing that what we have we earned by dint of
imagination and courage, and by believing in ourselves
and in the future of Australia and New Zealand.
Thank you. 



TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. ui/ u'
7
SPEECH BY THE PRIHE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
STATE LUICKEON WELLINGTON 21 PAY 1993
It Is both a great pleasure and an honour to be here
today, in this famous capital of one of the worldIs
oldest democracies.
I want to thank you for the warm welcome Aunita and I
have received.
This is my first overseas trip since the Australian
federal election on March 13. Jim Bolger was among the
first to telephone and offer his congratulations on the
Labor Party's victory, and in doing so he renewed his
invitation to visit New Zealand.
And I was very glad to accept.
We are old friends, New Zealand and Australia. Good
friends. More serious friends than In commonly admitted.
It Is a friendship Which goes well beyond rivalries in
sport. And boers and wines, and sheep and racehorses and
Sopranos. And films.
It Is a frlendship which goes to a history which we
substantially share, to trade and migration over two
centuries, to shared experiences In peace and war, shared
legends, shared values and aspirations and in the
1990s, perhaps more than ever before, shared
international interests.
Our friendship and the challenges we jointly face are
reflected in the network of contacts which exist between
Australian and New Zealand ministers, and which serves as
a catalyst for continuoui dialogue across almost all
areas of domnatic policy.
In the Closer Economic Relations Treaty we have a model
form of agreement which has brought both our countries
great economic benefits.
We have a long tradition of cooperation in defence.
These days the requirements of oui common interests are
mat by a process of Closer Defence Relations, through 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 02/ 09
2
shared training, support and inf rastructure and annual
metings of our defence ministers and service chiefs.
The quality of our defence partnership and the value of
the contribution we each make to wider regional stability
and United Nations peacekeeping depends on our
maintaining credible derenCe capabilities.
These formal contacts are vital to the success of our
relationship, yet in reality the strangth of that
relationship Is substantially built on the less tangible
facts of cultural exchange.
Indeed nothing has established the bond so much as the
simple movement of people between our two countries. For
so long there has been a steady flow these days In
Australia's direction, but at other times In our history
towards New Zealand. A~ nd with the flow has come.
knowledge and famlrarity, end we have learned froA% one
another something about the contours of the Australasian
mind. For generations there has also been a trans-migration of
ideas both ways across the Tasman: in literature and the
arts, in academia, and in the realms of popular culture.
Australian culture continues to be enriched by the
presence of talented and original New Zealan4 filmmakers,
artiste, musicians and writers.
On the other hand Australian popular Culture has for a
long time permeated N~ ew Zealand.
I had no Idea until very recently that New Zealanders of
Jim Bolger's generation were raised on ODad and Dave" and
used to sit in school singing " The Road to Gundagal" and
* Xookaburra Sits In the Old Gum Tree". And those of an
earlier generation than Jim's read the old Australian
bushman's bible The bulletin.
It has been a benign and democratic influence we've had,
I'm sure.
Just as the pervasive Influence in Australia of certain
New Zealand political satirists has been a boon to us
all. In truth, where things really matter, at the heart of the
relationship there really is a common cultural heritage:
and tha irrefutable measure of this to In those
democratic Institutions which srve and symbolise the
faith In democracy and freedom on which both our nations
are built.
it seems to me that paramount among all the things which
unite us is the belief that Australia and N~ ew Zealand
should be countries in which democracy, freedom and
equality of opportunity are exctendled: and if there Is one 
T2EL1:. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 03/ 09
3
thing which characterises the story of both Countries it
Is the pursuit of those goals.
That wes the other great trans-Tasman migration the
migration of progressive political ideas which heas gone
on for more than a century.
A lot of the people who carried these ideas with them
were people from my side of politics: but there has
always been something of a consensus on both sides of
the Tauinan on both sides of politics that Australia and
New Zealand should be lands of opportunity In the front
ranks of social progress. loa the front rankis of
progressive nations.
There Is no better example of this ambition than the
pioneering a centuary ago of women's suffrage. Now
Zealand and Australia especially South Australia led
the world; and New Zealand, I have to conicede, led South
Australia by one year.
This year New Zealand is commmorating the centenary of
womlen's suffrage. Today It has been my pleasure to
present, on behalf of the Auatralia-New Zealand
Foundation, a small contribution to the celebrations.
We start fron what I think is inalienable commn ground.
But of course It woul4 be a mistake of epic proportions
to Imagine that there are not basic differences between
US. I'm Inclined to think that these differences have their
origin* in environment end geography as much anything
else. From the beginning you can see In the work of those
colonial landscape artists who travelled Australia and
New Zealand, two entirely different countries,
And I think there in no doubt that in New Zealand they
saw a landscape which conformed more readily to European
ideas of grandeur anid beauty than Australia did.
For all their understaable attachment to Britain and
Europe, Australitans have Inevitably been shaped by a land
which to eMphatically lika no othar,
It has shaped our character and our institutions and it
will continue to do so and all the more as we at last
come to just terms with the indigenous people of
Australia. For, In the process of reconciliation we have commenced,
Australians have begun to increasingly appreciate the
ancient and extraordinarily rich and adaptive culture of
Australian Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders, and
TEL: 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 04/ 09
4
the contribution they have made to our underatanding of
ourselves and the continent we inhabIt.
Australia'. location so close to South-East Asia has also
affected Australian perceptions. For a long while It
gave Australians a feeling of insecurity: but In recent
times that Is changing and, In keeping with our best
interests, we are engaging with Asia on a cotusercial,
political aria cultural level as never before.
Australia is also demographically different of course:
Jim Bolger notwithstanding, Australia has always been
more Xrlsh; since the Second World war More European, and
recently more Asian,
The development of a culturally rich, pluralist Society
and a remarkably tolerant one I count as one of
Australia's greatest national achievements, and one of
our great assets In the internatianalisation of the
Australian economy.
We see our future as being very much bound up with our
region with Asia and the Pacific and we see our
diversity as a great strength in this.
These same considerations have played a significant part
In the recent devlopmsent of the debate about the best
means by which the unique reality of contemporary
Australia might be best expressed and synbolised, arnd
whether or not the time has coma for a Federal Republic
with an Australian Head of state.
There is also a growing awareness that how well Australia
does in the world depends to a conslderable mxtent on how
we are known in the world, and that depends in part on
the symbols and sense of our Identity.
our two nations have Inevitably developed different
perceptions and policies.
The Australian government and people have continued to
place a high value on our security alliance with thio
united States. New Zealand has chosen a somewhat
different path.
Domestically, the micro reform processes we have both
pursued over the past decode have been pursued with
different emphases and we have been led to different
conclusions in a number of importanL policy areas.
Mly Government i* committed to a social democratic
Australia, a free market economy underpinning an
egalitarian and inclusive social policy.
I don't think we neoed be anxious about the points at
which our national lives diverge. There have always been
differences. The friendship is made stronger by
understanding them by appreciating them. 
21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 05/ 09
Living in a vast and dLveQrse Continent, and, no lesS, in
a federal system of government, one learns that lesson
early in life.
We are two nations in a world which ia undergoing
profound change. Remote as we may seem trom much of the
turmoil, both Australia and New Zealand have recognised
the need to engage with it and the roles we can play.
We have joined in International efforts to bring peace
and security to the people o? those countries which have
expexienced tragic and appalling war.
It eems to me that those same ideals of democracy and
freedom which are the cornerstone of our two countries'
history are present with our young men and women now
serving with the United Nations forces in Cambodia and
Somalla. And I believe it is appropriate at this point to
congratulate New Zealand for the role it is playing on
the Security Council as it attempts to find effective
international responses to extraordinarily complex
situatlons. As you will know from our discussions this morning
Australia will continue to commit itself to the processes
of CER which have already been so successful in
stimulating trade and investment between our countries.
There will not be quick and easy solutions to everything,
but everything that should be addressed will be addressed
and progress will be made.
Our determination to continue with our bilateral efforts
is matched by our commitment to securing a successful
conclusion to the Uruguay Round.
we confirmed this in our diScusSiona this morning.
We also jointly recognise the need to build on the
economic growth now occurring in the Asla-Pacific region.
I shall make the point this evening in Auckland that we
should build on the success of CER to integrate more
fully with the wider regional economy.
I am greatly encouraged by what has been achieved in
recent months to advance the progress of APEC.
For both our countries APEC can be the avenue of the
expanded coumercial relationship we seek with the region.
The dialogue has now advanced to a point where I am
confident that we will soon begin to see some practical
measures emerge to permit liberalisatlon of trade ana
Investment within the Asia-Pacific ragion.
TEL: 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 06/ 09
Trade and investment cannot take place In a vacuum. I
know we are agreed that in advancing our economic
relations with Asia anid the Pacific we should also be
seeking to Increase our political and cultural
Interaction. I know we are both aware that our shared Interest in the
region will depend in part on the crucial factor of
stability and prosperity.
We can work together to strengthen regional seCurity and
in so doing secure the basis of our own prosperity and
that of Lhe region. And I believe that our suaccess in
this will enrich our people In more than material ways.
I take the view that our efforts Ina Asia and the Pacific
represent the greatest peacetime challenge Ina our
nation's history.
It Is the dawning of a new epoch In our history and, In~
no small way I believe, the fulfilment of our destinies.
There are those Who see in this challenge a threat to our
culture and values.
I say that ae we succeed as we are and as we will we
shall see that our success Is proof of the strength of
those values.
That io why I say we will be enriched in move than
material ways because It will lift our confidence, our
self-esteem and our faith in those things which have
emerged from our experience as Australians and New
Zealanders. Thank you. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PlNKM Mi NMsr], TIM ReON P. J. XNATING, Np
A) DIUSS AI ORILT K&amp; ORI VKUOIXG CERWIDN, OAIi WATI T
AA, AhCvAID, 8ATUtDAY, 22 MAY 1993
2603 PROOF OPY
Can I thank you for the warvith of your welcome, for the
welcome of your warriors, for the singing, of the women which
vas both moving, touching and most appreciated by me.
You welcome me as the Prime Kinister of Australia, you pay in
that case all Australians a tribute and let me return the
tribute by saying that all Australians recognise the spirit of
the maori. I have always been impressed by the resilience
and the strength of the Naori and the culture of the aori.
It is these things we feel that do give, as your Xinister has
said, a distinguishing character to the country of New Zealand
and I am particularly pleased to be here In this year the
Year of Indigenous People when in this year these countries
and those peoples which came to the new world disturbed of
course the old world, the world of the people who were here
first. And those things which Europeans and Buropean settlers
celebrate are often the tragic things, the periods of tragedy
for the indigenous peoples of various countries no less true
of New Zealand and Australia.
But the Neori have in such strength of ' Culture had such a
dominating influence over the culture of New Zealand. And I
am delighted that the education which you have here at this
Harae is one where you have maintained your traditional
cultures, you learn your traditional cultures, you take pride
in your traditional cultures and you also teach your children
about the society in which they live. This is Ism sure the
most effective way of keeping those two cultures in the first
sense alive and flourishing and beyond that weaving their
pattern together.
in Australia, in this Year of rndigenous People, we too are I
think finally coming to a ba-sof reconciliation with our
indigenous people. And unlike the Naori there was no treaty,
there was no equivalent to the Treaty of Weitangi. So the
nation of Australia has sought to come to terms with our
indigenous people and this year our High Court, the Supreme
Court of our country has in fact last year made a very
fundamental and historic decision to give recognition for the
TEL: 22. May. 93 19: 58 No.( I ) 02 P. 09/ 11 
T2E2L:. May. 93 19: 58 No. 002 P. 10/ 11
2
first time that there wasn a native title in the common law of
Australia Wefor* the settlement of Europeans.
This is a very significant decision and now the government of
Australia and the governments of the States of Australia are
now seeking to put Into the body of law a native title for the
indigenous people of Australia. This can and must be the
first effective basis of reconciliation in our country between
indigenous, the Aboriginal people and non-. Aboriginal
Australians. This process of x~ cQn= i1iStian as a nation ve
have dedicated ourself to and lot me say it tills me with a
certain sense of pride to see In this country such an outward
and obvious pride in your culture -the culture of the Maori
and the willing~ ness of the New Zealand community to see this
culture dominate in many respects its own national culture.
one thing that I think indigenous people understand that
European people have never quite understood and that Is the
relationship between the people and the land. And your Mayor
very eloquently said today that this is an environmental
place, a place where the environment has a premium and we have
much to learn trom the indigenous peoples of our countries
abouit the land. We are only now comning to understand what
they know about the land and hov they have preserved the land.
Whereas as a culture we have been often the destroyer. of the
land. We now understand that is a mistake. We nov understand
the land needs respect and we understand that without the land
having the respect it canvt give to us the kind of life that
could only come by a gentle, melding of the Interests of the
people and the land.
it may be that the environment is an issue amongst countries
and peoples around the world, but it has always been an Issue
with indigenous people. This is another thing you have taught
Us. So it we can learn this valuable lesson the futures of Nev
Zealand and Australia two great lands will be different in
the future than they have been in the Immediate past because
we have the opportunity to preserve our land anid to rebuild
the nature of our lands as many countries have now lost that
opportunity and if we can learn that from the indigenous
people of this country, you the Maori and from the Aboriginal
people of Australia, our indigenous people, we will learn
much. The culture of our indigenous people, Ab~ oriqinal Australians
is nov substantially permeating the culture of Australia in
its art, in its dance, in its music and we are in a sense in
this last decade celebrating the renaissance of that culture
within our own. And I'm sure as time goes on it to will start
to play a such larger role in our general national culture as
the Maori have played in New Zealand culture.
with all that said, Indigenous people have since the time of
European settlement rarely had justice and we know that we
will never entirely live in peace or peace of heart without a
true basis of reconciliation with indigenous people and that
TEL: 
22. May. 93 19: 58 No. 002 P. 11/ 11
3
is why we must be one people. One people with an ephasis on
different values, with loyalties perhaps to different
cultures, but one people in Now ealand, one people in
Australia and of course between us all Australasians. It we
do that we would do well.
Could I thank you again for the warmth of your welcome to me
and my party, to my wife. I think I have visited New Zealand
properly too and I don't think I would have visited New
Zealand without visiting the Marae and receiving its gracious
and traditional welcome.
ends TEL: 



vi u~ s: U4 UOS 273 2923 PHNi PPRREESSSS OOFFFFIICCEE 11.
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
REMARKS AT DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER VO VAN ICIET
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 27 MAY 1993
Embargo 8.30 pm
Prime Minister, on behalf of the Australian Government
and people it is my pleasure to welcome you on this
historic visit.
Our two countries have enjoyed diplomatic relations for
twenty years, but this is the first time a head of
government from the Socialist Republic of Vietnam has
come to Australia.
Let me say you are very welcome.
Those twenty years have seen the growth of cooperation
and understanding on a broad range of issues, both
bilateral and multilateral.
In the past few years we have seen frequent ministerial
and official-level visits, cultural and scientific
exchanges, and the implementation of a number of
development assistance programs in education, health and
resources. In recent years our commercial relations have begun to
grow strongly.
Between 1990 and 1992 two-way trade has grown from
$ 42 million to $ 252 million.
Representati-ves-of a -number -of.-Australian companies
operating in Vietnam have joined us for dinner this
evening. We are delighted that BHP will play a major role in the
Dai Hung oilfield project.
Other Australian companies are actively involved in areas
such as coal processing, telecommunications and banking. Q00 2/ 005 
02/ 06 -0 * 93 09: 05 00* 7 27 9933P-MI 03/ 005PRESS OFFICE
2
We can look with great confidence to the future of our
relationship. This morning we witnessed the signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding on Development Cooperation covering a total
of $ 100 million economic assistance over a four-year
period. This should be taken as another manifestation of our
friendship and maturing relationship.
Prime Minister, when we reflect on the history of the
Australia-Vietnam relationship, we see proof of our
capacity to change.
Proof that we can let old wounds heal, so that future
generations will not inherit them and pay the price of
past animosities.
The war which so ravaged Vietnam also left an indelible
mark on this country.
Today, in Australia, we do not debate the rights and
wrongs of our engagement in Vietnam so much as the ways
in which those who fought there, and the families of
those who died there, can be compensated and assisted.
Prime Minister, the Asia-Pacific region now faces a very
promising future.
Your country has embarked on a program to reform and open
up the Vietnamese economy to the outside world.
So, in quite fundamental ways, have we.
As a result, we now find a great many complementary
interests and considerable scope for expanding our
commercial relationship.
In our discussions this morning, I explained that,
although Australia is a medium-sized economy, we have in
many industrial sectors technologies of world-class
standard. Australian companies are well placed to help Vietnam's
development in sectors such as transportation,
telecommunications, infrastructure, minerals and energy,
woollen textiles and services.
I was glad that today we were also able to witness the
signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on bilateral air
services. I am confident we will soon be in a position to establish
regular air services. 
uu~~, ouou~,~ sO 6 73 223 U PRESS OFFICE
3
Direct scheduled flights between Vietnam and Australia
will assist business and tourist links, and help develop
contact between our two peoples, not least, Vietnamese
Australians and their families in Vietnam.
Prime Minister, as you are aware Australia is now home to
135,000 people of Vietnamese origin.
Vietnamese Australians have already made a very
considerable contribution to our national life.
In the multicultural environment of this country, they
have built strong and purposeful communities, and
participate increasingly in our political life.
We believe that in due course the Vietnamese community in
Australia will become one of the main conduits of our
relationship with Vietnam.
I appreciated very much the frank and constructive
discussion we had this morning about the Vietnamese
community in Australia.
I-warmly welcome your commitment towards reconciliation
with our local Vietnamese community and your willingness
to receive an Australian delegation to learn more at
first hand about human rights and other conditions in
Vietnam. This gesture is greatly appreciated by the Australian
Government and public.
For our part, let me say that the Australian Government
will do all in its power to encourage more harmonious and
constructive relations between Vietnam and the Vietnamese
community in Australia.
Prime Minister, the timing of your visit to Australia is
auspicious In that it coincides with the heartening news
we have received this week about the high turn-out of
voters in the United Nations-sponsored elections in
Cambodia. Both Vietnam and Australia played important roles in the
preceding Cambodia peace process.
We share an earnest hope that the long-suffering people
of Cambodia might finally be able to enjoy peace and a
better -way -of -1ife.
Prime Minister, we should like your visit to Australia to
define a new phase in Australia-Vietnam relations.
Not only are both sides keen to expand our bilateral
commercial relations, but we recognise the scope for
fruitful cooperation between our countries in the wider
Asia-Pacific region. IA 0041000 
02/ 06 ' 93 09: 07' OS 273 2923
I am also sure that the human links between our countries
will become a vital source of strength to us both.
I believe we have every reason for confidence that our
relationship will flourish and endure.
I should now like to invite the Leader of the Opposition
to join me in welcoming you to Australia.
CANBERRA 27 May 1993 PM PRESS OFFICE I005/ 005 



TEL i1Jun. 93 11: 29 No. UU4 V. Ulluz)
rv A s;
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 KEAITING MP
MATTHEW TALBOT HOSTEL APPEAL
SYDNEY 11 JUNE 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a prl~. ylege to be invited here to launch an appeal
by one of the great charitable organisations of
Australia, for one of the great humane institutions of
Sydney. The St Vincent de Paul has been around f or a very long
time of course. It doesn't have as high 8 profile 8s some
of the other charitable institutions, but it is
unquestionably the biggest, it provides more help to more
people than any other, and none is more efficient.
Rather like John Menadue, it is modest and effective
and like the airline he used to run, there's a bit of the
spirit of Australia about it. That's certainly true of
the Matthew Talbot.
Because the Matthew Talbot has been around for a long
time too. It's part of the Sydney legend. it was built
during the Great Depression sixty years ago, when 8 third
of Australia's workers were unemployed, and the idea that
governments should provide a safety net for the victims
of poverty was still pretty much just that an idea.
These days It is much more of a reality. But in modern
Australia where we have one of the better social welfare
systems in the world, we continue to need organisations
like the St Vincent de Paul Society and places like the
Matthew Talbot Hostel for Homeless -Men.
And while we would like to think that the day will come
when we don't need these charities, life being what Is,
and perfection being pretty well beyond us, the fact is
we will always need them.
And, in truth, when it comes to delivering the help that
people need when they are on hard times, in many ways the
charities do it better than the government and nobody
does it better, of course, than the St Vincent do Paul
Society. 
T : PT . n. 9
2
The Matthew Talbot speaks for itself: every day and every
night three hundred men sleep here, 2000 free meals are
served, nursing and medical services are provided, and
counselling along with acceptance, friendship, love and
hope. The men here have come by different routes through
family breakdowns, sickness, alcohol and drug dependence,
unemployment but at Matthew Talbot they all get the
same thing, which in a word is Cag Care and very often
another chance.
I know in her book about a family's experience of coping
with schizophrenia, Anne Deveson pays special tribute to
Matthew Talbot for the care and friendship given to her
son, Jonathan.
I am very nitdti aware that the demands on the society and
on this hostel have been dramatically increased in the
last couple of years as a result of the recession and now
the intractably high levels of unemployment.
I wish I could say that unemployment vias going to rapidly
fall. But it is not going to and wishing will not make
it go away.
Just the same, there are things we can do and are doing
to create jobs and train people, give the young work
experience, and keep those who are older in touch with
the labour market.
We can do these things to give people a chance to reenter
the workforce when the recovery gathers more pace
and business looks for new people. And of course we will
continue to fund the charities and our own welfare
programs to help people through.
There may be other things which can be done I am sure
there are, and that's why we've established a high level
committee to assess thoroughly our policies on
unemployment and to come up with whatever solutions they
can. Because of the long term personal and social damage it
does, unemployment simply has to be our highest priority.
I am well aware that while funding such places as this is
essential, by far the best thing we can do is get our
economy flourishing again and create jobs.
And that, by the way is a message for the whole
community. It's a message business might listen to. 
TEL: 11 . Jun .93 11 : 29 No-. 064 P. 3/
3
If we are committed to the country and the people as well
as to the company or corporation, maybe we could make
some useful improvement by changing the set of our
business minds and looking for ways to employ people
rather than disemploy them. It is not really an
altruistic suggestion to take on new blood now so that
they will have skill and experience on their side when
the economy begins to buzz again.
I think these days, at every step in our economic life,
the consequences for employment have to be considered.
when companies make an investment decision, when they
look at their operations, when banks decide whether or
not to lend to companies wanting to begin or expand.
We need business which is tough and competitive in a
tough and competitive business culture. But that does
not mean efther that business has no responsibility
beyond the balance sheet, or that the operations of the
human heart are inimical to success.
And unions might be thinking along the same lines is
their duty only to their members, or ts it also to the
country and the people? And, therefore, is it really in
their interests to deny work experience to young people,
to close out the unemployed, to make them someone else's
problem? That is something I believe we are learning in the
nineties unemployment is never just someone else's
problem. It's a problem for all of us.
it's a national problem and the solution will have to be
a national one. It will require a concerted effort.
Rather like the effort which is made here.
I don't make the comparison lightly this is a great
cooperative enterprise between the Society and other
groups, governments and individuals. The roots of it are
in the vision, good will and compassion of the people of
St Vincent de Paul and all the volunteers who work here.
They are the roots and the government adds water and
fertiliser. In this enterprise government plays a
supporting role, rather than a leading one and it is all
the more effective for that.
We have provided $ 5.5 million towards these marvellous
renovations but we did not provide the inspiration. The
inspiration came from the people here. It was not the
government which decided that the homeless men of Sydney
deserved a re-built hostel, a safer, more efficient and
friendly building, one so good that I'm told you could
feel the lift in morale. It is rarely in the nature of
governments to understand needs so well. 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 11: 29 No. 004 P. 04/ 05
4
Similarly, it was not the government which decided that
this hostel for homeless men should not be a place for
41warehousing" people, but one providing decent and
dignified accommodation; that no one should be turned
away; that the front entrance of the Matthew Talbot
should cease to be a security gate and become a receptIon
office those sorts of decisions can only be made by
people who are passionate enough about their vocation to
have a vision, and practised and knowledgeable enough to
understand reality. I mean the sorts of people paid
and unpaid who work here.
Governments do not have the capacity to do these things
so well. But they do have the capacity to recognise
social need. They even have the ability to share the
good will. And when they do that they spend their money
wisely. So the Matthew Talbot does provide a model for the
problems we now face it is proof, I think, that where
the resolve exists, inspiration and cooperation will
follow, and when we cooperate, when we work cohesively,
when we think imaginatively, we can w6rk miracles like
this. Old Matthew Talbot could not have imagined this piece.
When it was founded sixty years ago no one could have
imagined it. 5ut you will often find in the history of
Australia when the collective will has existed the
unimaginable has happened.
And there is one more thing for us to learn from this
place. It seems to me that the best measure the truest
measure of our worth as a society and as a nation
really is the degree to which we care for each other. I
mean the fellow feeling among Australians and how much
importance we attach to it.
Not only Is that intangible thing a measure of a
compassionate and just society, but of a strong societya
society capable of solving its problems.
We will. be stronger for Including everyone in the
national equation, just as Matthew Talbot is stronger for
turning no one away.
And we will be better able to solve our problems if we
face them unflinchingly, as Matthew Talbot does, and if
we recognise that all of them economic, political and
social are essentially h~ uman problems.
And nothing speaks more eloquently of that than life at
Matthew Talbot. All of us who might sometimes forget can
come here and remember that when we get it wrong in those
things we call the economy, or the family, or society, or
the democracy, it falls out in the lives of ordinary
people and the last place they fall is here. 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 11: 29 No. 004 P. 05/ 05
4
There is one more thing to learn from Matthew Talbot it
is that problems can be solved. That despair can give
way to hope. That ways can be found to re-build lives.
And that we are all strengthened by our involvement in
the process.
Thank you for having me, and I mean alU of you the
board, the staff, the volunteers and the men for the
inspiration you give the rest of us.
And for the rest of us it remains to give. 



TEL: 11. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J7 KEATINGQ MP
TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCHEON
SYDNEY 11 JUNE 1993
I am very glad to be here today. John Brown's powers or
persuasion are unrivalled 8nd legendary of course, but he
didn't needL. to use them for this.
The modern Australian tourist indust U and I grew up
together, and even in front of John, I will be so
immodest as to say that over the years I have given it
more than one or two helpful shoves along.
The last of these shoves was last year in One Nation when
we created 8 separate Cabinet portfolio for tourism, a
new Department of Tourism and when we significantly
increased funding for promoting Australia as a tourist
destination. This was less a visionary act than recognition of 8
vision realised, because the tourism industry really had
earned its stripes.
I'm fond of reminding people how much Australians have
changed in the past decade and a half. It seems to me
that the changes we have made are proof of our capacity
to make more changes necessary changes.
The change from an inward looking, even somewhat
xenophobic Anglo-saxon society to a much more worldly,
open and multicultural society is one example. The
remarkably rapid adoption of a co-operative industrial
culture is another. So is, in very recent times, our
reorientation towards Asia.
Australians do have the capacity to adapt as the world
and our place in it demands. This, of course, is the
reason why I am confident that in time we will embrace
the Idea of a re publican Australia and why we will
achieve reconciliation with indigenous Australians.
It's why I think that we can find a successful and
creative role in the world and the region, and a greater
level of mature self-confidence and self-esteem. In the
end these things depend on ourselves and on our faith in
ourselives. 
TEL: 2
Now, the other striking example of our ability to adapt
and grow and make the most of our natural advantages is
the tourism industry. A decade ago it was at best
embryonic. Very few Australians imagined that we were
capable of developing the sophisticated standards of
service and infrastructure which we now possess.
It has happened with quite extraordinary speed and we
should find in it every reason for confidence, both in
the future of the tourism industry and the future of the
country. As I'm sure you know, tourism has become a very
significant source of export earnings and job creation in
Australia. It Is our fastest growing industry. It
employs 457,000 people and earns us $ 8 billion in foreign
exchange a year. It will create 200,000 new jobs in this
decade, an4j4n so doing provide a future for 8 very large
number of yj~ ntis Australians.
The news is remarkably good. Studies by the Australian
Tourist Comm ission indicate that we are already first or
bcond most preferred destination in eight out of
thirteen key market countries.
A recent New York Times/ CBS Televisñ bn survey listed
Australia as the most favoured tourist destination for
Americans. Australia rated three times more popular than
France, Italy or Britain.
And new survey results which I'm pleased to release today
show that Americans' satisfaction with Australia as a
tourist destination is not only in the anticipation but
also in the fulfilment of their holiday dreams. An
Australian Tourist Commission satisfaction study of the
US market found that three out of four American holiday
makers rate Australia better than any iff ternational
destination they have visited.
An overwhelming 98 per cent of those Surveyed said they
would recommend Australia to friends and relatives.
The survey also found that Australia scored brilliantly
on a wide range of criteria including hotels, tourist
attractions, food and service standards, and
friendliness. it's one of the pleasures of this job that you get to
tell the good news. Here it is.
98 per cent of Americans were very satisfied with
the quality of our tourist attractions.
97 per cent were very satisfied with the
friendliness and helpfulness of Australians.
97 were very satisfied with the quality of our
hotels, staff, service standards and tour guides.
T1EL1:. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 02/ 06 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 13: 3? No. 010 P. 03/ 06
3
95 per Cent rated Australia as a good or excellent
country to visit for a holiday.
96 per cent said their trip met or exceeded their
expectations. And 89 per cent said they intended to return to
Australia.
You don't get much better product endorsement than that.
Nevertheless, it's very important that we do not
exaggerate the prospects for the Australian tourism
industry or underestimate the issues facing it.
it's not money for jam but a very complex industry often
confronted . b. y problems beyond our control. The success
of tourism relies on the right policy mix in regard to
marketing, transport, immnigration, investment and
infrastructure, training, taxation arrangements,
international relations, Cultural identity and industrial
relations. The Government is determined to help the
industry overcome impediments to growth in all these
areas. During the election campaign, I gave an undertaking to
continue the conspicuous level of support given to the
industry which in the recent pest has included an extra
million in One Nation for tourist promotion,
additional resources for the new Department of Tourism,
improved depreciation arrangements, and a further
liberalisation of aviation policy.
The new commitments include $ 42 million over the next
four years for the development and planning of tourism in
regional Australia; the completion of the -nat ional
ecotourism strategy and associated programs, and to
promote growth in special interest areas such as rural
tourism, coastal cruising and backpacking.
We also want to help the industry plan more accurately
for future infrastructure needs.
, The tourism industry has been plagued by boom-bust
cycles. The investment boom in accommodation in the
mid-eighties has resulted in an over-supply of rooms, a
decline in profitability, and a significant number of
hotels ending up; in the hands of bankers.
However there are signs that unless new investment is
forthcoming, the current surplus of accommodation may
become a severe deficit, at least in some regions.
we are stimulating tourism demand through international
marketing combined with major reforms in the aviation
industry. 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 04/ 06
4
But the lead times involved in the development of
infrastructure mean that we have to anticipate this
demand three to four years in advance.
Investment in tourism therefore crucially depends on our
ability to forecast trends. At present, there is a lack
of agreement within the industry on the credibility of
particular tourism forecasts, and the reluctance to use
these forecasts has confused planning decisions and
contributed to the current low rates of occupancy and
lack of new investment.
To provide much better quality information on which
investment decisions are made, we will establish a
Tourism Forecasting Council.
The Council will report to the minister and comprise key
tourism indpstry, finance and building representatives
with technical assistance from the Bureau of Tourism
Research, industry research organisations and government
agencies. The Council will perform a role somewh~ at like the
indicative Planning Council of the housing industry,
where the industry, the government and other interested
parties sit down a couple of times a year to make an
annual forecast of housing growth. These forecasts are
generally taken by the industry as the best guide to its
immediate future. In the same way, a tourism forecasting
council should provide that extra information which can
induce more confidence about the future and hence more
confidence to underpin investment decisions.
By means of a Council, it is hoped that we will be able
to smooth out boom-bust cycles by better matching supply
and demand and improving industry planning and
profitability. The survey of the American market which turned up such
wonderfully positive responses nevertheless highlighted
some problem areas.
The one that concerns us most was the finding that
American travel agents appear to underestimate what
Australia has to offer as a tourist destination.
It appears that we need to put more emphasis on
post-advertising marketing strategies which will convince
these 35,000 travel agents to convert American enthusiasm
for Australia into firm holiday bookings.
This is an Issue which I know Michael Lee plans to
concertedly address in the coming months.
You will be aware, I imagine, of the emphasis I have
placed on " partnership" in developing a more cohesive,
stronger and competitive Australia. It was the theme of
One Nation. And despite the hiccup on another matter in
TEL: 
TEL: 11. junf. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 05/ 06
recent days, I am not at all deterred from continuing to
pursue it, particularly in relation to the Commonwealth
and the States and Territories.
The tourism Industry especially needs a spirit and a
framework of partnership and co-operation.
We need to break down the old artificial demarcation
between State trade development and Commonwealth consumer
market promotion.
By providing an opportunity to work co-operatively
towards a common goal, the concept of Partnership
Australia will enable us to be both more efficient and
more cost-effective.
What we need Is a united effort to promote the Idea of
" Destination Australia", not just " Destination New South
wales" or Otlestination Queensland".
I was very pleased to see that the Northern Territory has
recently decided to join Partnership Australia and will
be allocating a percentage of its total marketing budget
to co-operative ventures and tactical'marketing
opportunities. The maximum effectiveness of our integrated marketing
ef forts overseas can be achieved only with the
participation of all States and Territories in
Partnership Australia.
And I sincerely hope the other State Tourist Commissions
will respond positively to the ATC's efforts to co-opt
their support.
The Commonwealth Government has worked to reduce the
barriers to tourist growth through liberalising aviation
policy, providing additional resources for policy
development, through the taxation system, through the
promotion of flexible industrial relations and through
the provision of more and better training.
If we can resolve to work more closely together, we can
build on what we have already achieved and maximise the
potential we know exists.
The beneficiaries, in no particular order, will be
Australia and you the industry. Partnership Australia
offers a better means of handling enquiries and
distributing product information. It will Improve the
effectiveness of our marketing effort. It will mean that
we can offer to the world a total and unambiguous
Australian product not the bits but the whole show.
So I urge you all to assist our efforts to persuade the
states and Territories to commit to PartnershiP Australia
and " Destination Australia". 
TEL: -~ 11. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 06/ 06
6
I said at the beginning that nothing confirms my faith in
Australia's future so much as the changes we have made in
the recent past. I said that there is no better example
of this then the tourism industry. However, I know that
the people here would be the last to say that we can rest
on our laurels.
I can give you now an absolute assurance that the
Commonwealth Government will continue to support the
tourism industry in every way that we can and in
Michael Lee you will find you have a very responsive
Minister with great energy, ideas Bad skill.
The Commonwealth Government will give you this. What we
seek from you is nothing more than a continuing
commitment to work with us and with each other in the
interests of the industry and Australia.
And knowinfthat you have come so far along this road in
the last decade, I have no doubt that that is what we are
going to see as never before in the next decade. A
partnership which will make the industry and Australia
that much stronger.
I wish you all the best in your efforts and thank you
again for inviting me here. 



TEL: 11. Jun. 93 17: 02 No. 019 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT FROM PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE
AUSTRAUAN TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCHCON, SYDNEY, 11/ 6/ 93
"... Australia does have great things about it and I think it's very important that we
understand ourselves what we have and seek to protect it. John ( Brown) mentioned at the
table the importance now of the environment In tourism, and people coming to Australia
to ee something that they can't-we In any other part of the wodd... this is just about the
oldest part of the world's crust, the flora and the fauna here are different to everywhere
else in the world and people do come here to see SomethinS they can't see somewhere else
and it's Important therefore that we protect a lot of these thinp.
And I think that some of the things we did in the eighties, like preserving the wet tropics
area of north Queensland has been an important draw to the north Queensland community,
the work of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park in preserving the Marine Park and
undcestanding It better the reef ecosystem better Is important to us, the declarations
of some of the wilderness areas of NSW and Tasmania have been important, the role of
the States themselves let me pay tribute to Neville in the period he was Premier in
declaring National Parks in NSW these things ar quite important and we have as a
country taken opportunities to preserve the natural environment in many key places.
We've not done as well with the built environment, and I think this lets a lot of people
down and It Is one of the things we have to concentrate on over the period, but it is
Important that places important to tourism are developed sensitively. Let me give you an
example say with Cairns In Queensland. Cairns is a place which has not been developed
sensitively. It's an important tourism place. There's no point in building 16 storey hotels in
the middle of Cairns when the building next door is a two storey warehouse or one storey
residential accommodation. You can double the footprint of these buildings and halve the
height and keep them more of human scale than just letting the developers dominate these
municipal or shire councils, or city councils trying to get their way.
And I think It's Important to take stock of places like Cairns to say, look,, if this Is one of
the attractions, let's keep It an attraction. If people come here to see it as a town in the
Queensland tropics, let's keep like a town In the Queensland tropica and let's not devclop
a-
TEL: il. Jun. 93 17: 02 No .019 P. 02/ 04
-2-
It as a Miamil Beacb or Suifers Paradise or somewhere, else. In that wonderful hinterland of
Cairns across the river of that wonderful mountain and the mangroves, there is a
development proposal there, and It may well bt that that development could procced but
again, In those things, you're then playing wilh the actual attractions of the city Itself and
you notice It. I'll eive you San example, you cross into Douglas shire in Queensland no
building above tree height, the cnvironument and public access to the beaches and things
have a premium on them and of course the development of the wet tropics area which Is
within that shire all of those things go towards making a long term~ attracion for the
tourism industry.
I think the envirornent and the built environment beyond the capital cities amc very
Important to us as are the services We provide In the capital cities themsclves. And in
Sydney, which is of course the main port of entry for tourism, we tried to do things not
only has the city Improved dramatically over the pust ten years and again let me pay
tribute to Neville ( Wrmn) for developing a core in the City of Sydney, If you like, In these
key places like Darling Harbour and the Macquaric Street area and down by the Quayside
these are important things and T was very pleased to see John Fahey express
interest a week or two ago In knocking over the Cahill Expressway and beautifying the
wholo Quay-side area.
We've just done, a deal with the Sydney City Councfl with Frank Sartor, where we've now,
on a sixty year lease, eiven the City of Sydney the Customs House which we think will be
the key civic building of the Quay-side and can provide, itself, an important contribution
to Quay-side tourism and tourism of the city with so much of the maritime history which
the Quay represents being Involved there. And of course the buildings near the Opera
House which we've just signed an agreement with the City Council to see them sensitively
developed with proper height limitations to pay due and appropriate deference to one of
the world's greatest buildings, the Opera House, is again snother important thing in terms
of Sydncy.
As are things like the second runway which has taken so many years to bring to fruition
and yet we're seeing substantial and rapid progress on seeing that second runway form
Itself out there In the bay ind seeing it go Into place, ARl these things, I think, are things
the Federal Government's been involved in so Its more than just a bit of money to the
lb" 0ist Commission and something In the depreciation schedules, I think we've been
enuinely Interested tn the industry as a destination for people to come In these areas of
the capital cities and the services in the cities and beyond the cities in the remote areas, to
keep them as beautiful as we've known them to be and where. they have to be maintained.
That Is, there should be an emphasis on the environment and an emphasis on beauty. This
Is Dot a word which, in planning terms, ever Sor of cuts the mustard. Providing we're
always run by either developers or en~ gineers but not often enough by architects and the
reault is we are not beautIfying our capital citis. And if we ame not wise to that we won't
' C 0. t 
TEL:. i. 1u n. 931 7: 02 No. 019 P. U-5fu4
-3-
attract people to this country to Come and see it. Why would you come and see something
you can go to seo down the west or cast cows of the United States when we're sort of
seeking to emulate or duplicate what they have when in fact we ca do something so
much better. So the enviroment I think does matter a great deal.
Airlines have been another important change in the One Nation package. One of the
important changes was for Qantas to acquire AustrAlian Airtincs so that we could develop
Arisett as a second International car-Ic You will have noticed In the last week or two that
Anscut are now flying to pants of south-cast Asia and will now qualify for some Important
schedule of flight Into Kansal Airport, Osaka Airport, service in Japan and this is an
Important development In our aviation history, to develop a -second Australian carrier and
to have It working out there is going to be very important to tourism.
Can I . also say that we ane having a dispute with the United States at the moment about
-Northwest Airlines and I think that Qantas as a corporate entity and its role in the world
has been Important to the Government and to all Australians but I don't want to sec the
Australia-Japan traffc dominated by just a couple of carriers where they are basically
litng an economic rent out of the travellers and diminishing the number of people
coming to Australia. These things should always be kept in balance.
Nor do we want to see Ameican carriers breaking their signed agreemnen-ts in terms of
their access. We can ha-ve access and people on these routes providing that they ant
negotiated ones but where the obj ective has to be that mom people visit Australia than not.
So In terms of what will guide our policy towards these things it will be the number of
people coming to Australia rather than which particular Airline is flying them, but I don't
in that sense want to give Northwest any encouragemicnt that is those who break
agreements can't cxpect to be treated well. But, again, Australia will have a balanced
approach towards airline policy both in and out of Australia arnd policy will not be made
exclusively for Qantas.
Now, we did well with Qantas and we'll do well when wc see It developed as a public
company where It's got a better availability of capital to it and can develop itself properly,
which It Wa not really beei able to do with a Govetnment guamatee and a lot of debt, and
I do look forward to that time and I think the British Airways purchase of. Qantas will
make a great " ea of difference to the operations of Qantas within a world system, and the
fit betuieen British Airways routes and Qantas routes was really quite an uncanny fit and
one which should be a partnership that works well. But, * gain, they'll only be a minority
holder in Qazitas and the majority, which will be the Australian public ought to be able to
turn Qantas Into a firt class carr ier with a good debt to equity ratio in the company, and
with people like Mr Pemberton as its Chair then the= 1' really no reason why we can't
develop an oiline company with already a substantial reputation can grow along in-Asia.
But seeing Azrsett grow along with it will be, I think, Important to us as well. 
TEL: 1. Jun. 93 17: 02 No. 019 P. 4/ U4
-4-
When I was ccently In New Zealand with Prime Minister Jim Bolger we apeed on
facilitating trans-Tasman flying and we'll be flyiD domestic terminal to domestic
terminal probably by Christmas and this should make quite a difference to tourism across
the Tasman where you can go on to an Australian Airlines or Ansett flight and hop off in
Wellington or Auckland as the case may be rather than through the International terminals
and this is another change which came from the One Nation package. So the shift to the
acquisition of Australian by Qatas, the development of Ansett as a second carier, the
trans-Tasman flying this must augur well for the tourism industry In general in getting
more sewiblc uirlinc arrangements.
The other thing I think we need to do is to again focus on our cultural identity aud this is
why I think it is important not that we want to sign everybody up though we'd like
to not that wc can sign everybody up in the movement to an Australian Republic but
the fact is that it will help our identity as will cominS to terms with the aspirations of
Aboriginal Australia. Aboriginal culture is now featuring much more in the culture of
Australia and in the culture of Australian tourism as it should. And as one of the signature
tunes of this country In terms of its art and what have you and of course the more we
progcss that isue as a country the better off we'll be, not only at home in our own
relations one to another, but In the view of the rest of the world which approves of
countries which can get their acts together and run themselves sensibly and at the same
time distinguishing our culture by what the Aboriginal community can bring to the culture
of Australia. So these things like our cultural identity, the environment, having a sensible
transportation policy, as well as all the other things, general promotion, tax incentives and
the like, I think arc important and that's why I have wanted to sec tourism as a Cabinet
ranked post and why we've set up a department of Tourism because it is an important
Industry and it can play an important role and I know in Michael Lec we have a Minister
who will take the Industry's interests to heart and barack for them sensibly and
appropriately In the places that matter." J. 



/ 1
PRIME MINVISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NSW LABOR PARTY STATE CONFERENCE
SYDNEY TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
13 JUNE 1993
We have won an inspired victory. One of the really great
victories of our history.
And the credit goes to the party and the movement.
Especially to you, the New -South Wales Branch.
Anyone who has not comprehended the dimensions of it
think of this:
Ten years ago the Social Democratic parties dominated the
political landscape of Europe.
They governed in Sweden, Austria, France, the
Netherlands, Greece and half a dozen other places.
Today, with the exception of Spain, there are no Social
Democratic parties governing in the European Community.
There are none governing in their own right.
But in Australia Labor governs.
None of us should underestimate the stature of Labor's
achievement. In the eighties the pressure on parties like our own has
been immense.
The necessity to confront new realities and yet keep
faith with traditional principles of social justice was
more than the Labor and Social Democratic parties of the
world could manage.
If they did not confront the new realities they were
overtaken by conservatives freshly charged with free
market zealotry.
If they confronted the realities but abandoned their
principles they lost their integrity, their traditional
supporters and, sooner or later, elections.
But we survived. 
We did better than survive.
And we did it because we recognised that, just as it was
essential to internationalise the economy and make
Australia more competitive, it was essential that we
maintain the safety net and develop new and effective
social policies.
In fact, all the more essential.
Because the human consequences of the structural changes
made it imperative to maintain such essential supports as
a universal health system, a system of family allowan * ces
and other income supplements, social security benefits,
education, training and re-training, guaranteed minimum
rates of pay.
All those things which our opponents, in the interests of
imitating the social chaos and hardship of Thatcher's
Britain and Reagan's America, were determined to remove.
If in the next few years doubts arise in the hearts and
minds of Labor's people, be sure of this: on 13 March
this year more than the Labor Government was saved.
Australia was saved progressive, egalitarian Australia,
that is.
The Australia of the fair-go was saved.
The idea that Australia should be always in the front
rank of the world's advanced societies was saved.
Our success has been no accident.
We are still governing because we were prepared to make
the agenda for change our own.
We made it our mission.
We did not just react.
We didn't come along behind trying to flog old policies
for new and bickering over the rent we took the
initiative. We took charge of the fundamentals.
We led.
And it was only by doing this that we were able to keep
faith with the principles of Labor and Labor's people.
And, we must continue to do it in the next three years.
As I said in this same forum last year, the Labor Party
is a bit like a bicycle if you stop pedalling, it falls
over. We have been pedalling for a decade. 
We will continue to pedal into the nineties; and we will
continue to undertake those great national projects and
reforms which give Australia not just its strength and
cohesion, but its identity and confidence.
Reform never ends.
In fact if Labor ever stops reforming, Labor's power will
end. But if we are going to keep up the momentum of
reform we are also going to have to look at ourselves.
We are going to have to reform the Party.
We did this in the late seventies and into the eighties.
We did it to make the Party flexible enough to cope with
the challenges, strong enough to be politically
effective. Today we should start the process of reinvigorating the
ALP once more.
We need to broaden the base of our membership; we need to
open our forums to more ideas; we need to make sure we
select the best candidates.
We need reforms which will reinforce the national nature
of the Party.
I've asked the National Secretary to start the
Organisational Review process.
I've asked him to get discussion, debate and agreement on
the future structure of the Party.
I've done it because on our strength, our ideas, our
remaining in office, depends the momentum of the nation's
progress as a fair, prosperous and enlightened community.
But we also need more than reorganisation, we need to
rethink our responses to new realities.
How will we meet the challenge of an increasingly
internationalised economy?
What system of industrial relations will deliver the
flexibility we need to compete in the world while
preserving and improving our wages and living standards?
How will we meet the greatest challenge of all how will
we get back to full employment?
Our opponents swing in ten year cycles between torpor and
aggression. 
Between doing nothing and beating the hell out of
ordinary people; between letting the social fabric slowly
fray at the edges and ripping it to shreds.
Just now they're in limbo.
They are waiting to be called.
They are not sure which way to go, so to give the
impression that they are thoughtful and busy, they are
playing the role of spoilers.
I won't spend much time on our opponents today, but let
me say this about them.
The one big thing about Australian conservatives is their
supposed belief in the-rule of law.
They have always preened themselves about that.
And, no doubt, if the High Court had decided that
terra nullius had in fact existed and native title in
fact did not; and that there had been no act of
dispossession to speak of, or injustice or brutality or
prejudice; and really it had all been pretty well the
Aborigines' own fault, the conservatives would have
extolled the virtue of the Court and waxed lyrical about
its wisdom.
But because the High Court decided otherwise: because the
High Court decided that this country had been occupied,
and that the indigenous people had been dispossessed and
still suffer the effects of this; and that native title
does exist and is a means to a just resolution of an
historic injustice: because this was the High Court's
decision, the conservatives have made a small adjustment
to their opinion of the rule of law.
With one or two very honourable exceptions, at best they
have accepted it grudgingly, and at worst not at all.
The conservative view is how dare the High Court
recognise the unquestionable truth that Australia was
occupied in 1788?
How dare it say that native title survived the
acquisition of sovereignty at settlement?
And how dare the rest of us try to find the mechanisms
which will give national expression and fulfilment to a
decision of the Court?
This is spoiling on a grand scale.
This is national spoiling.
But Labor will not give up on this. 
We must not.
The Mabo judgment does provide the best chance yet of
finding an enduring and just basis for reconciliation
between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
It is the classic evener up.
And finding the way to reconciliation must be one of
Labor' s ambitions.
I am certain it must be one of Australia's ambitions.
I believe this because the history and contemporary
reality of Aboriginal Australia is a blight on our
reputation, our traditions of fairness, social justice
and inclusion, and our self-esteem.
It is, therefore, a true Labor cause, and I call on the
entire Labor movement in Australia to get behind it.
But we have to avoid the extremes.
This is not about ensuring the success of Aboriginal land
claims over people's backyards or farms. Nor is it about
enisuring that development can go ahead ignoring native
title. In this as in other things we will get the
balance right.
We must give Aboriginal Australians justice but we have
to do it in a way that keeps the country cohesive.
In this as in every other national issue, we will best
counter our opponents by continuing to do what we do best
making the changes which have to be made, projecting
and defining the vision, and keeping faithful to those
social democratic ideals which is our reason for being.
So what are the challenges facing us in 1993?
To steer a course through these very difficult economic
times towards renewed prosperity.
To maintain and improve our standard of living and extend
opportunity. To define and enlarge Australia's role in the world and
our country's sense of national purpose and vision.
And, above all, to be the country which finds the
solutions to unemployment.
We should be under no illusions it will not be easy.
We are necessarily subject to forces beyond our control.
Working against us are international factors over which
we have little scope for influence. 
But in the long haul, worse than anything that might be
done to us, is what we might to do to ourselves.
That is why I talk about a national effort.
Having gone through a decade of structural change, having
made sacrifices to ensure the changes work, and having
seen sure indications that they are working, the worst
thing that could happen to us now would be to succumb to
the instincts of parochialism.
The worst thing would be to trade Australia's future for
petty self-interest.
We really do have very considerable advantages.
We proved in the last decade that we are a people who can
make changes.
And, reflecting this capacity, we now have in large part
both the necessary cultural outlook and the mechanisms
and institutions.
Today Australia has an unquestionable ability to be
flexible and adaptive.
It does no harm for any Australian to remember that for
all our problems, the great majority of other comparable
countries have more of them and bigger ones.
I think we have reached a crucial point in our progress.
We've come so far: we've done many of the things which
other countries have yet to do; and, among those who have
done them, few have managed to do less damage to the
social fabric in the process.
This has meant that we have come out of the eighties
essentially stronger and more cohesive.
In many of the fundamentals we are ahead of the pack.
Unlike many other countries, we do not have to re-build
the social net only improve upon it.
We don't have to re-educate a generation in social
responsibility only lead by example.
But for the same reasons of social responsibility, we do
need to turn this present slow recovery into sustained
growth and jobs.
I believe that will only come when Australian business
unequivocally throws in its lot. 
It is business which will determine whether we make it in
this decade or not particularly small and medium sized
businesses, " clever" manufacturing businesses, exporting
businesses. This is their era. As The Economist magazine wrote
recently, the days of the corporate giants are passing:
In a broad range of industries, powerful forces are
moving against the big companies. New technology
has spread around the world, trade barriers have
come down, financial markets have been deregulated
and consumer tastes have converged across borders.
All these changes. . have granted business
opportunities to thousands of small and medium-sized
companies.
That is why the changes we have made in the last decade
are such good news now.
It is why the statement of February this year, Investing
in the Nation, aimed at small and medium business.
It is where the future is going to be.
It is where the jobs are going to be.
But we must remember these small to medium-sized
companies generally run lean workforces.
That means, quite simply, to create the employment we
need, we need a lot of companies. A lot of activity. A
lot of innovation.
And we need a trained workforce.
I will not yet again run through what the Labor
Government has done in the last decade to clear the way
for business.
There are still obstacles.
There are still things we can do.
But already the way is well and truly open for business
in this decade.
To invest. To manufacture. To export.
And don't let anyone tell you that there is some kind of
sacrifice involved in investing in Australia.
To use the words of McKinsey and Company in their report
on emerging exporters, the opportunities are " fantastic". 
8
And to help business seize them, there is low inflation,
a highly competitive company tax regime, a new more
generous depreciation allowance, a 150 per cent research
and development allowance, a vastly improved and
improving education and training system, and an
industrial relations culture more flexible than ever
before and delivering the lowest rates of disputation in
thirty years.
The McKinsey and Company report contains some
fundamentally good news. -The changes made in the last
decade have created highly successful export companies.
The structural changes have been partly responsible, and
so have the various forms of assistance the Government
has provided.
While finding 700 dynamic companies has to be good news,
the real story lies in the 90 per cent of Australian
manufacturers who are not exporting.
The challenge is to get more of them into the
international market, and to generate new internationally
competitive firms.
That's a challenge for all of us: government at all
levels, employers, banks especially banks and the
workforce, because to succeed in the modern world, the
quality of the workforce and the quality of its
relationship with the company is vital.
So I say again a national effort will be needed.
There is a collective responsibility to seize these
opportunities, if only because on seizing them depends
our chances of getting back to full employment.
A couple of weeks ago I delivered a statement on
unemployment and in it announced the creation of a high
level committee to assess current policy and consider
alternative approaches.
By the end of this year the committee will deliver a
discussion paper and in the first half of next year, the
Government will release a White Paper on Employment and
Unemployment, the first major study of the subject since
1945. As we all know, because it so seriously damages
individuals and families and has the potential to cause
long-lasting social damage, unemployment must be our
first priority.
In announcing the formation of the committee I suggested
that we needed to ask a few questions. Questions like
are we committed to full employment? 
It was a rhetorical question. It seems to me that to say
that we are not committed to full employment would be to
say that we are not committed to Australia.
Of course we are committed to full employment, but we
have to do more than say so.
If we are committed to full employment, it might follow
that we are prepared to put self-interest and short term
gain aside.
That we might as a community change the set of our minds.
That companies might seek ways to employ rather than
disemploy. That unions might make every effort to see that labour
market programs which will give the unemployed a chance
in life are allowed to work.
That local governments might change the way they tend to
think and as far as possible reduce the obstacles in the
way of business.
In other words, if we are committed to full employment,
how are we going to demonstrate it?
By railing against government policies? But other
countries with different governments and different
policies have the same levels of unemployment.
By blaming the technology which is replacing workers, or
the new lean small companies emerging in the modern
economy? But that is an international phenomenon.
By finding scapegoats?
Of course, the policies should be up for scrutiny, and
governments are ultimately responsible. And technology
and the new shape of companies is a factor in job
shedding but does anyone think the Luddites were right.
But, again, the solution lies much less in what is done
to us than in what we do for ourselves.
Employers who decide to look for ways to employ might
come to the conclusion, as I know some have, that there
will be an advantage to those whose workforce is trained
and experienced when the recovery gathers pace.
And trade unions, I think, should do what they can to
make sure that those in need of training and experience
are not denied them.
And all of us if we think about it might come to the
conclusion that an effort now will save us a great deal
in the future in both budgetary and social terms. 
So a national effort demands an attitudinal change I
would even go so far as to say we should re-define the
way we think about Australia.
I believe it should be one of our fundamental aims in the
next couple of years to build among Australians a more
general sense of identification with national
aspirations. I mean this in a context which is broader than, say, our
republican hopes, or reconciliation with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders.
I mean a broader consensus on our social democratic
agenda, on the necessity to develop an inclusive society
not just because it is fairer but because it is also
stronger. And not just a broader consensus, but a greater sense of
pride in our social goals and achievements. The sort of
pride we ought to take in, for example, our achievements
in raising the status, security and life opportunities
for Australian women.
I also mean a broader consensus on the huge opportunities
which await us in Asia and the Pacific, and what it will
take to be successful there. Not just a broader
consensus, but a sense of common purpose.
And I mean a broader consensus on the necessity to work
nationally, to make the nation work.
That, of course, was at the heart of One Nation. The
port developments, the rail highway, the roads, the new
airline system and the electricity grid are essential to
allow Australia to reach its full potential.
But it must also be understood that they will allow
regions to reach their full potential.
Regional development is a matter of high priority.
The process of structural adjustment has had geographic
dimensions which we cannot ignore. The dimensions are
unemployment, hardship and disaffection.
It is reasonable to assume that the search for ways to
correct the imbalance will also deliver ways to stimulate
new energy and economic activity throughout Australia.
Last month the Minister, Alan Griffiths, announced the
establishment of a new Office of Regional Development.
Very soon we will be announcing the appointment of an
expert Task Force on regional development and I am
hoping that Bill Kelty will agree to head it up. 
There is a lot to be gained from success in this: the
stimulation of industry and employment in regional
Australia; the maximum use of our natural and human
resources; the opportunity to see those small and medium
sized businesses proliferate because very often regional
industries have that specialised character which sells
abroad; and the resuscitation of communities which are
presently in danger of drifting to decay.
Regional Development means national development on a
regional basis. It means not parochialism but
partnership. It means pulling the regions of Australia
into the national grid.
It will require a spirit of collective responsibility
between communities, business and trade unions and
between the three tiers of government.
I think it is fair to say that in each case the proper
starting point will be to ask not what can the
Commonwealth Government do for a region, but what can a
region do for itself.
The role of the Commonwealth will be not to deliver money
by the drayload but to assist the regions to take
advantage of their potential.
For local government, especially, it is a chance to play
a more creative role in the life of the community and the
nation. We have been through some very rocky times together in
the last eighteen months. I suppose there is nothing new
in that but there is something to be learned from it.
And I think it is this: we are a pragmatic party and we
know that change is difficult and usually incremental
rather than thunderous and rapid. We know we must be
nimble-footed sometimes and at other times absolutely
immovable. We are both the mountain goat and the
mammoth. The election should remind us that we must never let our
inspiration waver or put our beliefs in our back pocket.
Our inspiration is our ultimate weapon simply because it
is always greater than theirs.
As we translate our inspiration into government and
policy, you can be sure we will remember this.
Because a Labor government without courage and conviction
is not a real Labor government.
So we can't fall back.
We have to keep the shoulder to the door: With social
policy, industry policy, structural change. 
12
With enlarging our national purpose and our place in the
world. We have to speak for our generation and in doing so
create an Australia that will excite the involvement and
affection of the next generation.
There won't be any backing off. We'll listen, we'll take
notes, we'll accommodate, we'll diverge where necessary.
But our eyes will stay fixed on national goals.
And at the end of this next three years we will be much
closer to those goals and much further ahead of the
people who want to hold Australia back. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURING COUNCIL'S REPORT
4EMERGING EXPORTERS, HYATT HOTEL, CANBERRA, 1S JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
my colleague Martin Ferguson, President of the ACTU and ladies and
gentlemen. This is a very impressive and I think seminal work. It is the first accurate snapshot
of what is happening within the smaller innovative exporting firms which
has been undertaken by the Australian Manufacturing Council, under the
leadership of John Prescott and with the help of McKinsey's. A process of
rigorous interview and evaluation of the various firms has been undertaken so
as to give a clear indication of the performance of these businesses and their
trends and the way they are operating and their motivations. Much of this is In
the report.
The important thing about it is I think for all of us who have beleved in an
international culture for Australia, for those who have thought competitiveness
was the key to international success, what the report shows is that the twin, if
you like, Incentives of the carrot and the stick the carrot being access to
export market development grant schemes, export access, NIES, Austrade,
better research and development, better tax concession has changed
attitudes, as has the stick of lower tariffs arnd the incentive to be
competitiveness and then once having become competitive, turn that
competitiveness to exports.
It Is again, a microcosm of what could be a very much larger picture of
Australian manufacturing, and supports the notion of an internationall
competitive economy with an open goods market where companies sort
themselves into competitive lots and where through, then, some inspiration In
leadership, the companies then go on and do things.
We are talking here of quite phenomenal growth but off a relatively small base
15 per cent growth in a year as John indicated, $ 8 billion of earnings to date
growing even at the same addition of the number of firms as the 700; that Is on 
very conservative assumptions, growing to around $ 15.5 billion in five years
time. The very thing the country needs In the... that Is added value,
Innovation and tht focusing on the export markets, paitcularly at the Asia-
Pacific, One of the very clear things In the report Is that while these companies have
been successful, their character, their products and their history is often no
different than thousands of other companies that do not export at all and the
difference is only In attitudes, the difference is only In leadership. It Is not in the
products, It Is not in the research component, it Is not In the maturity of the
business, It is only in leadership and in attitudes which begs the question about
how we should try and motivate the other 90 per cent of similar existing
manufacturing firms to engage themselves In exports as well.
The survey shows that our firms can succeed and that three quarters of the
firms have only began exportng recently after an average of 27 years of
domestic production. Some are, as John Prescott said, some have been, to
coin an expression, born global; that is they have done nothing other than
export, they didn't have a domestic manufacturing history. But the average is
for three quarters is 27 years, they had 27 years of domestic production and so
therefore it is pretty obvious that many other firms could be exporting but are
niot, because they have not had the leadership or the Inspiration.
It Is surveys like this I think that do indicate, I mean a survey of this quality, that
does Indicate to many firms that they to can do the same thing and that the
focus on things such as best practice does lift the whole standard of Australian~
manufacturing. It changes the attitudes of Australians and Australian
businesses towards export and towards Asia and it does give us a real
opportunity to see the place mature as a modern manufacturing country, offsetting
that overwhelming dependence on commodities which we had through
most of the post-War years.
John made some Interesting points about the size of these firms. Many were
thought by the surveying firm McKinsey's to be too small to be successful as
manufacturing exporters, but they are. And one of the reasons that they are Is
of course, the shifts In communication technology. The fax machine has made
a very large difference to the way a small business can present itself abroad.
And of course the Governmen-t's changes there in telecommunications can only
further underpin the competitiveness of smaller companies and interfacing with
the world through these innovative technologies.
One of the other key points that emerges of the study Is the importance In
establishing distribution networlks in Asia. The likelihood of Asian firms
militantly marketing Australian goods is a very slim one and, while it happens in
places and certainly happens with the bulk traded commodities in some
respects, the establishment of distribution businesses in Asia Is one of the keys
to our future and we have to do what Japan did 20 years ago establish
distribution businesses even with clusters of firms operating In various areas, In 
some places foreign access zones which are now available in Japan and in
China, where these countries actually want to see the development of non-
Indigenous distribution arrangements.
These are all things which the report points up, and It most particularly points
up the fact that the culture of internatlonallsatlon, the culture of lower tariffs and
competitiveness is the right culture of Australia in terms of developing our
manufacturing capacity, that added value and innovation will come from a
competitive country which has got all the other things running for it a proper
research and development focus, proper concessions for that in the tax system,
a competitive exchange rate, low inflation, all the big macro things which are
part and parcel of competitiveness, and then what blossoms are the companies
under the leadership of people who can see beyond the domestic market.
This Is a very Important study, it Is a high quality, comprehensive one, the
nature of the Interviews and the assessment of the motivation and the
leadership of these companies in doing what they have done, information
gleaned from the Interviews about the products and the way in which they have
performed and developed make It the most comprehensive study of Its kind and
therefore for the development of Australian manufacturing exports a seminal
work. So I congratulate the Australian Manufacturing Council. I congratulate those
people who have been associated with the work Elizabeth Brian and Bill
Mountsford and also McKnsey and Company who have undertaken the study
and have produced a work, the substance of which were it have been produced
any time in the first two or three decades after the War would have made this
an entirely different country.
0: Mr Keating, one of the problems which the report Identifies is the
problems which the companies have had in getting access to finance. It
has been an issue which the Government has raised quite recently in
testing Is the Government concerned about the banks unwillingness
to lend to business In general and what is it planning to do to try and
address this?
PM: I think the banks had In the first instance and they are now focussing
on the sort of customers that can bring value to the bank. And I think
therefore there will be the development of closer relationships with
banking between banks and smaller businesses, that the cash flows and
business opportunities of these businesses will be much more a focus of
their lending than their assets than has been the case in the past. So I
would not expect that we are about to see a revolution here, we will see
a balance between cash flow lending and assets and a willingness to
find new businesses to grow their to find new customers of quality.
This is going to take a further cultural change In Australian banking and
that is why the Government has in Its ' Investing in the Nation' program
talked about better Information coming to the Government at the 
Reserve B~ ank about lending practices of banks and trying to given
instance specific Information about how particular banks are relating to
toe customers. I think the banks understand thIs Is a problem for the
whole country and that they want to change, but again for them the
change Is going to be a relatlvely slow one because they just don't have
that culture In their institutions and they have to acquire it.
0: Mr Prescott, why has this report ruled out the Impact of the recession,
the report says that import drive is not being driven by low domestic
demand, but surely local firms have been trying to find new markets as a
result of the greater demand in..
JP: I think the report shows that the" e firm have emerged through good
times and more difficult times and that just as many firms were
commencing to achieve this export status while the Australian economy
was expanding as there were when it was shrinking.
MF: The analysis shows that the firms we are talking about are firms that
have made a continuing commitment to an export culture. The research
goes back several years, it goe~ s back right through the 1980s, it shows
no significant difference in pattern as to the number of firms that
emerged in the early and middle part of that decade as has emerged in
the last couple of years.
0: Mr Prescott, how do we get the other 90 per cent of firms who haven't
got the message yet about exporting. Do you have any Ideas?
JP: One of the ideas, of course, Is this meeting. And of course the whole
Idea in producing the report was to try and get a quality piece of
research Into the market place to inspire debate about some of the
issues. This particular subject was first raised In the Manufacturing
Council's Global Challenge report and what we sought to do In the last
two or three years is to develop the various themes in the Global
Challenge report and In the last couple of years of have sought to
understand better what causes firms to export and this is we hope a
quality piece of research I think it is that will lift the standard of the
debate about these issues in this country and I hope it will be taken back
Into the industry organisations, Into the trade unions, Into work places,
onto the shop floor and disseminated and debated so that a much wider
cross section of opinion makers and movers and shakers in this
economy will be motivated to respond. In fact, In short we see the
performance of these 700 firms as quite inspirational.
Q: Mr Keating, is this report a vindication of your Government's policies?
Does it mean that you have finally arrived, that you have done
everything you need to do as a Government and it is over to business
from here on in?
j 
PM.: I think it Is an Indication that the direction Is right. As I said this Is the, if
you like, we are noting the sucecss of these businesses, we are taking
Ie sns from them and they have been õ rowing rapily, the value of their
export merchandise has been growing rapidly. But fromn a relatively
small base which means we have to encourage more companes to do
more of the same, So the kinds of programs which have been there
tha Is beyond the big and impodrtat macro seltngs of the exchange
rate, inflation, interest rates, the key competitIveness issues beyond
tse to programs like export market develop grants, NIES, Austrade',
those sorts of things I think the reach of those programs will become
Important and the lessons of the success of these companies, as John
said, an inspirational lesson is the one we want to transmit to the other
manufacturers, domestic manufacturers who have not ad this stage
bothered with exports and I think it Is a valuable lesson in Indicating that
the directions are right and that where we to have chosen for instance to
have locked ourself behind a tariff wall and continued to subsidise
uncompetitive Industries while the competitive ones in commodities were
subject to lower and lower prices In world terms would have seen us
certainly in trading and current account terms in an Impossible position.
This change has been a very profound one and of course, naturally If it
continues the whole nature of Australia's merchandise exports will
change..
Q: Do you think that the Government has to do more? The report talks
about giving a hand up to exports, it refers to things like developing
systematIc cornpaiisons between Australia and East Asian trading
partners, In terms of competitiveness and so on. Do you see that the
Government needs to more to give a hand up to these potential exports,
P M: Well I think we are trying all the time, and a cut in the company rate to
33 per cent which Is largely the sort of area company rate program a
very rapid acceleration and depreciation. Two Investment allowances,
one for' projects over $ 50 million and one for all projects, these are very
much, I think, hands up to all Australian companies and then I suppose
we may specifically say they are, well, hands up more specifically In
areas such as export market development and NIES and Austrade and
what have you, and refining these programs, I mean over the years we
have sought during the ERC process of the Government to try and refine
these programs down so that they actually worked better each time and
I think taking the lessons of a study like this gives you a chance to refine
them further.
0: Mr Keating, the report talks about changes to the EMDG scheme and
also ITES, obviously they are going to cost money, will you adopt it in
the next Budget?
PM: Well again, as I said a moment ago these are things which we can
continue to refine and obviously some programs will have better access, 
people have better access to them, understand them better and they will
be more beneficil to them then others, We try and work out what those
prorams are arnd to see how we cani Improve them and how we cant
make their reach more obvious and I think we will continue to do that
0: Prime Minister, if manufacturing exports reach the $ 15 billion, that would
slash the current account deficit and bring It down to a sustainable sort
of level, Is that the sort of macro effect that we can look forward to for
PM: It these categories of firms were producing another, say roughly 2 per
cent of GDP In exports, all things being equal, there would be no change
In the level of Imports and commodity prices being where they are, this
would more rapidly bring the current account back towards its debt
stabilisation point. But of course, as we know, nothing ever does stay
equal. So all you have got to do Is keep on trying and these firms could
mak e a very solid contribution, particularly when we have got low prices.
John ( Prescott) and I were having a talk before we came over here just
about the performance of BHP which is now exporting record volumes
just about acros-s all of its range of commoditiles, but at much lower
prices. This Is the thing, the world is largely in recession and prices are
low, therefore the thing to be doing is exporting more volume of the
things which we traditionally exported even at lower prices, and at the
same time try and export these higher value added areas where you cut
some of that difference away, which comes via the terms of trade.
0: A question from the floor, Prime Minister, do you have concerns about
one of the areas identified in the report is an impediment for exporters,
and that is financial Institutions that can't see their way into financing a
lot of these areas. And secondly, it does detect, or It does talk about
Australian concerns about businesses being subject to foreign
Investment and moving off shore, have you detected that sort of attitude
In Australians, and is that a problem for getting more and more of these
companies off the ground?
PM: Well I think it is always very hard to launch a new business at any stage.
They are as hard to launch today as they have ever been. But most of
these have got a history of domestic manufacture. I think one of the key
points of the report is that it is an attitudinal question, it is really a
leadership question. They have got the same products, they had the
same products and the same, if you like, competitiveness features and
the same opportunities, but some are doing it arnd some aren't. The
difference Is only leadership. Now, financing is part of this, of course,
and I was asked a question earlier about the banks, I don't think I can
add much more to what I said there. I think the banks recognise that
there Is a change going on here, but they have not been at the forefront
of the change and they are trying to catch up, and I think we have got to
give them marks for that. 
Q: Prime Minister, does it concern you at all one of the findings of the
report, which Is that even If these companies go ofl exportng their heads
off the job growth out of thai Is very small, only I think about 33 000
people over five years. That's not going to knock much of a dent in the
unemployment problem we have got, is it?
PM: Well I don't think we are seeking to suggest that the growth of the-se
firms is going to solve the employment problem. The employment
problem, we are In a period of much higher productivity then we have
been, we have got a much more productive corporate sector then we
have had for years, and that means fewer people are employed in that
process. How do you get more people employed? Answer, produce
more product, I mean there is no substitute, I don't think, here for
growth. That's the key point.
0: Mr Prescott, what's your answer to the question on the banks, do you
havo a different answer to the Prime Minister?
A: No, I don't have a different answer to the Prime Minister, I would simply
add that In many cases we are not just looking for traditional bank
finance to support these firms, there are quite complex equity Issues that
are discussed in the report, and there are other concepts that need to be
further explored for various types of new funds to provide development
capital. There are no easy solutions to the finance one, but we are not
just looking only at the banks.
0: Mr Keating, are you concerned about the general investment
requirement, and particularly in the last week or so the alleged
uncertainty created by the Mabo issue?
PM: No. Look, the profit share in the economy Is now nearly back to the late
180s, it is already above the 1960s average, if my memory serves me
correctly. We have got a very competitive exchange rate, we have got
by our recent history very low inflation and low interest rates and all
these things, I think, mean that companies have been able to rebalance
their balance sheets, that they are In a position now to look around for
Investment opportunities in a way they were not, say, two years ago. I
think it has taken about two years longer then everybody thought to
change the nature of bal ance sheets and to remove some of the gearing
that existed Into bill the profits and the savings of companies back up.
Now, I think that is happening, I think companies are stripped down to
do things and I think they will do things, and particularly with the
Investment Incentives of these Investment allowances, they are time
specific. In other words, the projects only qualify if they are In there
within the time frame allowed under the Tax Act. So, this Is going to
bring a fair bit on by itself as well as the traditional things of housing et
cetera. 
Q: Mr Griffiths, from the perspective of a ' V~ ctorian, we hear a lot of doom
and gloom about the States Mranufaturing, can you see mo* re promise
from this report for Victoria?
A: Well I think one of the lessons here is that Victoria Is as well
represented, and In many cases better represented then the national
whole, that is a function, of course, of the reliance of the Victorian
economy on the manufacturing sector, So, It is a good news story for
Australia generally, and I suppose in that context for Victoria specifically,
I would reiterate the sentIment that the Prime Minister and John Prescott
stated earlier, and that Is that in large measure success or otherwise is
determined by firm leadership, and a~ s I get around partlcular enterprises
In this country, you can work ot as you walk In through the front gate
and after two minutes of discussion with the leadership and the work
place whether these are can do companies or not. So, really the
message is, I think, all a-bout leadership.
Q: Mr Prescott, you in your speech ruled out any of the means ofmanufacturing
efforts, nevertheless . Qnaudible) talks about larger
companies helping smaller companies get But what do you say to that
approach and how do you foresee it coming about?
A: Well it is a very wide ranging question, of course. But what this report
talks about basically is three things. Firstly, how we build the more
pervasive export culture in this country. Secondly, how we remove
constraints to export success. And, thirdly, what are the key measures
that might enhance export competitive advantages. Now, each of those
three Issues goes much deeper and much more broadly across policy
making then just the idea of picking winners. But there are a number of
examples In the report that show what individual firms and groups of
firms can do to disseminate material. There are examples, for example,
of firms that set up to disseminate research information that, if you like,
provide a basis for bringing the providers of research to the knowledge
of people that might be seeking that research base or may be able to
take advantage of a particular piece of research. There are examples of
firms that by marketing information, technology can Improve the capacity
of other firms to remove a number of constraints and to find more
knowledge of the market place. Then there are other examples that go
more directly to the question of sharing information, sharing
management methods, there is a reference in the report to the
advantages of the best practice program where firms that have
succeeded in developing best practices can disseminate their methods
to other firms to the collective advantage. Their. methods, as distinct
from their own competitive edge. There is a whole host of things that
are brought out in the report where firms that get together can gain
advantage from one another. 
0: Mr Keating, you talked earlier about the need for leadership and leaders
don't grow on trees, so how are you going to Increase the number of
psople who can come to ir-emdionai meAzet in peace and comfort
do you expect just to, for success to breed success, or a domino effect if
you like, or Is there something more specific in there too,
encouragement?
PM. Well I think the culture of the country has changed, I mean we are
putting nearly eight kids In ton now through secondary school, anid forty
per cent of those into university, the culture In terms of the private
research and development effort coming from companies spending more
of their own income on R&amp; D, availing themselves of the Incentive of the
tax concession available, the co--operative research Institutions we now
have there, the CRCs, which I think Is a good and novel way of bringing
business, insfltutions, and research institutions arnd universities together:
this sort of change is, I think, demonstrating to many managers and
owners of businesses that develop an iniiative product and you can
basically draw some economic rent from it, and I think that is the lesson.
I think the launch of this particular report and the coverage of Its
contents is just another example of how we will get that Impression over.
Plus, the fact that we are very, very competitive. I mean there are very
few products now that we can't be competitive in an export markets.
This just makes an obvious point to somebody who is battling to either
keep a business together or to grow it, and as the best practice
programs and the rest start to prolife rate and move through the economy
the culture generally changes, and of course these are the companies
that are going to earn more. If they earn more and they become publicly
listed companies, they are going to have a higher premium on them.
Therefore the whole culture reinforces itself again.
0: Mr Ferguson, do you see a correlation between progress towards
enterprise bargaining correlation on the grim export culture of the
companies, is there any apparent correlation between those two things,
or are they
A: No, I think they are very much integrated. I think you will find that the
company Is adopting a leadership position on the industrial relations
front, also the company Is adopting a leadership position in respect to
your export. The reality of life is, when you talk about best practice you
are talking about an integrated approach looking at industrial relations,
the question of export culture, Investment in research and development,
they are all interrelated anid it is those companies that adopt that
leadership position that are going to lead this country in the future.
0: Mr Keating, how does the Government propose to respond to the
recommendations in the report today? 
PM; Well I think that many of the features of the report already cover, not just
the macro-economic influences of policy, but also the specific programs9
we have there like EMDG... et cetera. But I think from our point of view
what Is interesting Is the quantifcation of the success of these firms,
peering behind their managements to find out what did motivate them
and how they have done it, which itself gives us clues about how we
ought to direct policy in the future. I think In terms of any of the specific
schemes we have, I would think, we will seek to take lessons from such
an exhaustive study and try and improve those. But I think perhaps
more then anything else it just underpins again what we have believed;
that is, that our future is as an exporter not just of our traditional things
but of the higher added value products, and that we can do it and the
difference is not about competitiveness or about the products or quality,
it is about really attitude and leadership and I think knowing that is a very
handy thing for the Government to know to devise further progress along
this path, and that might go to designing some of these schemes more
closely or improving them, but wil probably go to proselytising about the
prospects of added value arnd the likelihood of success. 



RPRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
SPEECH TO THE LUNCHEON FOR HIS EXCELLENCY DR CENSU
TABONE, PRESIDENT OF MALTA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 16
JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
President Tabone, Mrs Tabone, the Deputy Prime Minister and roreign
Minister, Your Excellencies, distinguished guests and ladies and gentlemen.
Mr President It Is my very great pleasure to welcome you to Australia. As
countries of long standing friendships which we have had and with a very large
Maltese born component of our population we have been very much two
countries who have had friendship with one another for a very long period of
time. I am told that almost every family In Malta has some relative in Australia
and so when you come here you came to a place where Malta Is more than
well represented.
The Maltese have made a very significant contribution to this country. It is a
strange but true fact that notwithstanding the fact that Malta is a small country it
has a disproportionate influence on Australia. This has been the case of other
smaller countries too and in the migration program after the war we have seen
Maltese born Australians take their places in Australian society and make their
way and have their families and then watch them grow up and prosper, to take
a mnore complete place In our society as the children of Maltese people born
here.
They have been great contributors and I am sure the Leader of the Opposition
won't mind me saying one of the other great virtues we find In them Is that they
mostly support the Labor party. This Is not an exclusive, we don't have
exclusivity but we have got more than our fair share. I do not know why that Is,
but It seems to be a phenomenon which is true. The fact is though many
people of Maltese decent have been coming here since about 1810 and down
through the years they can be found not just In the capital cities and they seem
to congregate In places like Sydney and Melbourne, but also across the
hinterland of Australia In the townships and the provincial cities. So they wre
very much the pioneers of Australia amongst the pioneers-of. Australia's 
economic development: in rural and provincial communities which were small
places where they have played a prominent role and of course since the
Second World War pioneers In our social development.
We were speaking earlier about the multicultural character of the Australian
community and the Maltese community have played no small part In this great
social development in Australia and part of the tolerance of the country and part
of its sense of commitment to Australia on the part of many immigrants there
would be none that have shown a lead more than the Maltese who have come
here and called this place their own. their home and built a life for themselves
here. It has been a very substantial and creative role In our society and in the post-
War development of our cities and we think that this multicultural development
Is a unique thing In the world. This Is not the only multicultural country In the
world but I think we are doing something which Is Important here, we think we
are doing It as well as anyone else and maybe a little better. That we have
managed to produce a society which is diverse but in many respects, well
entirely cohesive as a community and this Is not an easy thing to do, but of
course the Maltese have been part of that.
I suppose if anything probably freshened up our relationship it was the
strengthening that occurred during the Second World War when Australians
helped defend Malta during three continuous years of bombing by the Axis
powers and it is point not well known In Australian that the Deputy Prime
Minister was just saying to me that Malta took greater bombings than the city of
London and took a tremendous pounding from the Axis powers during the war
and of course Australian forces were there to help In the defence of Malta and
this again just added another layer onto this history we have together and the
fact that we have so many things In common.
Last year your Government announced the issue of a medal to mark the
anniversary of the awarj of the George Cross of Malta to some 2000
Australians who I think, are eligible and as far as I know about 14,000 have
taken it up. This was a very nice commemoration and the acknowledgment of
the role played by Australians in the defence of Malta In the Second World War
and we appreciate that gesture very much Indeed.
We were discussing earlier the fact that we are pursuing different paths. In
terms of our geography Malta Is located in that part of the world where you are
an associate member now of the European community and have appied for full
membership. In the same way Australia Is part of the economic order and*
linkages of the Asia-Pacific and we are trying to grow Asia-Pacific institutions
here and be part of that as you are keen to Improve your own Institutional links
with the European community. This offers a challenge to both of us and we
have to think of novel ways In which we may participate more fully in these very
large communities and you were telling me Mr President, that you are
becoming now a much more service orientated socletykand, bjlI ing new 
3
industries on the service base which Malta can offer and that led us to talk
about air links between Australia and Malta and the fact that we would like to
see that succeed and In its succeeding just again with the transmission If you
like, the transport system being more convenient than it has been will lead to
not Just the natural flow of Australians of Maltese origin returning to Malta, but
may open up business opportunities for Australian firms participating In the
European area using the service facilities of Malta. This Is a good and sensible
development. You were talking also about the vagaries of the common market, the
development of Maastricht and how the European community might develop
with European integration and the Integration of the Commonwealth of
Independent States more fully In the European family and the challenges which
the Integration of those states into Europe, the strength of that challenge for
European nations to overcome and we see the problems In the post cold-War
era with Iraq and with Bosnia-Herzegovlna and the problems of the old
Yugoslavia already reminding us of the Intractability of European problems and
European unity. We would think as a full partner of the European community or
Indeed even as associate members there Is again that great common sense of
Malta playing a role, having a voice in these very Important world affairs as we
In Australia are having a role In the development of the Asia-Pacific area and
always standing up for sense of democracy and our sense of freedom and
human rights which Is an Important signature which Australia has and which we
think we can bring to this part of the world as well.
Beyond those economic, our economic allegiances In terms of the regions we
beong, nothing has stood In the way of our friendship other than those
thousands of kilometres of sea and of distance and we hope that we can shrink
those again. So with Malta as with all those countries from whence the
Australian people have come, there is a thred of kinship which Is bound to
survive our pursuit of our different destinies in different parts of the world.
Mr President, could I say we welcome you most heartedly to Australia. It Is
great to see you here with your wife and Foreign Minister and we do hope that
you enjoy our hospitality, not just the hospitality of the Australian community in
the broad, but particularly those of Maltese origin who I know are thrilled to see
you visit this country and I am sure as you travel around the country you will
find that the bonds between us are very warm and very strong Indeed.
Thank you. 



414
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
WELCOME TO HIS EXCELLENCY DR CENSU TABONE PRESIDENT OF
MALTA, CANBERRA 16 JUNE 1993
President Tabone
It is my pleasure to welcome you to Australia.
Our two countries are friends of long standing.
It is a unique friendship. It is one built much less on economic or security concerns
than on people.
It is the 56,000 Malta-born Australians and twice that number of Maltese descent
who unite us. I'm told that almost every family in Malta will have some relatives in
Australia. You cannot have stronger links than such human ones as these.
The Maltese have been great contributors in Australia and in those things which
really matter, like politics and sport, the Maltese have been there. And I'm pleased to
say that in politics their preference has generally been for the Labor side.
They have been coming here since 1810, I'm told; and down the years they could be
found not just in the major capital cities but out on the frontier in places like
Innisfail, Mackay and Broken Hill.
So they were among the pioneers of Australia's economic development, and since the
Second World War they have also been pioneers of our social development.
The have played a substantial and creative role in the post-war development of
Australia's cities, and in the emergence of a multicultural society which has been one
of this nation's great achievements.
Of course the bonds between our two countries were strengthened during the Second
World War, when Australians helped defend Malta during three y'ears of continuous
bombing by the Axis powers.
Last year when your government announced the issue of a medal to mark the
anniversary of the award of the George Cross to Malta some 2000 Australians were
eligible and I believe about 1400 have so far received it.
Mr President, Australia and Malta are pursuing similar objectives in different parts of
the world.
For us the development of economic and other linkages with the Asia Pacific region is
the highest priority. 84153 
I know that your Government is keen to improve its institutional links with the
European Community.
But in the past such differences have no more stood in the way of our friendship than
have the thousands of kilometres which separate us; and it will continue far into the
future, I am sure.
With Malta, as with all those countries from whence have come Australia's people,
there is a thread of kinship which is bound to survive our pursuit of different destinies
in our different parts of the. world.
So Mr President, welcome to Australia and please enjoy your stay. I am sure as your
travel around the country you will find among Australians of Maltese origin and
otherwise that the bonds between us arc very warm and very strong.
Thank you
8454 



TEL: 18. Jun. 93 13: 54 No. 011 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PAJ KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT OPENING OF ALP HEADQUARTERS, CANBERRA,
FRIDAY, 18 JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Bob ( Hogg), President Barry ( Jones) and other distinguished
members of the National Executive, particularly our Secretary Gary ( Grey),
Andrew ( Schroth) representing Civil and Civic, my Deputy Brian Howe, other
members of the parliamentary party, Lionel Bowen its lovely to see you
Uonel, Fred ( Daley), the father of the tribe as he is called I don't know
where that leaves Gough ( Whitiam), probably the Holy Ghost I suppose, with
many people vying for the job of Son. John Bannon and Angela who Is with
him, thanks for coming over John during your Presidency this occurred, David
Combe who was the first ' Mr Builder' of the Labor party, the Federal Labor party
and it is great to see him here on this occasion and other distinguished guests.
I am sure I have left somebody out, but I'm sure they will believe they are
distinguished, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very telling thing 10to see a modem, strong, contemporary building like this
opened under the ownership and name of the Australian Labor Party in 1993;
that Is Centenary House, a century on the Labor party has remained relevant to
Australia and useful to the Australia people. What often happens with political
parties over such an extended period, they are no longer useful to their
communities, the fall into disrepair, often disrepute, and they fade away. The
remarkable thing Is that our Party which, of course, has always taken its
strength and Inspiration from the great body of the Australian people has
maintalned Its strength of purpose and Its Integrity and Its usefulness to the.
community of Australia and therefore 100 years after its founding we still*
control the national government of Australia after a decade, many of the States,
and until recently most of the States, and here we are building a building to take
us on into the next century as this building will.
This must say something about us as a Party, about our capacity to change,
our ability to tap the consciousness of the Australian ommuiy oudrtn 
TEL: 18. Jun. 93 13: 54 NO. 011 P. 02/ 04
2
Its aspiratons, and to try and do justice to them. The building represents more
than an Investment or an abode for our federal officers, It represents in a very
tangible way the life spirit of the Labor party In that In difficult financial times
even and with another federal election behind us aind its expense we have been
able to build a building like this and perhaps a testimony to the culture we hav# e
ushered In In this country to see it built under budget and under time. That Is a
tribute to Civil and Civic, but of course a greater tribute to the people who work
and build bildings, the workers of this country, and In this case of the ACT.
who put this building up.
It speaks muvch about the contemporary Labor party and its relevance to
modem Australia and as Barry said a moment ago we are out there again,
starting to draw on some of those Issues which have for so long lain dormant
which Indicates we will always be the Party of change In this country and the
Party that recognises the true underlying issues of substance and tries to do
something about them. I sincerely hope that in this year where so many young
people are now joining the party one of the great things about the election Is
that thousands of young people are joining the Labor party. I went to a function
for Clyde Holding recently in Melbourne on the occasion of his 31 st year In
elective public life and a third to forty per cent of the people there would have
been under 30. We are seeing them coming to our State branches, people
phoning up to join, and for a party to get such an Infusion of youth and
enthusiasm will, of course, carry us on for another generation.
This is a tremendous change for us. We don't have mass parties In Australia,
we like to think we are mass parties, they are not large parties neither the
Labor party nor the Coalition parties they are not large by world standards,
but they are enthusiastic, they are paticipatory parties and to get such a
charge from young people today Is tremendous.
So, If you look at the building and the election and subsequently the
enthusiasms of the election are embracing these great national Issues and the
Influx of young people I think it has got to say a lot about the Party which fit
very nicely with the deblsion to build this building.
It Is funny how foresight always matters, and David Combe had this when he
built our first building, which was a struggle. David was always a frustrated
developer and became a developer not long thereafter and we got the building
up and the building, in our most difficult time in our financial history of recent
times, stood us In great stead as we sold some of it down to pay the election
costs of the previous election. But it said more than that, it was again at its.
time a contemporary building, a brave statement of the Labor party it put a
large building which was then, by Canberra's reckoning, a large building. And I
always thought it was very nicely juxtaposed against the pastiche the Ulberal
party put up a couple of blocks away. It was almost lifted straight from the
suburbs of Connecticut, this architectural pastiche which fitted the politi~ cal
pastiche of the Uberal party. Here they were all being tradltional, this must
have been In their ' all the way the L13J' phase. Or it cp~ sd by ee ht hy 
TEL: -18. Jun. 93 13: 54 No. 011 P. 03/ 04
3
Eggleton looking suitably wise and Menzian felt he had to be surrounded by a
building with traditional cultural emblems of more conservative times and
values. So they built this building and I have always thought it was a scream.
Every time I have come past It I have always thought it was a scream of a
building. But it sits over there, and In and out they go In their cars and when
ever their crises are on In they walk, with the little Georgian windows and you
used to see Tony Eggieton bobbing around through his oval Georgian spoked
window. Isn't this them? And Its just the same, whether Its last week with Mabo or be it
the republic. We have now got Petrou Georglau, who must be breaking new
ground for anyone with a name like that, pushing John Hewson towards
standing up to the monarchy last week when he supposedly wrote the signature
tune on his last speech. Well, be careful John, be careful. That is all I say.
Don't ail believe that old advisers are good advisers. But this Is them. It
doesn't matter what it Is in the contemporary environment, you can bet they will
always be down the time tunnel there, tripping along behind us.
Anyway, here we are brave as always, modern to a fault, putting up this
wonderful building and let me pay you know I am normally such a critic of
packing case architecture and Australians architects and the post-modem
school but, I think Darryl Jackson and Alister Swain have done a marvellous
job here. When our architects get It right, they get It right in a big way and we
want to thank them for this effort and with the builders they have done
something really contemporary and good for us.
I think It says a lot about the spirit of the Party, that we should, in difficult
political times and they were, jump In and build a building like this In bad
financial times as well. Of course we had the support of the trade unions and
the ACTU In the financing of John Curtin House and acquisition of half the
property, but can I say, to particularly John Bannon who was the President,
under his leadership and, most particulaly In an executive sense, to Bob Hogg
a second ' Mr Buiider has come along and put up a building for us and though
Bob has now left the federal secretaryship of the Party he leaves behind
another monument to his great contribution to the Australian Labor Party. Barry
mentioned ItIn Victoria, we have mentioned itI nt he national domain of national
politics and a couple of significant national elections, but in organisational
terms, Bob will go down as one of the greats of our Party and this building will
be here probably when we are ali long gone.
Thank you Bob, and John, for your work here today, but I would like to thank
David Combes for starting this process of giving the Labor Party assets which it
Is able to call, on In difficult times, for those of you in the National Executive
particularly. And I would like to also thank the Auditor-General as the tenant. I
thought the last time we attacked him in the House he might have oancelled the
lease, but he didn't, he has done the right thing by us and even the super
sleuths like Senator Bishop have been over the lease and apparently she thinks 
TEL: 18. Jun. 93 13: 54 No
4
it is all right as well. So there we are, clean as a whistle. There Is nothing like
getting a Seal of approval from the obscurantists of the Opposition.
Can I now say to the Party In general this Is a monument to our vitality and our
verve. I am very pleased to be associated with It, It is a tribute to be here, it is
nice to be asked to officially open it and to unveil the plaque. Thank you.
ends U
S m" .011 



TEL:
VA 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 0' 1/ 10
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE BON F J KEKATING NP
KOREA riORRICR ThADE ASSOCIATIONI
SEOUL MONDAY# 21 JJIE, 1993
It is a great pleasure for me to address this gathering
of business people here in one of the most dynamic and
influential. capitals of the region.
Korea is important to us, of coursei as one of our
biggest trading partners.
But it is important in other ways as well.
Korea is an example of a country which, in recognising
necessity, recognised great opportunities and found the
Way to grasp them.
A country which was determined to re-create itself, which
imagined success in the world and found success.
K~ orea has been an outstanding example of successful
change. An example and an incentive k7uto of course, we are very
different countries and we will find success in different
Ways. in an entirely different cultural, political and
historicat enviizonment, Australia is also undergoing a
radical transformation.
A deregulated economy, a new psychology and new
disciplines in business and industry, a new labour
relations culture, new manufacturing and export
priorities imperatives most of all, a new orientation
towards the region.
Today Australians do business in ways which had not been
imagined a decade ago. And they do much more business in
East Asia.
It has been an epoch-making decade in Australia our
decade of re-definition. And we defining It further.
in recent times Australians have recognised th~ e necessity
to coinpete in the world, to be less reliant Onl 
TEL: 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 02/ 10
2
coymodities, to change the idea of Australia from that
of a country which needed to do little more than exploit
its material resources, to one which also exploits its
intellectual resources.
From one which exploits her vast reserves of natural
energy, to one which also calls on the energy of her
people. Change is being vigorously discussed in other realms aS
well: about how to deliver justice to Aboriginal
Australians for instance; about the institutional and
symbolic representations of our nationhood, about
projecting an iuage of Australia which reflects the
modern cultural complexity of Australia, about whether
Australia would be better served by a republican form of
government. In a significant sense all these debates derive from the
same source, namely the recognition of the new realities
facing us and the need to create a new Australia to meet
those realities.
They are all debates about issues which, in the interests
of expediency, or old loyalties and connections, or
because we were for a long time carried along by our
comodities, previous Australian governments and previous
generations were able to ignore or defer.
Today we can't ignore them. We came to understand that
in the 1980c. And the response from Australians has
been, I believe, a reason for pride and confidence.
but in Australia we face new challenges to keep raising
our level of competitiveness, to find the means of
concentrating our national enOrgies: so toO, I know
does Korea have to deal with the challenges of a more
sophisticated economy.
Korea has also been important to us to all of us In the
region fbr the'foresight and skill of its contribution
to the creation of an Asia-Pacific economic community.
It was here in Seoul four years ago that Australia and
Korea launched the initiative that has today become the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation group.
Two years ago it was again Seoul which hosted the third
meeting of APEC ministers.
When the history of APEC is written it will begin with
that Seoul declaration of 1991 the set of principles
upon which APEC is founded.
Principles of open regionalism, of liberal and expanding
trade connecting the two sides of the Pacific, which
underlie the emerging Asia-Pacific economic comunity. 
TEL 3
Over the years the Republic of Korea and Australia have
continued to work closely together on this great
objective of linking the Western Pacific and North
America. The objective of spreading a net of government
understandings and cooperation under the booming growth
of Pacific trade and industry.
In APEC we produce half the world's output.
Already the degree of regional integration is very high.
of our total trade, two thirds is between APEC countries.
We can observe within the Asia-Pacific region all the
signs of an increasingly rapid and unique economic
integration.
We can see shifting patterns of production as labourintensive
industry is relocated to China and Indonesia,
for example; while Singapore and Korea develop newer and
more capital-intensive industries based on services or
new technologies.
We can see successive waves of restructuring as Japanese
industry is forced off-shore by the ever rising yen.
We can see the growth of trade within the same industry,
but between different APIC countries.
We can see the growth of trade within the same
corporation, but again between different APEC countries.
We can see the rapid growth of investment across APEC
borders and the growth in services trade.
The notion that trade policy is only about access for
goods, about tariffs and concessions, is dead.
That is whvy the trade-liberalising agenda being pursued
in APEC is one wich accommodates diversity and which
focuses on changes from which all participants gain.
Today, only four years after the process was launched in
seoul, we have begun to give some real substance to APEC.
There is an APmC secretariat in Singapore with an
executive director and staff.
There are working groups developing agendas of tradeliberalising
reform in oustoms procedures, standards,
health controls, telecommunications data bases and so
forth. There is an APEC Eminent Persons Group, including Korea's
* Kim Mahn Je, presently thinking about ways to deepen our
integration In coming years. 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 03/ 10 
TEL: 4
And there Is the ministerial meeting in Seattle in
November. That is a meeting which will give all of us an
opportunity to consolidate our progress and set new goals
-and give the United States an opportunity to think
through its economic and trading relationship with this
side of the Pacific.
So we have come. a long way. in building APEC, but we are
Still only at the beginning of what might be possible.
The integration of markets and production in the region
is so rapid that governments are going to have to work
very hard just to keep up with it.
As our economies become more dependent upon each other it
becomes ever more necessary to lay underneath them the
political nets or cooperation, conflict resolution and
dispute settling.
As I said earlier this year, we should be seeking as our
goal an integrated market which includes Australia and
Now Zealand, the ASEAN countries, the three Chinese
economies, Korea, Japan and North America -a market of
two billion people producing half the world's output*
bound together with harmonised trade rules, harmnonised
investment rules, harmonised standards and certification,
and an agreed way of settling disputes between members.
it would be a market where trade between its members
already accounts for two thirds of their own trade and
where the total exports of the region already account for
per cent of world exports.
it would be an integrated regional market which works
towards commonality and minimum restriction in all areas
in which these can sensibly be advanced.
That is sovething beao nd the initial APEC information
sharing,~ trade 1 bral Lsing agenda to a true economic
comuniy.
All it takes is mutual agreement that it should be done,
and the time and intelligence of governments to decide on
appropriate standards, the appropriate forms of mutual
recognition, the appropriate harmonisation of conflicting
rules* There are great opportunities, but right now there are
zany challenges to Asia-Pacific economic COOPeration.
There are the bilateral trade negotiations between Japan
and the United States# which require great sensitiVity
and imagination on both sides. TEL: 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 04/ 10 
i-I
I LL
There is the end game in the Uruguay ikound, which means
so much to the future of the world trading system on
which Pacific prosperity is based.
There is the lateat yen appreciation, which may see
another wave of restructuring of Japan's industry
throughout the region.
Within a few months we will have the rminent Persons
Group report and the November APEC meeting, which will
set out goals for the organisation over the next few
years. We will be looking at the possibility of a framework
agreement which will formalise the objectives and process
of APEC, and strengthen the structure of government
understandings underpinning the has-Pacific economic
community.
We will be looking, too, at a work program designed to
remove obstacles which business people encounter in trade
within the region.
Finally, there is the need for a meeting of Pacific
leaders to give greater weight and authority to the APEC
agenda. It the United States administration moves to host such a
meeting this year, we should all be delighted to attend.
Above all we would like to convey to the United States
the message that the Asia-Pacific region represents much
less a threat than an extraordinary opportunity: Duch
less An area of difficulty than one of almost limitless
potential. it is very much in the interests of all Western Pacific
countries that the United States sees things this way.
There is a great deal to be done, and I know from my
talks with-Presioent Kim that Australia and Korea
continue to find ourselves in close agreement on the main
issues bef ore um.
In a way this alliance between our two countries to
advance the creation of an Asia-Pacific economic
community is less surprising than it seems.
True, we are at opposite ends of the Pacific.
True, we often have so few difficulties In our
relationship that the media have little cause to report
on~ it.
True, the strength of our mutual relationship is
* sonetimes overshadowed by the relationships each-of usr
V&amp; ewith the regional giants of China, Japan and the
United States. I 17-21. jun. 93 14: 13 NO. 011 P. 05/ 10 
but the logic of our relationship in fact depends on
these characteri~ stics.
The economic weight you wield in the world is about the
same as ours*
Like us, you are always aware you are a big player in
relation to some countries, and that Japan, China and the
United States are big players in relation to us.
Like us, you are a security ally and trade Fartner of the
United States, but also an important participant in the
Western Pacific economy.
Like us, you depend on trade to expand your economy and
increase your living standards.
Like us, you have an interest in keeping both sides of
the Pacific together.
And of course the truth is that the bilateral
relationship between Korea and Australia is now very well
established, deep and stable and continuing to grow.
it was in response to this growth and the growing depth
and diversity of our dealings that President Kim and I
agreed this morning to establish a new Joint Economic
Coamittee, bringing together all the relevant government
agencies, and meeting annually to oversee the developmsnt
of our economic relationship.
Korea is now our fourth largest export marketq
Commercial links betWeen Australia and Korea underpin a
relationship from which both countries have prospered.
Australia supplies high-quality competitively priced
industrial raw material inputs f or Korean industry
including coal, aluminium, iron ore, non ferrous metals,
uranium, wool and cotton.
Australia is a Significant market for Korea in mtotor
cars, textiles clothing and footwear# chemical$ and
electronics. Today we are striving for a further expansion of two-way
trade. Korean industry is still growing in areas which miatch
Australia's export strengths, Particularly enkergy.
Australia is broadening its trade profile with Korea as
the Korean market expands and diveraifies.
Australia remains well placed to supply coal andl uranium.
Commercial appraisal is underway Of Australia's capacity
TEL:' 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 06/ 10' 
21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 07/ 10
7
to suPPlY Korea's long-term delhand for liqUid natural
gas a
Australia is now becomin~ g a supplier of Manufactured
goods such as food, fiiM, building products, automotive
engines and component..
We are selling services such as telecommunications,
banking, computer sortwareo education and tourism.
Korea is also Iiproving its share of the Australian
market. Last year your exports to Australia rose 20 per
cent, with cars leading the surge.
While Australia's reputation as a supplier or mineral,
energy and agricultural commodities is well known within
] Korean industry, we are much lass well known by Korean
business as a source of industrial goods and technology.
Australia has recognised Korea's priority to develop and
access industrial technology as a part of the economic
reform program.
r an pleased to note that, coinciding with my visit,
Australia and Korea will sign tomorrow an industrial
technology cooperation a~ reement which will provide a
framework for collaboration in this field.
The extent of business cooperation between Australian and
Korean companies is also encouraging.
I refer particularly to areas such as the coo0perationt
taking place between
The Australian telecomm unicatians carrierl Tel'stra,
and the Korean companyt posDATA. on Wednesday I
will be witnessing the signing or a letter Of intent
between the two cooPanies for a strategic alliance
witi) a view to becoming one of the leading
telecommuiicatjohs companies in Korea.
In the informatiofl-t~ chn~ l~ gY field; the supply of
industrial software to Hyundai zlectronics by
Adelaide company# The Cadds. Man Australia, and the
success of Moldf low Korea in selling Australianl
comaputer-aided engineering software for the plastics
industry. in the area of environmental technology; the suPPly
of new water-related environmental technologY
equipment by cheutronics to several organisations in
Korea, including the Seoul Metropolitan Government,
and the agreement between the West Australian
ovipany, Environmental Solutionls InternatiOnal, and
R Samsung on the supply of oil-from-sludge technology.
in the automobile industry; the supply Of
sophisticated mbachine tools by Kirby Engineerinlg for 
TEL a
the manufacture of automobile steering mechanisms
and the supply of automobile engines by utralia's
Holden Engine Company.
And the supply of engineering services by Kaiser
Engineering for the construction of a new aluminiua
hydroxide plant in Korea General Chemical
Corporation.
In this context, I welcome the joint management
consortium between the Australian company Intag
International, Deutsche Aerospace of Germany and Samsung
of Korea to use Australian technology for electronic
baggage and freight handling. This is an agreement which
will open up new manufacturing opportunities in both
Australia and Korea for markets world-wide.
I am also pleased that Austrade will be expanding its
role in Korea with the-establishment of an office in
Pusan.
The growth of our trade has been more than satisfactory
although Australia still encounters difficulties in the
Korean market over access for agricultural commodities,
particularly for beef and dairy products, and over
Korea's wide-ranging quarantine restrictions on the entry
of Australian horticultural products.
The business environment between our two countries is
being enhanced by the rapid increase in non-stop direct
air services between Australia and Korea. Six flights
per week will be in place this coming July compared with
YAO services at the beginning of 1990.
For those of you who haven't visited us recently, let me
say that everything you hear about our wonderful beaches,
about the forests and wilderness and the outback is true.
But, as I said when I began, it is also true that
Australian% have over the last decade transformed their
economy. It is most visible in our trade performance. over a
decade, exports have more than doubled. A decade ago
barely one dollar in eight in Australia came from
exports. Today it is one dollar in five, and Climbing.
Today manufactures and services each rival rural exports,
and both are growing. The fastes6t growing manufactured
exports are elaborately transformed goods.
Ahs our exports have grown and the nature Of our exports
has changed, their destination has also changed, A
decade ago less than half of our merchandise exports vent
to East Asia. Today nearly two thirds do and our
exports to Asia are far and away the fastest gr6wing part
of our trade., 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 08/ 10 
TEL:* 21. Jun. 9 14: 13 No. 011 P. 09/ 10
behind these changes in our trading performance are the
ef forts of Australian industry* and deliberate changes to
government policy.
We have opened up the economy by floating the Australian
dollar, abolishing capital controls, and puttinV in place
a sensible, consistent program of tariff reductions.
We have introduced competition into telecommunications
anid deregulated air transport.
We have Introduced a national system of eniterpr ise
bargaining by management and labour, which we Intend to
sustain and encourage through comprehensive legislation
later this year.
We have over a decade maintained an Accord withi the trade
union movement which has been a significant factor in
reducing inflation to 1.6 per cent one of the lowest
rates among industrial countries.
And as a result of tax reforms we now have one of the
lowest ratios of tag to GDP in the OECD.
The change continues today. We are cutting the company
tax rate from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. We have
introduced a conditional 10 per cent investment allowance
for plant and equipment, anid an additional 10 per cent
development allowance for approved projects with a
capital cost over $ 50 million.
We now have consistently higher productivity growth than
we have had for a generation, low inflation, and the
lowest level of industrial disputes for decades. We have
a trade surplus, and manufacturing production is rising.
There is no doubt the structure of the Australian economy
is changing, and that we have the policies in place and
under developm~ nt to maintain the pace.
Certainly our recovery has not been as fast as we would
like. economic growth, though faster than virtually any
other OECD country, is not sufficient to make an impact
on our greatest problem unemployment.
Of course, we are not helped by the slow pace of world
recovery, or the low prices presently being fetched by
some of our commodities.
But we have no doubt about the path we are on. Indeed it
is all the more reason to push on with our programs of
reform, especially our efforts to encourage more world
class small and medium sized businesses to flourish, to
flourish as exporters, and to flourish particularly ini
Asia and the Pacific.
Fifteen years ago, with some of my colleagues, I imagined
an Ausntralia which exported not only commodities but 
TEL:
sophisticated manufactures. I sometimes ask those same
colleagues to ileagine for a moment whiere we would now be
bad these ref ormis not been made if We had continued to
drift in the world, instead of qoing out to meet it.
The reforms represent a huge step for any country to take
they involve cultural change as well as structural
change in the economy. It all takes time, anid the world
does not always cooperate with our ambitions. Although
in Australia we are determined to soften the impact,
there bar, been hardship for a lot of people.
But there is no question these reforms were essential anid
that they have given us unprecedented opportunities and
there is hardly a more persuasive testimony to this than
our flourishing trade with Korea.
I said at the beginning Australia has had to re-imagine
itself anid rQ-define itself. And because Korea has done
this, and because Korea continues to meet the new
challenges, I know my audience here today will understand
what I mean.
I have no doubt we will continue to re-define ourselves.
And I am sure that our two countrie&amp; will be able to call
on this excperience in our efforts to re-imagine the Asia-
Pacific region and help re-create it as a genuine
economic community.
If we do that, every country's interests will be served,
and so will future generations of Noreans, anid
Australians. Thanik you. TEL: 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 10/ 10 



S. j_
TEL: 21. Jun. 93 18: 44 No. 025 P. 01/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER# THE HON P J KEATING, NP
OFFICIAL DINNER HOSTED BY PRESIDENT KIM YOUNG-SAM
CHONG WA DAE ( THE BLUE HOUSE), SEOUL, 21 JUNE 1993
( EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.00 PM KOREAN TIME, 21 JUNE 1993)
I appreciate very much the warm welcome I have received
on this my first visit to the Republic of Korea.
Ours is a friendship of long standing which spans the
turbulent history of the Western Pacific in this century.
Our first contacts date from the arrival here around the
turn of the century of Australian missionaries.
in 1950, Australia was one of the 16 countries which sent
military forces under the United Nations flag to assist
the Republic of Korea in its bitter struggle against
aggression.
About 17,000 Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen
served in the United Nations forces. Australians will
always be proud of the service they gave.
The loss of life and devastation caused by the Korean War
was horrendous, and it has demanded of the Korean people
great qualities of faith and endurance, not just to
withstand he haydship end suffering, but to overcome it
and build this mo~ dern Korean society.
Australians who know Korea well admire Koreans' courage
and resilience.
They respect not only your recent achievements: they
respect also your long struggle earlier this century to
achieve independence and to reassert the rich tradition
of your national heritage and culture.
As one of the world's ol~ dest democracies, Australians
also applaud the great achievement of the Korean people
in establishing democratic political institutions.
We congratulate you, Mr President, on your decisive win
in last December's presidential election.
My own Governmuent was returned in the Australian election
which was held in March. 
TE: 21. Jun. 9 3 18: 44 No. 025 P. 02/ 10
2
So like you, I know something of the excitement and
challenge of the electoral process.
Your election as the first civilian President in 35 years
is itself a great step forward in the maturing of the
Korean political system.
We admire the vigour with which your new Administration
has set about the task of stimulating and revitalising
the economy.
We are no less impressed by your campaign to strengthen
democratic institutions and create in Korea honest and
open government.
Mr President, what I have seen in Seoul today helps me to
understand In new ways the pride of your people in their
achievements in economic development and nationbuilding.
Korea ' s record of economic growth and dynamism over the
last four decades has been truly impressive.
We value greatly the partnership that we have forged with
you in the course of your extraordinary economic advance.
In 19921 AuStralia-Korea two-way trade was worth over
five billion Australian dollars.
The size of Australia-Korea trade and the interdependence
it generates between key industries on each side give our
economic relationship a strategic character which commits
us to an enduring, long-term partnership.
We are a reliable source of high quality and
competitively priced mineral and energy commodities for
Korean industry, and this is a role we take very
seriously., i
As well as expanding established areas of commerce, we
are interested in widening and diversifying the base of
our economic and business relationship.
We also would like to see expanding air links to Support
the growth of tourism, education and business travel in
both directions.
Increasing numbers of visitors in both directions,
establishment of parallel cultural foundations, and
efforts to promote the study of the Korean language in
Australia will increase awareness of each other's society
and culture.
And that can only deepen our friendship.
TEL: 
-Tf E C: 21 . Jun .93 * 18: 4 A No .025 P d3/ 1Oi
3
Mr President, our strong and successful bilateral
relationship also provides Australia and Korea with an
opportunity to work together in helping nurture a
stronger sense of community among the countries of the
Asia-Pacific region.
Australia arnd Korea share a fundamental interest in the
maintenance of an open and non-discriminatory
multilateral trading system.
We also share a vital interest in encouraging economic
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, and in having the
countries of North America and the Western Pacific remain
together within the some vibrant trading community.
In 1989, our countries played decisive roles in helping
launch the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC
process which is now showing such promise as a vehicle
for promoting open economic regionalism in the Pacific
area. I have been encouraged by the strong support given by the
Korean Government to the proposal I made last year to
establish a process of periodic meetings of APEC leaders.
interest in this proposal is now gathering momentum.
If realised, it will add status and authority to APEC and
ensure that it becomes the pre-eminent vehicle for
advancing economic cooperation and trade liberalisation
in the Asia-Pacific region.
The economic dynamism of the Republic of Korea and other
East Asian countries provides a very positive outlook for
our region.
But to achieve this great promise it will be important
that our efforts towards economic institution-building
through APEC are complemented by appropriate attention to
regional abcurittr.
Australia recognises continuing uncertainty in the
security situation on the Korean Peninsula.
More widely in the region, a general trend towards a more
favourable security outlook is tempered by increased
fluidity in strategic affairs.
Maintaining in good order the bilateral alliances that
Australia, the Republic of Korea and Japan each have with
the United States Is therefore very important.
In addition, both our countries welcome the increasing
support throughout the region for processes of security
dialogue. 
TEL: 21. Jun. 93 18: 44 No. 025 P. 04/ 10
4
Mr President, as I explained in our talks today,
Australia is now embarked on a sustained effort to make
our economy more competitive, more open and better placed
to take full advantage of economic dynamism in East Asia.
For Australia, the economic imperative of integrating
more closely with Asia coincides well with the regional
focus of our diplomatic and security policy.
The Asia-Pacific region is where Australia must work out
its destiny: the changes we have made and are continuing
to make, to our economy and to our business and
industrial culture, have been expressly geared to this.
These efforts are now finding expression in an
Increasingly confident and independent view of
Australia's national Identity, and a broad debate about
the institutional forms and symbols of our nationhood
reflects this.
As we strive to transform our economy and engage Asia
more closely, we value all the more the relationship we
enjoy with the Republic of Korea.
Based on trust and friendship and a congruence of
economic and regional interests, our relationship with
you can only advance and prosper.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I should be glad if you would join me in a reciprocal
toast to the good health of President and Mrs Kim
to the success and prosperity of the Republic
of Korea, and
to Australia-Korea friendship. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATIG MP
BUSIES RECEPTIO AMD CMINIS
SHAHIM SAURDAY, 26 JUNK 1993
It is fitting that my last public speaking opportunity on
this visit to Korea and China, should be to a
predominantly business audience.
This visit has been very much about business: about
impressing on our hosts how much Australia has to offer;
about. encouraging and supporting Australian firms already
out in the international field; and about sending clear
signals to the business community back home about what
can be achieved.
Let me say that my task has been made a lot easier in the
last few days by seeing first-hand how successful
Australian companies have been in establishing critical
business relationships in this country.
The scoreboard is impressive. In Beijing, I attended
ribbon cutting ceremonies for four new ventures involving
Alcatel, AAP, the ANZ Banking Group and Cadbury
Schweppes. In Shanghai today I participated in a
foundation stone-laying ceremony for the new Shanghai
Fosters Brewery.
Ind here this evening we are celebrating two other recent
events: the opening of the Australian Wool Corporation's
Shanghai office; and ACI's conclusion of a joint venture
for the establishment of two plants one in Shanghai and
one in Guangzhou. which are expected to make it the
biggest manufacturer of glass containers in China.
As well, I know there are representatives here from other
Australian companies, like Suspension Components, who are
setting up in Shanghai.
In naming these recent successes I should not overlook
the achievements of many other Australian companies.
Even before these recent announcements there were an
estimated 540 Australian companies operating in China.
But what is remarkable about the list of companies I've
named is the diversity. 
r rom the Wool Corporation, representing one of our
oldest and most valuable comodity exports.
To Alcatel and AAP, involved with Chinese partners
in sophisticated communications technology.
From the ANZ Banking Group, whose new branch here in
shangha-i will signal Australian competitiveness in
the services sector.
To joint ventures in sophisticated goods-processing
and packaging and industrial components.
I congratulate all of these companies for their
enterprise. Their achievements leave no doubt about our ability . to
succeed here in China and elsewhere in the region and
that is a message I will be taking home to Australia.
The integration of our economy with Asia is not a
speculative venture but a fact waiting to happen.
That doesn't mean it will be easy. I daresay there is no
one in this room who would say that it has been easy, but
equally I doubt if there is anyone who would not say that
it was a chance that had to be grasped.
And I'm sure that ACI and the Australian Wool Corporation
would be among these.
Let me congratulate them both, and now please join me in
a toast to them, and indeed to the success of all
Australian business endeavours here in Saga
China, and throughout the region. Shgai. i 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECK BY nm PMM lawT THE RON P 3 KETING MP
YOSTERS-HUAGUANG PCKDATIMCW S7voE-LYMING
SH&amp; NGI SLVM&amp;, 26 JUNE 1993
This ceremony to lay the foundation stone for the Fosters
Shanghai Brewery might be taken as a symbol of
Australia's commercial response to the opportunities and
challenges on offer in Asia.
It is another significant chapter in what is a genuinely
good news story.
It is good news for the two joint venturers:
Huaguang Brewery vill. benefit from their
relationship with one of the world's foremost
brewery operations, the Fosters Brewery Group, and
in particular Carlton and United Breweries.
And Fosters, which is now a truly international
company operating on four continents, have by their
enterprise won a foothold in a very significant
market. Within five years, it could well be
producing as imuch beer in China as it does in
Australia.
This is also a good news story for Australia and for
China. For Australia, because we see one of our companies making
a major investment and a long term commitment in one of
the fastest growing countries in the world.
And for China, because we're seeing world class
technology and quality international backing linking up
with a Chinese partner to meet a market-driven need.
What we are seeing here is a quality international
response to China's new economic policy.
Australia's new economic policy too: because Australia
is encouraging companies to be internationally
competitive, to get out in the world and compete with the
best, and to look to Asia as a place to invest. 
Joint ventures like this are good for Australia because
the reord shows that trade invariably follows
investment.
And it is trade and investment linkages of this kind that
will guarantee our share of the economic growth in the
region. So Fosters must be comiended.
And the Huaguang Brewery must be commended: it has
forged a partnership with a company that is not only at
the leading edge of its field, but an internationally
recognised Australian icon.
We look forward with a fair degree of certainty to the
day when Shanghai Fosters is a Chinese icon as well.
All of you deserve our congratulations and I wish you
all the very best in this most significant joint venture,
Shanghai Posters Brewery Limited. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
CLOSING REMARKS, PREMIERS' CONFERENCE; PARLIAMENT HOUSE
JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well thank you very much, Marshall Perron. I might just recap on a few
points that Premiers and Chief Ministers have raised and then we might then
retire to the cabinet room. We have a lunch scheduled for 12.30 pm that we
can vary. So, at a conclusion to my remarks, I think we may, well it is really
your option whether w e go to the cabinet room, or have lunch a little earlier and
then return to the cabinet room, or go to the cabinet room first.
Could I lust begin by addressing some general comments. A few remarks were
made about the one day meeting being a farce. Well I think this belles a
tremendous amount of work by officials, as you know the Commonwealth and
State Treasury and central agency officials have now met consistently about
this subject for some time, particularly in the national fiscal outlook statement,
which is a joint statement of the Commonwealth and the States. It is the first
time that It has ever been produced, it is the first time any Commonwealth
Government has put estimates of receipts out into the medium term and
therefore estimates of deficit or surplus, as the case may be, when I became
Treasurer and John Dawkins became Minister for Finance in 1983, the then
Coalition Government didn't even publish forward estimates of outlays, much
less forward estimates of receipts, and forward estimates of the budget
balance, or let alone give any commentary on the profile of the receipts or the
outlays, or influences on the receipts or the outlays on the way through.
I don't know of any federal Government, -any national governmfent in the world
which publishes these sort of documents. So, the notion that this Is a day of hit
and miss type of things, is wrong. I mean it Is a tip of a very large iceberg and
there has got to be a point where the executive authority of the Commonwealth
and the States Is brought to bear to decide things. But that Is not taken without
undue consultation and understanding of the Issues which both the national
fiscal statement, the new loan council arrangements and the FitzgeraldReport
itself which backgrounds savings in the broad. 
All of that means this is easily the best informed Premiers conference meeting,
ever. I think that we should understand just how much progress has been
made in trying to get a better understanding between us all about where our
fiscal needs are.
The Treasurer was just telling me the offer document went to States on
Thursday as well, not Friday. So there was a number of days there to consider
the distillation of the Commonwealths work In respect of the meeting.
Let me just brefly comment at least on some of the points that have been
made. John Fahey made the point In his opening remarks about the need for
certainty in fiscal finance and arrangements between the Commonwealth and
the States. We have tried to provide that in arrangements over periods of time
where we thought we could see some medium term horizon, and this is the last
year of a three year real terms guarantee, and we will try and devise some
method where the States can have some Idea of where we think we are
heading for the future. The problem with It Is the difficuity of getting the balance
between certainty on the one hand and the need for flexibility on the other, In
my opening remarlks I mentioned the question of the change In the world
forecast and Jeff Kennett picked me up on this point about the OECD, but I will
come to that in a moment, The OECD growth rates for ' 92 changed from a
positive 2.7 per cent to a negative That's nearly a four per cent change in
the forecast, and In 1993 from 4.3 per cent In forecast in ' 91 to .3 this year,
again, for the second year in a row a 4 per cent change In the forecast.
The OECD, I will come to Jeff Ken netts point, it is not a matter of we
Australians comparing our growth rates to the OECD, It Is a commentary on the
weight of the OECD economies in world output. They represent more than half
world output, and much of Australia's prosperity. We now have commodity
prices last this low In the middle eighties and I think from memory the last time
they were that low was the depression. We got very low commodity prices
because the US economy is down, the German economy has been in
recession, and the Japanese economy has been In recession. And so with
these very dramatic changes In the balance of world output, therefore we need
always the flexibility to adjust our own budgetary positions. And so I think the
reason while none of us, certainly on the Commonwealth side, wanted to deny
States certainty about having some predicability in their revenues, we always
do need that capacity to be flexible in the face of quite mammoth changes like
these. These are very large changes. The fact that we are still growing at
per cent -as a-developed-economy with theQOEOD shifting balance of growth,
shifting to the negative for ' 92 and barely positive for ' 93 means that we are not
doing too badly. But we have got to do much better, of course, for the point
which John Fahey also made and that Is respect of unemployment, where of
course rates of growth under about 3 per cent barely start cutting Into
unemployment at all. 
3
Could I just mention, Jeff Kennett mentioned, that we should meet to discuss
national outcomnes and to Improve ourselves. I mean, I don't think we should
underestimate our progress, as I said In my opening remarks we are 30 per
cent more competitive than we were In the middle 80s. We are now hugely
competitive in terms of our exports and Import replacement by virtue of lower
inflation, our wage costs, and a shift in our productivity. And as that Mcklnsey
study showed and pointed out so eloquently a week or two ago the big shift in
manufactured exports and elaborately transformed manufactures Is occuring
not because, amongst other things, because the competitiveness or the
economy, but the big shift Is In attitudes within businesses and the striking thing
about that result was that the survey revealed that It was the 90 per cent of
businesses that were not exporting which had exactly the same products,
exactly the same opportunities and exactly the same availability of
competitiveness, but we are not doing it because of attitudinal Issues. And that
is our big problem getting this attitudinal shift on the part of business to look at
the world as their market and not lust Australia.
But in terms of our competitiveness we have been Improving quite markedly.
I am always quite receptive to proposals of doing things, more things, together
and I think we should. But can I just say and I do not want this to be too
negative a remark about Jeff Kennett's comments, but last Friday we had one
of the most depressing outcomes of any Commonwealth/ State meeting. At the
meeting of Commonwealth and State Ministers for Education and Training a
decision was taken to defer action on major reforms and refer them back to the
States and Territories. This is on the Implementation of a national curriculum. In
schools and I am sure many of you know that the question of key
competencies and the national curriculum In schools Is germane to the
adopting of an Australian vocational certificate. which of course, Is underpinning
our major reform In vocational education. One has got to ask oneself what kind
of country we may be if outside of the tertiary sector of education, at the
vocational area we can't get to a point where a vocational standard in technical
and further education In those thousands of jobs which will be needed to power
the economy along outside the tertiary area where we can't get to a national
certificate for a student who wishes to participate In Industry In those terms.
The more obvious thing why would we want any child not to be able to continue
their education in one State coming from another to find that there Is a dramatic
shift or change In the curriculum.
Apparently the reason these decisions were taken was because the
conservative States decided the States rights issues had to be dealt with. Jeff,
I do not mind * being enjoined to do things nationally, -but If we can not even g~ ve
our kids a national curriculum after five years of work on this between the
Commonwealth and the States to pull out now because of some notion about
States rights when the States have been absolutely the drivers in a national
approach here, then you do wonder where we can ever get to anywhere cooperatively. 
4
But the general view that we should work co-operatively Is coming through, our
nlational fiscal outlook, it is coming through the COAG meetings and we are.
registering important gains, but I think we have got to keep the spirit going. We
have all talked about Asia here today, anyone who has been to Asia particularly
In the last year or two knows what tremendous opportunities are there for
Australia and the notion that we should be bickering about educational
standards or something between States of Australia and not approaching these
markets as a unified national force is of course, folly in the long run.
Can I say a couple of other things then addressing concerns which were raised
by Queensland and Western Australia also South Australia, the ACT, the
Northern Territory and Tasmania about fiscal equalisation.
The Commonweaith Government in the last decade has remained committed to
fiscal equalisation. We remain committed to fiscai equallsatlon. That is not to
say that the Grants Commission should not from time to time examine the
methodology and the relativlties between States and It has taken that
opportunity and that Is why we seek to try and adopt a Grants Commission
Report when that opportunity is taken. That is why we have sought to give
expression to the current change In methodology and relatlvities coming from
the Grants Commission report.
We are one nation and to see ourselves as States and therefore to see only
areas of advantage and comparative disadvantage Is I don't think the way to
view the country and the fiscal equalisatlon has played an Important role In
binding the federation together and keeping some of the smaller States
committed to being part of national fiscal solutions, giving their communities a
standard of living they might not otherwise enjoy.
There is a view, and a very strong view from New South Wales and Victorla,
and I understand the view particularly when the value of the tariff to those
States has fallen and It has fallen notwithstanding the point which was made
earlier about Western Australia. The fact is New South Wales and Victoria
have been through a substantial adjustment to their Industrial base through
protection, declines In protection, and one hopes that these Grant
Commissions relativities at least understand that point and that the shift In the
relativities are fair to the change of position of the various States.
Can I just say a number of States took Up the question of the-Medicare
agreement and Its Influence on the current outcome. At the time of signing the
agreement we gave an-Indication to'States how much they would be better or
worse off from the Impact of the change to Financial Assistance Grants and the
Health Fund Grants Implicit in the Medicare agreement. And In that
Queensland was to lose $ 47 miliion; Western Australia $ 70 million; South
Australia $ 73 million; Tasmania $ 11 mlillion; and the Northern Territory $ 42
million. In fact as a result of in the ' offer document' those numbers have
Queensland losing $ 21.6 million; Western Australia $ 32.4 million; South
Australia $ 68.5 million; Tasmania $ 1 million and the Northern Territory gaining 
$ 36 million. The difference Is that Queensland is $ 25.4 million better off than
expected to be; Western Australia is $ 37.6 million better off than expected to
be; South Australia $ 4.5 million; Tasmania $ 12 million; the Northern Territory
$ 78.4 million; the loser In this Is the ACT which loses $ 27.5 million and that is
why we have already put special financial assistance in for the ACT and I have
also In conversation with the Treasurer and the Chief Minister said that we will
consider additional special assistance as well.
But on the expectation versus the ' offer document' there are substantial gains in
there. We thank those Premiers and Chief Ministers who did make a reference to the
real terms guarantee, we think It was Important to keep that certainty, for the
Commonwealth to keep Its word on those things and that we can therefore at
least consider our respective responsibilities In the context of a pool which is
maintained In real terms.
There were many other Issues which were raised that are not appropriate here
to deal with In detail. I hope I have touched on the broad ones and couid I with
those words thank you for participating In the opening public session of the
Premiers' Conf erence and now invite Premiers, Chief Ministers and Treasurers
to the Cabinet Room.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING REMARKS AT PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, PARULAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA, MONDAY 5 JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I declare the meeting of the Premiers' Conference open and say that this Is
somewhat of a significant occasion because this will be our first meeting where
we have together participated In a study of the national fiscal outlook. Where,
before, fiscal policy of our effect upon savings has always been something
which we have together contemplated, on this occasion we have had quite a
long run study between us and we have prepared a document called the
* National Fiscal Outlook". And It attempts to look at the public sector, Its role
over the medium term, its call on savings and therefore our role In Investment
and in debt and In recovery.
This is the first time we have sought to have that greater transparency,
rationality, predicability thereby giving the rest of the country an Idea of where
we are heading.
This follows the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments which first
met last year and in that it was itself a somewhat historic meeting because It
was the first time that we separated out non-financial matters from the
Premiers' Conference Loan Council agenda. Normally we would have an
agenda for financial assistance grants, Loan Council matters et cetera then we
would have other matters associated with it and invariably, as attendees of long
standing here know we would not get often on to those issues. Now we have a
separate non-financial meeting our Council of Australian Governments
where such things as electricity generation and distribution, technical and
further education, recognition of standards and reorganisation of ministerial
councils has already produced a positive result and so In a way we have been
operating the federation at the financial and at the policy level In a way that
better meets the country's needs than we have In the past.
We have been focusing on sensible, practical gains wherever we Could see
them, and taking advantage of them. 
At this meeting we have another opportunity to deal with the nation's public
financing for the coming year and the fact that you now have a much better
Idea of where the Commonwealth budget Is going by virtue of the national
financial outlook and the fact that we now provide the States, all of you, and
Territories with the ' offer document' at least two business days ahead of the
meeting In this case last Friday means that all Governments represented
here have an Idea of what the Commonwealth proposes and what you
responses to it may be.
The first thing I would like to say is that about the Issues of this meeting Is that
this Is the third year of a real terms guarantee on the -pool of financial
assistance grants to the States and we have maintained that commitment in
that guarantee, on maintenance In real termns for 1 993-94. This for us Is
despite considerable pressure on our own Budget, as you know in terms of the
Outlook Statement.
The Commonwealth offer also accepts In general terms the outcome of the
1992-93 Grants Commission Review so, including all hospital funding grants In
the base for both years, the Commonwealth In Its offer for this year is
increasing comparable funding over $ 544 million over last year which Is an
increase of about 3 per cent nominal and above the expected inflation rate.
in that sense we think that we can do justice to the States In this and at the
same time to national fiscal policy. It is very clearly the Commonwealth's view
that the Budget IS playing an appropriate role In terms of cushioning the Impact
of the recession and with the so-called natural stabilisers working. The world
is slower than we thought it would be just a year or so ago and It Is just worth
recalling that in December 1991 the OECD forecast for the year 1992 was 2.7
per cent. That turned out to be .9 per cent which was a dramatic change from
+ 3 growth for the OECD area as a whole to virtually And for 1993 in
December 1991 the OECD forecast growth at 4.3 per cent for the area, In Its
latest forecast It has 1993 coming out at .3 per cent. So a change from 4.3 per
cent to .3 per cent and the previous year from 2.7 per cent to 9 per cent. This
is a very dramatic change and most of that Is coming from in the case of
Germany, Germany was In there for 1992 at 1.8 per cent and ended up for
1993 at 2.5 per cent in forecast and ended up at -1.9 per cent. Japan was in at
per cent and Its forecast for 1993 Is + 1 per cent rather than 3.5 per cent and
the United States was 3.8 per cent and was In at 2.6 per cent. So, we can see
how that 2.7 per cent and 4.3 per cent transiated themselves Into 9 per cent
and per cent. That was not just the impact of restoring balance sheets and
dealing with lower inflation and the blow out of the credit boom of the eighties,
but the reunification of Germany has obviously put a very large dampener on
European growth. That's obviously affected Japan as well and the United
States. So, this is the context In which our fiscal situation Is set, And It means that for
our country we've been growing of the order of 2.5 per cent while, as I say, the 
OECD area In 1992-93 if you took at us, I just gave you the calender years
but if you look across the financial year If you put OECD numbers In with our
financial year we're growing at about 2.5 per cent and the OECD is growing at
1 per cent. So we're doing better than twice the OECD growth rate. Now, part
of that is because of the role of fiscal policy and lower interest rates and lower
Inflation. And you saw on the national accounts a couple of weeks ago where a
substantial contribution was being made from the public sector. And the public
sector In deficit Is holding the growth in the economy up higher than It would
otherwilse be.
Now there is a view around the place, particularly from the Federal Opposition
that we ought to be having the budget pulled more rapidly back into surplus.
Well this Is very much a wrong view very much a wrong view. And, again, I
remind people what the OECD secretariat and the IMF said just six or eight
months ago. And that was, that the stance of fiscal policy In the area of the
OECD and the IMF ought to be basically In deficit so that the world economy
starts to come out. Now, that's meant that the One Nation funding which has
been spent throughout calender 1992 and now Into calender 1993 Is playing its
role not just in the nation of course, but In each state and it has had its
own Impact upon fiscal policy.
Now, I just paint that picture to put the setting. In that context, our budget and
the maintenance of the same real In terms of payments to the states and
the sixteen hundred million we're going to spend on health over the next three
years is, we believe, getting the balance fairly right In terms of payments to the
states. Now, I'm not sure what Premiers may say about the offer but I just want
to make this point. And that Is that the Federal Opposition at the time of the
last election was intent upon taking $ 709 million dollars out of financial
assistance grants for this year. And that meant NSW losing $ 195 million,
Victoria losing $ 145 million, Queensland $ 138 million, Westemn Australia $ 76
million, South Australia $ 72 million, Tasmania $ 29 million, Northern Territory
million and the ACT $ 11 million. Now, at the time we argued that that
policy was a wrong policy I might say many of you couldn't see the wisdom
of that position at the time and were happy to sign up to that policy and I only
make the point that what you are receiving now Is far more generous than that
which would have been received there.
Could I just say that going back to the economic outlook could I just
make these points. We are well positioned now to grow, particularly after the
visit I had to China and Korea our stance with Asia, our competitiveness has
improved thirty percent since the middle eighties has put us In a very good
position to participate in the growth of this area of the world. We've got solid
productivity growth at the moment, our productivity growing at about two per
cent per annum. inflation is better than our trading partners; Australia's top five
partners' inflation rate is 2.2 per cent and ours Is 1.2 per cent, well below that of
our partners. As we said, manufactured exports In 1992-93 are now around
per cent higher than a year earlier and nearly three times higher than a decade
ago. interest rates are at historically low levels and, Importantly, the profit 
share In the economy Is now already up to just about the late eighties level
which Is beyond the sixties historic experience, even at this stage of the cycle.
So, profitability has Improved, balance sheets of companies have improved and
I think companies are In a position now where thley can look around for
opportunities and take investment decisions.
So, could I perhaps conclude on this note and invite the Treasurer to say a few
things and then I'll Invite the Premiers to address the Commonwealth offer
document and any other remarks they wish to make, just to say that In the
1 980s Australian fiscal policy was arguably in better shape than any OECD
country. As a consequence, we've been able to stand the shift in the budget
balance better and cushion our economy better, than comparable countries.
It's one of the reasons why we're growing at 2.5 per cent and they're growing at
one per cent, on average. We know we've got a fiscal task to perform in the
medium term. But not In 1993-94. 1993-94 Is a year when the budget should
be In deficit; it's a year when we still need the public sector hauling activity
along and at the same time encouraging private sector Investment. And It Is, as
a result of that national fiscal outlook statement, that we will focus on the
medium term of fiscal policy. And that statement allows all states to
understand where we're coming from; It allows the public the opportunity to
know what the shape of fiscal policy may be; and It also provides a role for the
states In being part of that fiscal outlook and savings equation.
So, we think the offer today Is a fair one, we've maintained our commitment to
the real terms guarantee, we've sought also to receive the Grants Commission
Report and Introduce It, and I remind you again that we'll be spending $ 1 ,600
million over three years on health. So, with those things, we think In all the
circumstances the Commonwealth offer Is a decent one and one which the
states can accept.
I now invite the Treasurer to augment my remarks.
ends. 



23/ 07 ' 93 15: 57 e06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE Q~ 001
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THU R0n P. J. EATING, NP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 22 JULY 1993
It is a pleasure as usual to be here, even for the
nineteenth time.
I thought I should come along and be re-assured that I
exist. I was a pretty sure I did; my colleagues assured
me, the numerous people with whom I have been consulting,
the people on talkback, the people on committees, the
Chinese, the Koreans, various Heads of State. They all
seemed happy with the degree of my visibility.
But I should have remembered the old maxim I speak at
the National Press Club therefore I am.
Let me begin with a quotation from a very familiar
source. When King George VI died Robert Gordon Menzies made the
following observation:
The death of the King has once more reminded us that
our great Commonwealth is united, not by legal
bonds, not by the Crown as an abstract notion, not
by fine-spun constitutional theories, but by a
common and all-powerful human emotion which discards
form and penetrates instantly to the substantial
truth.
It is not very often that I quote the words of Bob
Menzies. My opponents do it enough for all of us.
The Liberal Party is like a hound which cannot be induced
to leave its master's grave. It is always scratching
around in the dust for a hint, an indication, some sign
which will tell them who they are, and what they stand
for, and what they should do next.
But I agree with what Bob Menzies said in this instance. 
2
I agree that what unites a nation or a Commonwealth
has less to do with the law than with feelings held in
common. 9
Menzies developed a very similar philosophy about the
Queen. He took her extraordinarily popular visit in 1954
to be evidence that Australians' affection for her " was
one of the most powerful elements converting them from a
mass of individuals to a great cohesive nation."
I agree with him there too.
I agree that there is such a thing as national sentiment
and that it is a powerful force in the shaping of a
nation, in the cohesion of a nation, in the success of a
nation. I agree that in the 1950s and for a surprisingly long
time afterwards Australia's unity with Britain was built
on something more than friendship it was built on an
implicit sense of unity, on an instinct.
And I agree that in 1954 the Throne of England, and in
particular the new Queen, constituted a considerable
element of Australia's national sentiment.
I agree with all this. I think more national sentiment is
what we need now, and more unity, and cohesion.
We need it because the old affections are not there in
the same way.
Even though there is widespread affection for the
monarch, there is simply not the same affection for the
monarchy. Our relationship with Britain has changed irreversibly
as irreversibly as our culture and the composition of our
people has changed.
We are a very different country in a very different
world, faced with entirely new challenges which will have
to be met in entirely new ways.
In Asia and the Pacific we have opportunities of a kind
we have never been offered before.
To grasp them I believe we need a new sense of unity a
new kind of national sentiment.
And in 1993 it can only come from one place. From
Australia from the democracy, from shared values,
shared aspirations, from the necessities we face.
I have been saying it for some time now: we need a sense
of common purpose, of fellow feeling the things which
will both inspire Australians and bind them together. 
And if you could transport Bob Menzies from the era in
which he lived, and put him down in this one with all the
necessities it imposes on us, and all the opportunities,
I am pretty sure he would say the same.
We cannot expect to change the direction of our trade and
commerce, adapt to the revolutionary changes in the
processes of production and the nature of work and to the
equally radical changes in the global economy without
cultural change.
We cannot expect to live in this new era with the
institutions, symbols and attitudes of an old one.
We cannot find our place in this new world without
finding and cementing the common ground among ourselves.
These are not radical ideas. They are common-sense ideas
pragmatic ideas.
Let me say it again, if only for John Howard's sake: many
of the things which bound together the Australians of
Menzies, era are either irrelevant or no longer on offer.
In fact there is something much better on offer: there is
the chance to make good in our region, which is the
fastest growing in the world; and to do it on our own, by
our own collective initiative and genius.
In the last decade of the twentieth century the chance
exists for this generation of Australians to set
Australia up for the DeA century.
That is why last year I made a deliberate decision to
depart from the usual overseas travel priorities of
Prime Ministers by concentrating first on Australia's
main regional relationships.
So, as you know, I went to Indonesia, Papua New Guinea,
Japan, Singapore, Cambodia.
And this year to New Zealand, Korea and China.
To our regional partners I wanted to underline
Australia's credentials as an economic and political
player in the Asia-Pacific; to emphasise our commitment
to economic engagement in the region; and to strengthen
our voice in regional affairs.
To the Australian public, I wanted to underline the
enormous benefits that will accrue to our country through
closer economic integration with the region.
During the 1980s the countries of North-East and South-
East Asia grew twice as fast as the rest of the world.
During the 1990s they seem likely to easily repeat that
performance. 
But one of the main messages I wanted to impress in Korea
and elsewhere in Asia, is that Australia is very well
placed to expand our exports of technology-based goods
and services.
And in both Korea and China there was concrete evidence
that the expansion and diversification of our trade is
already gathering pace.
The radical reform and continuing growth of the Chinese
economy are providing numerous opportunities for
Australian companies and, as you know, I was able to
witness a number of joint venture signings between
Australia and Chinese enterprises.
The Chinese leaders made it clear that they were
interested in a long-term strategic relationship with
Australia in the development of the Chinese steel and
woollen textile industries.
At my discussions in Korea and China there was agreement
to strengthen the government-based mechanisms which
support these important economic relationships for
Australia. And our Trade Minister, Peter Cook, will
follow with visits to both countries in September.
I went to Indonesia last year with great enthusiasm.
in the course of that trip and my subsequent ones to
other East Asian countries the enthusiasm has become
conviction. I came away from Korea and China last month more than
ever convinced of the enormous potential the East Asian
economies provide for Australian business and therefore
the potential for Australia's future our integration with
the region holds.
I came away more convinced of this, and more convinced of
the potential of APEC.
The Korean and Chinese leaders very much agree with our
view about the importance of ensuring that the economies
of North America and the Western Pacific be locked
together in one great and dynamic market.
Since my return, of course, President Clinton has issued
his invitation to host an APEC leaders meeting in Seattle
this November.
President Clinton's announcement is very good news for
Australia. It opens up an historic opportunity to
promote the economic integration of the Asia-Pacific
region in a way that serves the interest of all members. 
It is important that the process of Asia-Pacific economic
cooperation provides genuine benefits not only to the
advanced economies of the United States and Japan, but
also to the rapidly developing economies of South East
Asia. If the Seattle APEC leaders meeting goes ahead as
proposed and I am fairly confident that it will it
will put Australia at a table which really matters:
the APEC economies account for half the world's
output and forty per cent of world exports
three quarters of Australia's exports now go to the
APEC region
Establishing a process of periodic leaders' meetings will
greatly increase the status and authority of APEC a
forum which, of course, Australia was instrumental in
creating and has helped define and promote ever since.
The process is necessarily long-term. But this is the
best evidence of progress towards that goal, and the best
possible spur for further progress.
There is, then, this extraordinary opportunity for
Australia. We should not overestimate the speed with which the
process will occur. But it is even more essential not to
underestimate the chance it gives us.
It is essential that we are positive in our approach to
it. And essential that we find the common purpose and
collective will to grasp it.
It is essential that we find the national unity our
effort will require.
Most of you will know that famous story about Menzies
which got him into a bit of trouble at the time: how he
came back from Britain in 1941 and said to the waiting
press how despondent he felt upon returning to all the
local petty politicking.
I love politicking I think it is how the democracy
advances but when I came back from China last month I
think I had an inkling of what he experienced.
I thought here is this fantastic opportunity for
Australia, an historic opportunity to which the whole
national effort really should be turned.
But what do we hear? 
23/ 07 ' 93 16: 02 006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICEApart
from the usual healthy and not-so-healthy cynicism
we always hear, we hear in the debate over the Mabo
judgement a mad retreat to parochialism and petty self
interest. We hear politicians playing to the lowest denominator of
public opinion.
We hear deliberate misinformation and the encouragement
of outright bigotry.
All this on an issue of fundamental importance, not only
to the Australian economy, but to the values on which
Australian democracy, the Australian ethos, and
Australia's reputation abroad are built.
There has been an element of mischievous and ill-informed
journalism in the Mabo debate. But the primary
debilitating role-has been played by the Opposition.
Tim Fischer goes to Hong Kong and assures his audience
that there is nothing to fear. In Hong Kong he tells the
truth. But in Australia he tells the people that they
will lose their backyards. In Australia he tries to whip
up fear and panders to the worst feelings in the
community. Yet, we expect this from the National Party. Paranoia and
parochialism is to the National Party what grass is to
sheep and goats.
But the party which has Most failed Australia on the Mabo
debate is the Liberal Party. Confronted with a great
national issue which needed, above all others in recent
times, a great deal of good will and good feeling and a
concerted search for consensus, the Liberal Party chose
to foster ill-will and ill-feeling. They chose the role
of spoiler.
And the chief spoiler has been Dr Heweon. Not only has
he refused to distance himself or ta-ke'issue with
outrageous comments from people like Tim Fischer and Hugh
Moqrgan, he has actually joined the little company who
claim that people's homes are at risk. Dr Hewson knows
that they are not.
Last month we saw him on national television talking
about what he called " massive uncertainty" " are titles
secure, is your home secure, your mine secure, your farm
secure?", he asked.
Dr Hewson knows the answer to these questions is
unequivocally " Yes".
Mabo calls for something much better than this. It calls
for nothing more or less than a mature national response. 
23/ 07 ' 03 16: 03 -006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE I0
7
The High Court judgement entailed recognition that the
fiction of terra nullius was indeed a fiction; that
native title, where it had not been extinguished,
continued to exist; and that the appalling treatment of
Aboriginal Australians did in fact occur.
It is hardly revelatory. In essence it recognises what we
have long known to be true.
The Mabo judgement places great responsibilities upon us,
but it seems to me these responsibilities create the
opportunity to set right some aspect. of Australian life
which have long been wrong. it offers a chance to raise
the level of dignity on both sides.
And these responsibilities are no greater than the
responsibilities which the United States, New Zealand and
Canada all confronted last century. These countries
faced up to their responsibilities while they were still
in their infancy.
I am one of those who believes that in our maturity we
too can meet our responsibilities that we can make a
mature national judgement.
It must be a national response: the entire continent was
declared terra nullius; native title was denied
everywhere; the abuses occurred in all the states.
The need to find solutions is a national need. If the
word " Australia" still means, as I believe it does, a
belief in democracy and social justice, if that remains
the national sentiment, then a just national solution
must be found.
From the first Cabinet discussion a year ago, the
Government has seen as the nub of the matter finding a
rational reconciliation of two imperatives: the certainty
about land tenure which a resource-based economy requires
and the discharge of our deep obligations to Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people whose legal rights have
been granted them by the highest court in the land.
We have been determined that it must be a reconciliation
managed by Governments rather than left to the fate of
protracted conflict and unpredictable litigation.*
We have moved as quickly as possible. Mabo amounts to
the biggest change in Australian land law since we became
a nation. That is why I announced last October that we
would be taking a year to consult on the issues, consider
them carefully and formulate our policy.
I remind you that during the election campaign the Leader
of the Opposition supported the process and the
timetable. 
23/ 07 ' 9 18: 04 WS I_ M72 93P PRESS OFFICE
I will not attend now to any of the shrill and irrational
charges that have been made in the course of the debate.
As for the charge that the States have been browbeaten, I
won't go back over the twists and turns of discussion and
drafting that went on at the COAG meeting in June.
But if it is browbeating the State. to ask them to accept
one of the most important-and positive decisions the High
Court has ever taken if it is browbeating the States to
ask them to do more than simply pocket a Commonwealth
offer to validate their grants and pick up the entire
compensation bill if it is browbeating the States to
ask that effective mechanisms be established to determine
native title claims, and that laws be updated to
recognise and protect native title and if it is
browbeating the States to get them to understand that
Mabo has a significance well beyond the nitty gritty of
land management then the States have been browbeaten.
And the Government will not waver from its view of Mabo
as a national issue requiring a national response.
At our initiative, consultations have been held with the
States since last year, in every State capital and in
multilateral meetings the work has continued since COAG.
I reiterate what I have said to the Premiers and Chief
Ministers: in dealing with the land management
challenges posed by tMabo, our preferred course is
complementary legislation, cooperatively achieved.
That does not mean we will accept the lowest common
denominator, or will fail to establish appropriate
national standards and mechanisms for dealing with native
title. If Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have one
overriding request of the Government it is that the
Commonwealth set the benchmarks. And this we will do.
As we work on legislation, we are going to keep the lines
of communication open to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander representatives, to representatives of industry
and to others. The political heat of the issue will not
deflect us from that sound, deliberative, consultative
course on which we embarked last October.
The legislation we will introduce in the. Budget sittings
will make Mabo work. It will demonstrate that native
title is not incompatible with efficient land management
or with the national economic interest.
Dr Hewson made another contribution to the Mabo debate
yesterday. He said that Mabo threatened to lead to
recession. 
23/ 07 9i3 006 917 PM PRESS OFF 005
9
Dr Hewuon appears unable to live without recessions.
When he doesn't have one, he conjures one up. Late last
year, you will remember, he said that the recession was
deepening. Double dipping. Then he said that we were on
the verge of a depression.
Dr Hewson has also been talking about how the Government
must not " go beyond" Mabo, as if it is possible to
deliver a complete response without paying regard to the
wider implications of the judgement.
Let me say that it is not " going beyond" Mabo:
to see how the decision, by sweeping aside the
doctrine of terra nullius, also sweeps aside the
foundation of the dispossession of the indigenous
Australians or to note that the decision itself talks of
Aboriginal dispossession as having underwritten the
development of Australia
or to consider then what might be done for those who
have been dispossessed
or to consider also how the apprehensions of landbased
industries and the hopes of Aboriginal people
for economic improvement might both be addressed by
giving the latter a greater sense of involvement in
industry
or to recognise, as the High Court has now done,
Aboriginal customary law and traditions as a source
of Australian common law
or to recognise why, therefore, the Mabo decision
can be seen as a major contribution to the social,
cultural and economic standing of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people with the potential to
establish a new basis for the relationship between
indigenous and other Australians
None of these aims exceed our capacities as a community
and a nation: none of them exceeds our democratic or
social aspiration. They are, I believe, consistent with
our values and beliefs.
The spoilers, no less than the bigots, should know that.
And they should know that no amount of sophistry, or
denial, or lies will deliver us from the truth. None of
it will help Australia escape judgement in the eyes of
the world. And none of it is needed.
What we do need and what we will have is a workable
solution that will actually improve the quality of our
national life, which will build up the values we hold in
common, and nourish the reconciliation process. 
-j/ 07 ' 93* 16: 08 006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFIC -a 006
And there is no doubt that we would be considerably
closer to this solution if the Liberal Party had not
decided that it was in their interest to subvert the
national interest.
But, in fact, as Judith Brett wrote the other day, the
Liberal Party is " philosophically bankrupt". They no
longer have any idea how to address those things which
their founder understood instinctively the need for
unity, the importance of social values, the essential
role of a responsible political party to find the means
by which a society can cohere around common principles
and aspirations.
The Liberal Party, the alternative government, has
comprehensively lost its way. This is a fact which in
some circumstances might give the Labor Party comfort,
but there is no comfort for any Australian in their
present behaviour.
And there is little prospect of their improving. Having
just lost an election, they number among their leadership
aspirants the man who contributed more than any other to
the loss.
And having lost it on a Thatcherite program, they allow
to be a contender a politician who, in an embarrassingly
transparent imitation of Mrs Thatcher before she
mellowed, said the other day that government should be
" Poor", and " the laws of the free market are as immutable
as the laws of gravity".
Among their youth two of their brighter sparks are avowed
monarchists. The former Hewson adviser, now Hewsonhater,
Abbott; and the Melbourne lawyer, Costello.
Abbott and Costello lead the youthful wing of the Liberal
Party, along with the likes of the Member for Menzies
who, to judge from an article in The Aae the other day,
makes the man after whom his seat is named look like an
Irish rebel.
But no one is more culpable in the present fiasco which
is the Liberal Party than the bloke who only six months
ago was still believed to be their hope for the future.
In what appears to be a sort of penance for his sins, he
now tramps around the country saying things he doesn't
believe or he knows to be untrue.
It is well known, for instance, that privately John
Hewson will tell you Australia must move on to be a
republic. But unlike the Greiners and the Faheys and Sir
Rupert Hamer and many other leading Liberals, he will not
say so. He will not lead. He does not have the courage
of his convictions. 
23/ 07 ' 03 16: 07 0&amp; 06 273 29 3
The man who just last year
is so reduced he will not er
republic and discourages the
between Aboriginal and white
extraordinary grounds that k~
Keating' s ambitions. PM PRESS Ovpk'' 007_
ras touted as a visionary now
igage with the debate on the
goal of reconciliation
Australia on the quite
Le will not cater to Paul
The nation's ambitions apparently no longer enter into Dr
Hewson's political equation.
Nothing will persuade Dr Hewson that economics cannot be
divorced from social policy, that our economic
performance depends in considerable part on the strength
of our social bonds and on the development of a uniting
spirit. That our success in Asia will depend on these things as
well. I think it is safe to say that Australian business
understands what the political Opposition fails to.
Business knows that in the end it will not be the
Australian Government which carries the day in the Asia-
Pacific. It will be business.
It will not be Government which ultimately carries the
day in Australia. It will be business. Business, unions,
the workforce: public and private institutions, schools
and universities, communities, individuals.
In the end it will be, as I said, the quality of our
national effort which determines our success.
That is what increasingly impresses me in Asia the
number of Australian initiatives which are succeeding.
it is what increasingly impresses me here. It's what
impressed McKinsey in the survey of 700 new exporters.
We will help business up wherever we can. We won't be
shutting down the economy as some people are saying we
should. We'll do what we can to sustain demand.
But once it gets going we'll get out of the way.
Right now it is particularly important that governments
get the broad parameters of economic policy right.
To generate investment and jobs Commonwealth and State
Governments must get their budgets right: they must
support the economy in the short run by providing a
stimulus to spending; but they have to able to show that
in the medium term deficits will be scaled back to allow
private saving to be used to fund business investment.
We cannot allow our private savings to be used solely to
fund big budget deficits. 
23/ 07 ' 93 18: 09 -BOO 273 2923PMPESOIT 0O
12
We have to have more business investment and we have to
free up our private savings to pay for it.
This is what we did in the 1980. when we built up those
big budget surpluses. I
More recently, the Treasurer, the National Fiscal Outlook
and the Fitzgerald Report have reinforced this simple
point. In the medium term, big budget deficits are not
consistent with a strong economy.
That is why the Government is committed to reducing the
budget deficit to 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97; and why
we are aiming for a budget deficit of around $ 16 billion
this year.
The economy has been recovering for seven consecutive
quarters but, while the medium term looks good, the
process has been stubbornly slow.
We can be thankful that with more and more of our trade
in the Asia-Pacific we are not so dependent on the OECD
economies to sustain our export growth.
But sluggish growth in the OECD area has inevitably made
it difficult for us in Australia.
There are some forecasters suggesting that the GDP growth
in 1993-94 might be little different from 92-93.
Private consumption conceivably could weaken.
The economy could therefore do with the stimulus this
financial year that the One Nation tax cuts are scheduled
to bring next year.
on the other hand, because inflation is much lower, the
One Nation tax cuts are now more generous than they were
intended to be when they were announced in February 1992.
It is for these two reasons that the Government is
considering how the One Nation tax cuts can be best put
into place best for the economy and best for taxpayers.
The tax cuts now legislated are to be paid in two parts
one in July 1994 and the second in January 1996.
we are now in the process of considering the extent to
which the first leg can be brought forward to boost the
economy, and the second put back to secure the savings
task in the interim. 
23/ 07 ' 93 .18: 10 1008 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE Qh009
13
As I said earlier, when the tax cuts were announced in
February 1992, they were intended to encompass fiscal
drag. The subsequent better performance on inflation now
implies that they are substantially more than fiscal drag
substantially more than was intended.
Delaying the introduction of the second leg will bring
the tax cuts backs into line with what was intended and
announced in February 1992 while still seeing the tax
cuts paid.
In this way the incidence of income tax will not rise,
savings will be boosted, and the economy will receive a
fillip at a time when it's still needed.
These tax cuts will be delivered in full this financial
year. They will be L A W law.
And what is more, they are R E S P 0 N S I B L E
responsible law.
I began by talking about Australia's national values; or,
if you like, this system of belief which unites us.
I have said before that this a country which has got its
basic values right.
Those values remain, by and large, democratic,
egalitarian, tolerant and far more than before open.
But I do think we need to be more generally aware of
them, and they should be reflected more obviously in our
national symbols and institutions.
I think as Australia changes and old affections
inevitably fade it is essential that we get these things
right for future generations.
It seems to me that there is no better recent evidence of
the need for this than the Mabo debate particularly
where it has been led by our conservative opponents.
In the end, however, I am supremely confident that the
better instincts of the vast majority of Australians will
prevail. I recognise, just the same, that none of this can be
divorced from our economic performance our ability to
provide long term security and prosperity.
That, despite the slow recovery, is now on offer as never
before. It is what the government, and a great many
Australians, have been seeking for some time.
There are profound reasons to believe we will succeed
and in the end nothing will be more important than belief
itself. 



PRIINMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
ADDRESS AT OPENING OF THE FINANCE SECTOR UNION OFFICES, 230
EL. IZABETH STREET, SYDNEY, FRIDAY 23 JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Thank you very much Keith ( Westgarth), Kevin ( Davern) and Len ( Hingley), I see
the President of the Labor Party here Terry Sheehan and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure for me to could I say Keith, to be here on this occasion and
I can ass * ure you I was elated in March as well. I am quite sure that we would not
be opening any union offices had we not won the election, we would be closing
them and that the savage right wing Thatcherite agenda of our opponents would
now be in full swing. They would be having a beano, working out each bit of
draconian law they could have put into place and how they would hop into
ordinary people and in their defeat they are getting all pious about the
soundness of their policies and the rest. Well, that is all right, let them, I don't
care. The fact of the matter is they would have been into ordinary people, they
would have hopped right into ordinary people in a way we have never seen
because when they had a chance in this last period, the government had been in
office ten years, to put a policy coming from a recession with the government
facing the economic and social difficulties of the recession, where they thought
they were a chance of winning, did they have a balanced approach to life looking
at all the elements of Australian society? Not on your life. They were going to
get in there and grab the national income and give it to the high income people,
rip Medicare apart, rip the social wage apart and hop into wage and salary
earners, put a GST on their back and give the tax cuts to business.
So, there would have been the personal tax cuts they promised, you could have
forgotten those, you would never have seen them because to have been funded
they would have had to cut $ 10,000 million out of the public sector of Australia,
out of the social wage, the social and education programs of the Commonwealth.
As a public sector manager of ten years standing I can say definitively, I actually
know more about this subject than anyone else in the country because I have
presided over sixteen reviews of the Budget, you can not cut $ 10,000 million out
of the Commonwealth budget without hurting a lot of people particularly the
aged, the young, women, the sick and the infirm, these are the places where they
would have had to cut and of course, public opinion would have come down
against them. It would have been a consumption tax and nothing else but that,
I I 
2
but more than that the thing they really wanted to get at was trade unionism.
They hate the fact that people have a right to organise and-bargain for their
incomes. I don't know why it is because the people who run the Liberal party,
they are only basically wage plugs themselves and only one I remember was
born with silver spoon in his mouth or two maybe, in one case a ladle, but the
rest of them are dead ordinary. Why they want to hop into ordinary people has
got me beat, but they do. They would have been right into it, they would have
been ripping away at the structure of unionism and you saw Jeff Kennett at it in
Victoria, I am pleased to say when we extended federal award coverage in
Victoria the great body of Victorian unionists have now registered themselves
under federal awards and so sense will prevail.
All of this at a time when the best things were happening in the labour market,
the best things in our industrial history. At a time when a union like this was
amalgamating and becoming a focussed, central force in the financial industries
of this country, where a union like this had lead the way, one of the leaders in
enterprise bargaining with really innovative changes in the nature of those
bargains especially for women, the majority of whom make up your membership,
where you are looking at improvements in productivity and then spreading those
improvements back to the workforce and to profits, it is the very essence of cooperation
and decency at the workplace and of course, underpinned by the
Labor governments policy of a safety net for those on low income.
What is the point of objection to such a policy? Keith made the point earlier
about the number of offices around the country you were five unions and you
are now one and you may soon be six unions as one. Isn't trade unionism
therefore running in a totally responsible direction? We have got an inflation
rate which until recently was the lowest in the OECD, the lowest in the world and
it is now just a decimal point or so away from that. Can anybody suggest that the
trade union movement is rampant with an inflation rate of that variety, of that
dimenstion? What in God's name made the Liberals so snakey on Australian
trade unions and Australian working people? I don't know, but there is no doubt
they want to expunge any sense of organisation at the workplace away and of
course, the great spoof in their policy was they said they would have enterprise
bargaining, but enterprise bargaining is as you know all of you banding
together, talking to the managers, the owners saying can we reach an agreement
and getting a good commitment, shared commitments which produce a sense of
esprit de corp and comradeship in the organisations that you work in and make
the businesses better.
But that -is not what they wanted. They wanted individual wage contracts, so you
got singled out and separated off and the employers dealt with you individually
and then that was sold as an enterprise bargain. It was never an enterprise
bargain. In contrast we have got enterprise bargaining and we are setting the trade union
movement up with enterprise bargaining and we are setting it up in my view to be
a much stronger body, a much stronger set of institutions in Australia than they
would have otherwise been. In the 1980s when we needed aggregate wage 
3
flexibility, under the various Accords and tax cut arrangements where we had
wages as a proportion of GDP falling, where we had to get the profit share up to
re-start Australian investment after the 1981-83 recession, we had the aggregate
flexibility, but what we are seeing now is flexibility within sectors. The important
thing is that if we still have a centralised system as inflexible as we had In the
1980s, if we didn't have enterprise bargaining as we established in Accord Mark
VI and a Coalition government as it had come along, it would have gone for the
jugular of the centralised system and the organs of Australian trade unionism
would have been out of condition, that is not developing an organic system of
bargaining, it would have been out of condition and less able to resist that kind of
an attack. Whereas now we have moved away from the centralised system to
enterprise bargaining, where unions are slimmed down, where their
management, where amalgamations are congruous, where there are a set of
common purposes amongst people in similar sectors of an industry, where we
have seen appropriate amalgamations. Unions are now much better set up not
only to do a better job for their members and the businesses which employ them,
but they are going to be stronger, better exercised limbs and sinews of unionism
to resist the kind of crude attack that you have seen attempted by the likes of
Hewson, Howard et al.
This structure is a much healthier one for the economy and for unionism and it
also protects trade unions from the right wing predators who hang around our
political system. These are important things and trade unionism has been
through the ACTU and the great body of unionists in this country in the last ten
years at the leading edge of changing the Australian economy into a modem,
productive externally oriented economy with a low inflation rate. Not having to
be dragged along, right up the front and in terms of productivity and bargaining;
before Accord Mark VI the notion in this country was if you want to make a
business more profitable you cut wages. What the trade unions said was there
is something much smarter to do than that, we can make the business more
productive, you don't have to cut wages, we can do more to make the business
more productive together and that is why things like you have negotiated, with
flexible working hours, with cycles up to 300 hours over eight weeks, job sharing,
home based work, career break opportunities, part time employment and now
you are looking at agreements involving Saturday trading, training, team based
performance pay, all of those things are typical of the kind of innovative and
ambitious flexibility that one can get in a co-operative structure.
If you look around our part of the world, in Japan particularly, in Korea and all
sorts of other countries you see the models of co-operation as the places where
people want to do something better with their business and themselves as a way
of making the thing function better and providing higher real income. Not by
cowering people, the straitening, cowering thing, get everyone's eyes down,
threaten them, split them off onto individual contracts if they play up, get rid of
them. This punishing approach which the Liberals have always had. You would
think if they just look around business in the region we live in they would see just
how that sort of British model of employer/ employee relationships is just not
appropriate to Australia any more and why we are much better off doing what we
are doing. 
We have now got one thousand enterprise agreements which have been
agreed. One thousand, which is a very encouraging number and they are
growing all the time. We have got the lowest level of industrial disputes for
decades and part of that is the fact that the Government does sit down
under an Accord with the trade unions to work out a structure. Now, we sat
down before the election with Accord Mark VII, your officers were, there
and we agreed to a safety net. We are now asking the Commission to
endorse Accord Mark VII which provides for three updates of the safety net
over the next three years which will then underpin the enterprise
bargaining structure which will see most decisions in the workforce being
taken. In the course of that we made clear that the Government would support
those safety net arrangements, that we would also look at a legislative
package to bring our laws and institutions into alignment with a system of
national enterprise bargains so we actually change the' system to
accommodate the new thing and of course, in that we talked about, as we
did right through the 1 980s, the backdrop of a decent tax system behind it.
Since 1983 we have had effectively a policy of de facto tax indexation, that
is, in the period up to 1991 we had handed back in tax cuts more than tax
indexation and I made clear with Peter Cook when we sat down to do
Accord Mark VI1 that tax cuts would form again an Important backdrop to
Accord Mark VII.
What I announced yesterday is that those tax cuts will be paid, and not
only paid in full $ 3.4 billion in 1994-95, but they will actually be brought
forward into this financial year. This will be a significant tax cut for people
from two thirds of average weekly earnings up. From $ 20,000 and
onwards. The group who in the 1 980s didn't get above the weight of the
tax cuts which formerly went under $ 20,000 and beyond about $ 45,000.
So, it is their turn and their time and we have been looking therefore to do
that. In the 1 980s we supported the low paid with things which the ACTU was
engaged such as the Family Allowance Supplement was dramatically less
the income of a low income family and made the tax cuts, most of our tax
cuts focussed on the bottom end. When I became Treasurer in 1983 the
bottom rate of tax was $ 30,000 it is now $ 20,000. The tax free threshold
has risen so in that area we focussed our tax attention first. We are now
focussing it in that area from two thirds of average weekly earnings and
beyond. That is why yesterday's commitment to see those tax cuts paid in
full next financial year and brought forward earlier to this year is important
for that backdrop in the labour market where people because of the
slowness of the economy are seeing it has taken time to get wage
increases through the system and we will put the second tranche back into
1998, probably 1998, so that we are doing what we intended to do and
said we would do in February 1992 in ' One Nation' to say that basically the
tax cuts would be paid for by fiscal drag in the system. 
Because Of a much better and lower inflation performance we were going
to be paying much more than such fiscal drag, but pushing the second
round out means we return to pay that which we intended. The tax cuts will
be delivered, they will be delivered in an economically responsible way
and I should have thought given the fact the economy has been in the last
couple of years slower than we had hoped and thought, in doing that we
have met the economic imperative of the savings problem in the middle of
the 1990s by bringing the Budget deficit back to around 1 per cent of GDP.
I noticed in some of the newspapers this morning some comments, you
would swear blind the tax cuts were abolished, much less being paid in full,
and some are actually saying this was a central plank of the election, the
election was decided upon it. It is just not true. The tax cuts hardly rated a
mention in the election campaign. They were there as a backdrop to it
from both the parties, but the election was fought about things that I
mentioned a moment ago. About the way Australians live and relate to one
another, the kind of society we want whether it is going to be survival of the
fittest, or a society which is broader and kinder and nicer, where we do
care about one another and things like access and equity in health, in
education and these things matter. That was what the election was
decided on and appropriately decided upon.
Ladies and gentlemen could I say that I regard the Finance Sector Union
as a model of what is happening in Australian trade unionism. It is growing
in an area of an internationally traded service which is financial services.
Deregulation of the financial system has had a big shake out in the
banking system in particular, but will now lead to a very productive banking
sector, one which I hope is more closely attuned to the needs of the
economy with productive investment into the future. We are seeing the
growth of the superannuation industry through the Government's policies,
and the growth of the whole sector in financial services, banking and
superannuation and insurance is a growth area for the economy, it is
growth of an industry which wouldn't have had the growth possibilities it
now has but for deregulation. And this group of unions has been always
part of that process from the early 1 980s onwards, now coalescing as a
single group to better represent your members and also to make certain
that the organisations and businesses you work for are efficient and
productive ones.
If one has to stand back and say, here is a sector, in many respects a new
one, an internationally traded service, one which has got great prospects
both at home and in the region and what is Australian unionism doing with
this sector and the answer Is developing the appropriate structures to
make the sector better, giving employees within the sector the flexibility
that they need particularly women in the innovative enterprise agreements,
taking enterprise agreements forward and changing the wage system as
we must do in a modern, flexible economy. 
Thank you. 6
I am delighted to be here, thank you Keith ( Westgarth), Kevin ( Davem) and
Len ( Hingley) for inviting me. Thank you, all of you, for having me along.
It is a pleasure to open a union office, a greater pleasure even to open one
which has got its act together which is developing appropriate, rational and
good structures which is operating for good purposes and of course, it just
speaks volumes about the difference between them the Liberals and we
of the community, we of the Labor party, we of the trade union movement.
We stand for good, decent values, the right of organisation in the
workplace, the right to see a good productive industry, what better thing
could one be able to say at the opening of the headquarters of such an
organisation. So, congratulations, it is a great pleasure to be here and to
be declaring these premises of yours officially open. 



a EMBARGOED UNTIL 9. OOPM
CHECK AGAINST DELIVE~ RY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, NWP
COROWA SHIRE COUNCIL CENTENARY DINNER, COROWA RSL CLUB
31 JULY 1993
It i3 a great pleasure to be in ti very beautiful, historic, classic Australan town.
It is particularly good to be here to join in the commemoration of the moment a hundred
years ago when Corowa was host to one of the more important gatherings in our nation's
history: a meeting which, in a combination of national idealism and equally characteristic
pragmatism helped propel Australia towards nationhood.
Enough of the Victorian architecture has been preserved, enough families have remained,
enough memories handed down for Corowa to still speak eloquently of the past.
And thcn there is the river: the Murray tells a story of its own, including of course the part
it played in the -federation of the continent.
For it was the dividing line between the two most populous and prosperous colonies and.
in 1893, on the other side at Wahguinyah therc was a customs shed, a real and symbolic
manifestation of the divisions the people of Australia had to overcome.
You don't have to look hard in towns like this to see the labour that has been done, and the
aspirations of those who did it
Far more than in the cities and the suburbs, you can sense the traditions born here of work
and leisure, of individual enterprise and community cooperation, of a common effort
through good times and bad.
In one sense the story is all Corowa's own. In another it is a typically Australian story.
1T monuments to war, for instance, can be seen in every Australian town.
They bear witness to the sacrifice of famnilies in this region, but also to the common cause
Australians evrhr recognised in times of crisis.
ITO~ J TOr) ro InccOF:;, 6nH' 7 
Thcre are other kinds of monuments: monuments to imagination and effort monuments to
belief in the region's future, and ultimately in AtIstr1ia future.
I mean the farms, this township, the industries, the clubs. And it's useful to reflect on how
they camre to be.
What were the essential elements in their success?
And the answer is private initiative, public cooperation, loyalty and commitment to the
region, confidence, belief.
In every Australian community you will see the samie combination of elements, and over
time, it seems to me they form a collective national experience.
For all our disparity including the great gulf between rural and urban there is in the end
a collectivc Australian experience which should unite us.
Nationally, we have shared in triumphs in sport, in the arts, in industry and science.
But the greatest by far is the creation over the ycars of one thc world's great democracies,
one of the great multicultural societics, and surely the very best place in the world to live.
And we have done this substantially because our effort in the last century has generally
been towards including all Australians in Australia's wealth.
This is a loose federation on a vast and varied contincnt whose population is immensely
diversc in origin and culture.
These factors can encourage division or fragmenrttion they can encourage jealousy and
rivalry, between States, between cities, between the urban population and the people in the
country. There is always that tendency latent or real. But the great majority of Australians
understand, as the founders of federation understood, that we work much better when we
work as one nation.
These individual and collective efforts, these successes and failures, constitute the unifying
experience of our naitional life.
Whether we live in Corowa or Darwin or Wahgunyah this is the story of us all, and the
means by which we recognise each other as Australians.
And this gives us strength.
/ 7_ Od TOO-ON 92: 8 l~ 
3
This and future generations living here in Corowa will continue to draw their strength from
these traditions and from their love of the country, and it will be this as much as anything
else which carries the district through another century.
But I daresay if the people of Corowa were asked what most concerns them today, it
would not bc the past hut the future.
What industries will employ them and their children?
What businesses will grow to replace those in decline?
How will the future of Corowa be secured?
They are the same questions which Australians ame asking everywhere -in every town and
suburb, in every factory and farm.
How will the future of Australia be secured?
It is a question which every generation has asked, including the generation of 1893.
They had every reason to ask-they were living through the worst depression in our
history, the worst civil strifc and the worst drought
The answer to the question in 1893 or 1933 or even 1963 tended to he by secure British
markets for our agricultural products, by the protection of local industry, by the
exploitation of our minerals and energy.
But by 1973 the secure British markets for Australian agriculture had gone.
It was becoming plain that protection had left our industries hopclessly uncompetitive.
And dependence on commodities left us still exposed to the uncertainties of world markets.
So if Britain would no longer secure our future, nor the United States or any other
country, and our commodities alone would not alone secure it, and wholesale protection of
our industries would not, how could it be secured?
The answer was, and remains by our own efforts. by our own imagination, by grasping
the opportunities which our region provides, by confidence in ourselves and our best
traditions, by belief. By those same familiar things which carry Corowa through.
And I know we will secure the future. I know we can be prosperous as never bcfore. We
can find a place in the world as never before.
And we can find it primarily in our own region in that part of the world which the
Australians of a century ago looked at with a mixture of fear and disdain.
/ OdTOO'ON 92: 3 œ Bl~ 1. 
4.
We can secure our future in the huge and rapidly growing Asia-Pacific region. And in the
rest of the world.
And I'll tell you why I know this. Because of the succc-ss we have already had.
In 1993 we are losing industries but gaining new ones. We are replacing old markets with
new ones.
We are steadily growing less dependent on commodities.
We are growing new companies clever manufacturing companies, born entirely of the
export culture created in the last decade.
In the last five years they have boosted their exports to Asia by an average 20 per cent per
annum. They are exporting elaborately transformed manufactures. High tech products.
Last year exports of elaborately transformed manufactures to Europe rose by more than
per cent; to South East Asia by 17 per cent; to East Asia by more than 40 per cent.
IThe opportunities for Australian companies in Asia and the Pacific are boundless, and as
we continue to trasform ourselves into a competitive and sophisticated manufacturing
nation, and a leading supplier of services as well as agricultural products, minerals and
energy, we will begin to see the huge rewards to be reaped from the changes we made in
the eighties.
And I might say the great agricultural regions of Australia regions like this one foodgrowing
regions, will play a pre-eminent role in the future.
That is why I belicve we will succeed: bccause of the success we havc already achieved.
Because of the proven willingness of the Australian people to embrace change.
Because when faced with necessity they were prepared to do what was necessary.
So while the answer to the question has varied with time, one thing has not changed: the
future of Australia like thc future of Corowa will ho made safe by the enterprise and
work of the people.
And by their faith in themselves, in their communities and in Australia.
We will always need that faith.
L/ t O 10 N 9: 26-6nHiZ: 3 
In this last decade of the twentieth century we have a chance the lilke of which the
Australians of a century ago could not have imagined.
There is the chance to succeed in the world's fastest growing region, and to do it by our
own initiative, our own effort, our own genius.
There is, as I have said before, the chance in this decade to set Australia up for the next
century. I can tell you that that is my one great goal. It is the Government's goal
But reaching it, needless to say, will depend on it becoming the goal of all Australians.
Last week I made again the point that I have made many times in the past cighteen months:
to meet the challenges we face we need a renewed sense of national unity.
I quoted someone who I am sure retains more than a little respect in this district, Robert
Gordon Menzies.
It was Menzies who talked about the need to convert " a mass of individuals into a great
cohesive nation."
Menzies understood the power that a common national sentiment commands.
And even if there is little else he said with which I would agree, I agree with him on this.
Of course, he saw the British monarchy as the powerful unifying element.
But these days, while the British monarch still has our affection and our regard, there is no
question that the monarchy commands much less of both.
In truth I think this decline has less to do with the problems the royal family has recently
faced, than it has to do with changes in Australia, changes in the relationship between
Australia and Great Britain, and an understanding in both countries of the different
necessities we face.
The monarchy has had family problems at other times in the past, hut Australians did not
draw the conclusion that the monarchy had lost its relevance.
Today they draw that conclusion because the monarchy is remote from their lives and
perceived as inappropriate to the sort of nation we must become.
If thc challenge is to enliven our spirit, to create a new unity of purpose, to make this a
more inclusive Australia, or to use Menzies' words, to convert a " mass of individuals into a
great cohesive nation" there is only one place it can come from. Australia.
OdTOO'ON 9' 2: 8 6flHn : 13. 
From faith in this democracy. Our shared values and hopes, shared understanding of our
past and the necessities which confront us.
T7hat is why I believe Australian affairs should be managed by Australians.
It is why I am for a republic.
Not because I am against Britain I like Britain very much.
I was raised on her heritage and the cxploits of British heroes and remain a grateful and, in
many regards, a passionate advocate of things British from the parliamnt~ and law
bequeathed us to the art and architecture and music.
But Australia's diverse heritage is uniquely our own. So in many respects is our
democratic heritage: it includes not just the fabled spirit of the " fair go" and the collective
egalitarian tradition, but a number of constitutional innovations which were achieved here
well in advance of Britain among them the secret ballot, payment of MPs, universal male
suffrage and votes for women.
Nor am I against the British monarch I count myself among her countless Australian
admirers. But the Queen of Australia is not Australian and, however conscientiously and
skilfully she performs the role of Australian Head of State, she cannot symbolise or express
our Australianess.
Nor am I against the British monarchy the British monarchy works in Britain. But it is a
hereditary British institution and in the multicultural post-imnperial world in which we live
and, with all the regional imperatives now facing us, it no longer constitutes an appropriate
Australian [ Head of State.
Nor am I against the British Commonwealth of Nations Australia, so long as I amn Prime
Minister, will remain in the Commonwealth. Membership of thc Commonwealth
comprised of more Yepublics than any other category of government is not part of the
argument. Nor do I think the republican debate distracts from thc economic problems which currently
beset us it is no more a distraction for Australians than Federation was for those
Australians of the 1890s whose economic problems makc ours seem insignificant.
And, as Barry Jones said the other day, we don't hear people saying that we should give up
A sport until the economy improves, though much more time is spent on sport than the
Constitution. Nor am I for thc republic because I am against the States IJike many Australians I am
conscious of the shortcomings of the Federal system, and I would like to see rcgions like
this urnc given a more dynamic political role: but I believe the States are an organic part of
/ 9d TOO. 0N ' 92: 83 œ 6U 
7-
the Australian nation and quite possibly inseparable from it. I do not believe they could be
easily abolished even if the nation thought it was worth doing.
Some say the republic will undermine our stability. I value stability and place the highest
value on the social peace we enjoy in Australia.
To the extent that British institutions have contributed to this I appreciate that too.
But Australian institutions also gave us these things.
The idea of social justice, and government policies which gave that idea concrete
expression, played a major part in our stability.
We did not build this stable, sophisticated and harmonious multicultural society with
British institutions half so much as we built it with Australian principles and policies.
It is also said by opponents of the republic that it is primarily a manifestation of my
ambition. Insofar as I have played a role in instigating the debate, they are right.
I have an ambition for Australia and the republic forms part Of it.
Nf an ambition for Australia disqualifies the republic, then those who met here in 1893
should have been disqualified from Federation, along with every one else who ever had an
ambition for Australia and acted On it.
I am for the republic not for what I am against, but what I am for not for what a republic
will throw away, but for what a republic can deliver:
It can deliver a new sense of unity and national pride in which Australians of this and
future generations can share.
It can deliver a re-cast Australian identity defined by the commitment of Australians to this
land above all others, which will say unequivocally to the world who we are and what we
stand for.
Among them I would number democracy, fairness, tolerance, justice, invention, industry,
pragmatism. They will all -serve us well in the new world we have cntered.
I would go so far as to suggest that had we long enshrined the values of tolerance and
fairness, and had we more faith in our own traditions and more commitment to them, more
confidcnce and pride, the dcbate about the Maho judgement would not have taken the
shape it too often has in the past few months.
/) flA--o6on : i :-131lH 
Had those values become the basis of our national pride we might have asked: what good
would it do us as a people, what would it do for future generations of Australians, what
would it do for our reputation in the world as a mature democracy, if we said the Hi-gh
Court was wrong Australia was never occupied before 1788, there never was native title,
injustice and dispossession did not occur what good would it do us if we enshrined lies in
preference to the truth?
What would it say to future generations if in 1993 Australians could not face up to what
the United States, Canada and New Zealand faced up to a century and more ago?
What would it say about this generation of ours if, when we were offered the truth, we
chose to perpetuate untruths?
What would it say about us if, a hundred years after sixty men in Corowa had the wisdom
to see the necessity for Federation, the will to do it, and the wit to know how, we recoiled
from the chance to find a national solution to our oldest problem?
If we turned away from our responsibilites? If we failed to see the legal recognition of
prior ownership and post-European dispossession as providing a basis for reconciliation?
Our duty is to find a mature national solution.
My hope is that In finding one we wil re-learn a little of the value of Australian democracy,
the principles of tolerance and justice, and the necessity to find common cause as a people
that we will re-learn it and pass the lesson on to future generations. Perhaps that will be
the lesson of Mabo.
By their initiative the people who met here in 1893 served generations of Australians,
I believe in this last decade of the twentieth century we need to look beyond the day-today
and towards the next generations of Australians.
If it is true, as I think it is, that this and future generations will be best served by revisiting
the Constitution drawn up a century ago, then we can learn something from the approach
taken at the Corowa Conference.
In 1893 Federation was, as one commentator observed " dead as Julius Caesar".
The Corowa Conference revived it.
Anid it revived it by turning Federation into a poul~ cause. The conference itself was not
a government initiative, but one promoted and paid for by private enterprise by private
indus tries.
T1O0 QM j: 26* 6ntU : 131 
The decisive resolution which wasq passed here called on the colonial parliaments to pass
legislation that would provide for the popular elction of representatives to a national
convention to draw up a Federal Constitution.
That constitution would be submitted to referendum in each colony.
The Corowa Conference gave the people of Australia the opportunity to claim their own
destiny to forge a new national entity from a far-Rlung colonial population.
And the people grasped the opportunity.
The Constitution was the foundation of the new national entity.
ReAd in 1993, it is an uninspired and uninspiring document; complex, lcgalistic and
virtually impossible to relate to contemporary Australian life.
It was framed as a routine piece of nineteenth century British imperial legislation. It shows
its age.
A great many Australians don't even know it exists. Very, very few have ever read it, let
alone understood it.
How many Australians could quote the opening words? Not half as many, I suspect, as
could quote the opening of the US constitution.
In the 1990s there exists the chance and I think the need to revisit our Constitution and
reclaim it, not for the lawyers and the politicians, but for the people.
In Australia, surely in this most democratic of countries we can have a constitution
vested in the people.
It is hardly radical to suggest that our Constitution should bc remade to reflect our national
valucs and aspirations, evoke pride in our Australian heritage and confidence in our future,
and help to unite us as a nation.
It is hardly radical to suggcst this, and hardly beyond us to do it.
We want Australians to consider the strengths and weaknesses of their Constitution.
We want them to debate the advantages and disadvantages of making our Constitution
more closely reflect Australian reality, Australian values, Australian hopes.
In the cnd we want an Australian Constitution in which Australians bclieve.
As I see it, the republic can be very much the precursor to enabling the people to reclaim
the Constitution.
/ 6O* d TOO* oN 92: 8 26-6nd, 71 
Last April wc established the Republic Advisory Committee to work on an options paper
which will set out some of the ways Australia could become a republic and the consequent
changes to our Constitution.
The Committee has consulted widely over the past few months, and the debate as you
have probably noticed is now flourishing in the community.
Following the report of the Committee in September. the Government will consider ways
to ensure that people have sufficient information about our system of government to
participate fully in the decision-making process.
In thc end, as with Federation, it will be the people of Austr-alia who decide.
After they have had time and information enough to consider the issues, the people will
decide by referendum whether we move to a republic or remain a constitutional monarchy.
No one should forget the fundamental point enshrined in the existing Constitution the
only way this or any other constitutional change can take place is by refercndum, It cani
only occur if the people want it if a majority of electors voting, and a majority of clectors
in the majority of the States, vote for change.
Changed or unchanged, the Australian Constitution belongs to Australians and only they
can decide how and when and if to change it.
By way of conclusion, let me go back to the Murray. The Murray says it better than I can.
Tis is the river which divides New South Wales and Victoria, the river along which
customs houses were erected in colonial days.
Viewed one way it can be a real and symbolic obstacle to unity. Yet the Murray is both a
national resource and a unifying national symbol. We bold it in common.
The Murray did not dictate that customs houses be built along the banks.
The Murray was not a border until Australans made it one.
It was not the existence of the Murray which persuaded politicians to run a railway line
south from Sydney in one gauge and north from Melbourne in a different one.
Yet Australians also combined in the national interest to remove the customs and to
standardise the rail line. They combined to harness the water for power and conserve it for
irrigation. They are combining now to restore the environment of the Murray-Darling Batsin and to
rectify the great problem of salination and land degradation. I believe we can combine in
/ OT'd TOO'ON 9S: 8 2j6* 6nH'Z :-3 
11
future to make the Murray-Darling the basis of a hugely expanded Australian food.
growing and food-processing industry.
The choice is always ours: we can pursue local interests or sectional interests or state
interests. We can always ind in our landscape, our laws, and our history re asons for division.
Or we can combine. We can pursue the national interest.
We can do as the Ausuralians of the 1890s voted to do and draw our strength from the
Commonwealth. The republic seeks closer identification with the nation, and a more spirited sense of
national goals and purpose. It also seeks to bring our institutions and symbols into line
with reality.
The States are part of that reality as the states are part of United States reality. The
proper aim is to get all three fiers of government working for national ends.
My argument is that in this era above all others the overriding loyalty must be to the
nation. Let me conclude by addressing the most common argument against an Australian republic.
The one which says " i it ain't broke, don't fix it",
It partly depends on your definition of broke.
If it's an anachronism is it broke?
If it no longer inspires us, or fails to unite us, or offers us no belicf, and therefore
effectively doesn't work, is it broke?
If it does not coincide with contemporary reality, is it broke?
And if we decide now that it's not broke, and in twenty or thirty years time that Australians
not only fail to identify with Britain but also with Australia, will we decide then that it was
broke all along?
Broke doesn't really come into it.
We didn't throw out the horse and cart because they were broke. We abandoned them:
we affcctionately and gracefully retired them when thcy became obsolete.
We took a considered decision to trade up to something that would serve us better.
! K/ TTd IOO* ON 92':' S 6~~. 3 
12
' That is what the people who gathered here in 1893 did.
They knew that Federation would serve Australia better. They saw themselves as having a
responsibility to their country and its future.
Who would say to them now why did you fix it when it wasn't broke?
Thank you for having me here tonight. It has been a great pleasure for me.
Corowa was there in 1893 when a great national endeavour began in earnest.
I hope that some of what I have said tonight has helped define to you what I believe is
another great national endeavour.
A hundred years ago when the colonies soon to become states wcre supreme, and their
primacy was manifest in those customs houses along the river, the people who gathered
here in Corowa stepped out of the orthodoxy and said, we need to be a nation we need
one government in charge of our national affairs.
I should hope in the prevailing orthodoxy of today, having made the step to a national
government almost a century ago, the people gathered in Corowa here tonight can see the
sense again in stepping beyond the orthodoxy.
I hope they can see the sense in that final assertion of nationhood the confidence to elect
one of our own to preside over our affairs.
I notice today the Sydncy Morning Herald writing off the people of Corowa as
conservative, not blatantly but patronisingly, seeming to suggest that the people here
tonight can't see as far as the people of Corowa one hundred years ago.
Well I doubt that. I think, like an increasing number of Australians, they will see the nccd
to put the seal ofl our nationhood.
I think they will feel themselves very capable or taking the view that the affairs of Australia
cannot forever bc presided over by a British monarch.
Tonight we are cclebrating the vision which found expression heme a ccntury ago. I think
no more fitting tribute could be paid to their memory than to complete the work that they
began. In 1993, as in 1893, 1 think we must havc the courage to see bcyond what is to what can
be. ENDS
/~ dTOO* ON 92: 8 266H7 



( I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BlY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SANDAKAN MEMORIAL SERVICE, RURWOOD PARK
1 AUGUST 1993
The people whose initiative has built this memorial have done their country a great
service. It commemorates the most appalling event in Australia's war history.
Two thousand five hundred Australian and British soldiers were taken to Sandakan,
Only six survived and, because the Japanese authorities covered up the story, it is only
from these six that we know what happened.
Three times more men died at Sandakan and Ranau, and in the jungles betwcen, than died
in those heroic battles at Kokoda in New Guinea,
The Sandakan men did not die in battle they were tortured, massacred or allowed to
perish of disease.
Yet until now Sandakan has been forgotten.
The families of those who died received the most perfu~ nctory of messages they never
knew what happened to their husbands, fathers, sons, brothers, uncles.
Knowing how and why makes a great deal of difference to thosqe who are left behind.
Knowing even when the truth is awful is better than the horror and dread of not
knowing at all.
What is true for the loved ones left behind is also true for the country they never saw
again. It is better to know. :-131
/ 2T'd TOO* ON 9S: E 663r 
Australians should know the truth about their history.
A nation is stronger for knowledge of its shared experience, and the experience of these
men should be engraved in thie national memory.
With this memorial we remember these Australian and British soldiers who fell victim to
acts of cruelty and sadism as horrifying as any in World War 11.
Sandakan must be known. It must not be forgotten.
I don't say this because one of my own family died there, or because the deaths of these
men are to be regretted more than any others whether they were in Burma, or New
Guinea, or the Middle East or any of the other places where Australians have fought and
died. I say Sandakan must be known because all Australians should recognse that these men
died in the defence of their country they died as prisoners, as slaves, but they were no
less at war with the enemy.
The final victory was as much theirs as anybody elses,
It must be known because it is a reminder of what was at stake in the Pacific War, and
how much we owe all those Australian men and women and their allies who fought and
finally won.
At stake was the democratic civilisation Australians had built in this country and those
ideas of what is fair and just in which they believed.
The land they loved was at stake, the land they believed in.
The events in Sandakan should be known because we should never forget that there have
been generations of men and women prepared to die for Australia.
We owe a debt to them. Every succeeding generation owes them. Their sacrifice helped
Lis survive.
It should also help us believe.
We should remember Sandakan for one reason above all others.
Sandakan was more than a battle between nations. More than a battle between conflicting
ideologies.
r/~ dTOO'ON 92: 8 2636nuz 31 
3
It was a war between human decency and human depravity.
That is why I think we should remember the men who died there as we remember the
victims of the death camps of Europe as casualties of pure cvil.
There was no glory in this kind of war, and nothing much to comfort those whose loved
ones suffered and died.
With this memorial there will be some consolation in knowing that others know what
happened at Sandakan.
If other Australians can come to know about these things the comfort to those who have
lived with Sandakan for fifty years will be so much greater.
And as a nation, surely, we will be wiser and stronger.
If there was no glory in the way these men died perhaps there can be in their memory.
Perhaps it can inspire in us the feelings for Australia that the men of Sandakan felt.
As Jim said earlier, they were all volunteers.
Men like Keith Botterill who, when recalling his escape from the death march, wrote:
We started at night, the native carried bamboo torches to light the way, until the
moon came up. The next day I was lying down thinking I could not walk another
step, when I looked up and saw an Australian face bending over me. 14e was a big
six footer. He just sat down beside me and cried.
So long as we have some sense of what Keith Bottcrill felt we will have an understanding
of what it means to be Australian.
And so long as we remember the lesson for humanity at Sandakan we will be a better
people and Australia a better place.
I ami very glad and very gratefujl to have had the privilege to speak here today.
Thank you.
/ dS TOO'ON 92: 8 26* 6nu' .1 



IVI
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY PRIM HMSTER, THE HON P I KEAM) N, NV'
CENOTAPH CEREMONY
9 AUGUST, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
HIft Fxcellency, the Pres~ ident of Naum1 the honowablo Speaker of ie Nawijan
Puarnment, miembers of the Nauruan Cabinet other distinguished gisests, and tadies and
gcntlomwn. I understand my in~ it is the Frt to Nauru by an Austruliin Primc Minister.
I thiink it is therefore ' very fitting that Presidoni Dowfyogo and I should take a mornant
from the Forum schedule to take part in today' coremony here at the Cenotaph.
The Cerntaph honours the courage and sacrifice of Naunuan and Ausralians who
sufferid dwrinjS the Japan ese occupatio n of Nauu
It 6~ important that we ncvcr forget the great ftragdy experieniced by the Nauruan
peoplc at that tie
The ccrmnunity was dMdcd by mnass exilo. Vnspeakable hardship and brutality mncant
thats mny Nauruans died. Indeed a Largo part of the population died.
Exceptional qualities are needed for a comniiy to surve adversity r-uch as ths.
A generation of Nauruan leadership was forged in thAt bidter stnvle,
Their loyalty to their community remains an timpiration for aft Nauxuans today.
As an Auatralian I am also proud to honour the bravery and dedication of Colonel
Chalmers and hiis four colleagues who died htr in the occupation. Their namecs are
fixed at th.; Ccnotaph commemoration of the fact that they stayed after the evacuation
with the Nauun people anid died as a conscquence.
/ TO'd iO* QN 8T: 2. T 16'~ 6n':-3 
Our two countries have a long association, and it is associations of this kind where we
sharo an experience in war. Where we die at the hands of an enemy, but die together.
We know these things form part now of not just a long association but a long
fricndship. We know each other now as friends and partners.
In recalling together today our shared history, we should draw faith from the courage
and dedication of past generations of Naunans and Australians. People who faced
hardship and struggle, and in the Second World War, of course, brutality on a scale
none of us today are asked to bear.
We should of the consequene of all this commit ourselves to long-standing friendship
and cooperation in the fu;,.
I am very happy that earlier today, President Dowiyogo and I agreed on a compact of
settlement which will define a new phase in the Australia. Nauru relationship.
lhi is a relationship which I think is now underwritten by a treaty of principles,
statement of principles, which I might say exists between Australia and no other country
as it now does between Australia and Nauru.
Never bcfWore have we written downi the basis of an ongoing friendship together as we
have today.
So from here on we know well that we can build a future on a shared past, we know
ours is a unique relationship, one which I am sure will endure.
I am very hlionourd to have had the opportunity to visit Nauru, and particularly
honoured to take place in today's ceremony, where as Prime Minister of Australia this is
the 1rt opportunity for me in the position of Prime Minister to honour the Australians
who died here and to honour the Nauruans who died also. And to bring to our
memory the great losses and shared sacrifices of the Second World War.
Our long history together is worthy of remembrance and now we can celebrate a future
together, one based on mutual trust and mutual respect and one where we know well
together where our future will lead us.
Thank you very much for having me here today as part of this very moving ceremony.
ENDS
/ ZO'd œ SOON 8T: ZT œ 6* 6flh6 : 131 



PRIME MIISTER
SPEECH 13Y TUE PRIME MIMSIER. MHE HON P J XEATING. M P
ISIGNINJG CER~ EMONY
NAURU, 10 AUGUST, 193
E&amp; OI, PROOF COPY
Your Extcellency, the President of Nauru, other distiiauished Nauruant guests, and
ladkio and sentlemen.
I am vceiy please that President Dowayogo and I have been able to tign today theft
three inter-related agr" eemnt whtich makce up the Compact of Settlement betwccnt
Australia and Nauru.
hoe are solemnn and binding comnitments, and I think it is lWr to say they define a
now phaic of coopardou between Australia and Nauru.
The terms of x-tticniciii were made public yesterday and I am heai tened that the
Compact of Settlemnent Wa becen warmly ueleonad int both countries. That 13 what the
President reliably tells Me, ajnd I am sure that is true in Australia as well.
There is a wide recoontion in 1501,1 countries that AuStraia and Nauru arc lungstanding
fdends arnd partners. Theiic is reief, I think. that an issue which has divided
us has been resolved, well I think both amicably and reaRsonably, and honourably, to the
satisfaction of both partes.
Timw reaction of ourirners in the South Pacils; Fonrm was also positive, and a
number of members of the Forum I re-came up to both Of wtq crtainly to mysclf,
saying thial they were pleAscd to see that countric3 within the Forum could resolve
diffcrcricci, dad that paritilArly some of the larger doinor countries who have
boncfited from t rade and commerce with the area could also make such ant
arrangement. I iihink This wax very comforting to them,
They wclvomc the diemonstraion thAt Australia and Naur. u are able to work together
to settle our differvacczi awd solve prohiems as neighbours and friendzi, making the
obvious point that such pi " esses should al1so be able to take place btworn ourselvest
and themselves. 
This is called, of course in this part of the world, the Pacific way, and if this is the
Pacific way obviously it works.
On the Australian side negotiatiorns were C. onducted by my colleague, Gordon Bilney,
the Minister for Developmnt, Cooperation and Pacific island Affairs, and I should like
to note publicly my appreciation of the skill and care with which he has handled this
sensitive task.
The Foreigni Minister Wad to him, how come you can do this, Gordon, when I wasn't
able to? And a lot of the rest of us knew the answer but I won't ( inaudible).
At any rate this is a feather in Gordon's cap, and I am sure that the relationship he has
developed with the people of Nawsu will be one of long-standing, one which there is, I
am sure, repect on both sides which will now obtain for many yearm and in this
important post, particularly in the Pacific Island Affairs this is, I think, a very solid
tbundation for Gordon reprsemin$ the Government to have in its relations with
Nauu Mr President, the agreements we have signed today not only record an amicable out of
court settlemntd of the IC) case, they also set out a frame work for the future conduct
of Australian-Nauru relations.
r
The joint declaration of principles coven3 a large number of field where Australia and
Nauru are already oooperating, and where we lave scope to develop fRther our
partnership. All these fields are significant, but there is one I should particularly underline, at
paragraph 20 in the document it says this. " Both Governments recognise both the
challenge presented by rehabilitating the worked out phosphate lands on Nauru and the
fragility of Nauru's ecosystems, and will work together to facilitate the progressive
rehabilitation of Nauru and the protection of NaWUs environment."
This is an important commitment and one which the Australian side takes very
seiously. and already the President and I had some substantial discussions a day ago
about how and which ways that might be addressed and progressed.
So we should like to see the proposed rehabilitation and development cooperation
4reement contribute in a real way to the process of rehabilitation on Nauru, where the
' people of the country feel they have a very tangible stake in this settlemnent, and where
there are tangible and obvious benefits for them.
I
so, Mr President, I anm pleased to have the opportunity to visit Nauru and attend the
South Pacific Forum. Could I take the opportunity of congratulating you and the
Government for hosting the Forum and for the way in which it has been organised. It
is a diffcult thing to host a Forum like this, for any country, particularly when you are
not doing it often, and to do it so well, and of course chairing the proceedings as you
have done today with great aplomb and dexterity and smoothness, I think attest to the
decision which was taken a year or so ago for Namu to be the host. 
I am especially happy that during this visit it has provided an historic opportunity to
sign this historic Compact Of Settlement, as well as attend the Summit, Can I say I
was also very pleased to lay a wreath on the Cenotaph yesterday in remembrance of
the sacrifice which Australians and Nauruans had made together as long ago as the
Second World War, again underpinning and underlining the strength and depth of the
Australia-Nauru relationship.
As I said, our relationship is unique and it is one to which we acre committed on a long.
term basis and I hope that this historic settlement, the statement of principles, which
for the first time Austrai has written down a set of principles which will govern the
relationship that it has with another country, and the general warmth of the relationship
between Australians and Nauruans on this occasion at this signing and at this point of
the Forum of your host, your hosting of the Forum, this should be I think, let's may, a
milestone, another mnilestone, in Australian-Nauru relations.
So could I again congratulate the President on agreeing to this settlemet, and again
congratulate Gordon Bilney on negotiating for the Australian side. But more
particularly, on behalf of the Nauruan people for a stake in their fuzture development
and rehabilitation, which I think this agreement does and in so doing underlining this
partnership with Australi.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH B! THE PRIME MINISTER, TEE HON P J KEATING MP, TO
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY DINNER,
CANBERRA, 13 AUGUST 1993
When I first arrived in Canberra as a young opposition
backbencher John Gorton was Prime Minister and this great
library was well on the way to completion.
So it is very pleasing tonight to come here and see that
we are all still standing.
Not that it was a surprise the National Library and Sir
John both have about them the same timeless,
indestructible quality.
The building of the National Library spanned something of
a sea change in our history. Sir Robert Menzies laid the
foundation stone. Sir John Gorton opened it.
That was a considerable political shift.
For without intending the slightest disrespect to his
illustrious predecessor, Sir John was a bit of a
revelation to those of us who had really only known one
Australian Prime Minister.
I know there are some who look back and see it as perfect
peace I saw it through different eyes, and so did many
of my generation. We saw it by the mid-1960s in the
doldrums.
With Sir John there was a difference in both style and
substance. It was Sir John, for example, who declared Commonwealth
control over the coast to the high water mark and over
coastal waterways and so preserved national
responsibility for the environmental and resource issues
which these areas presented.
In this and in other ways -like his support for an
Australian film industry -Sir John demonstrated that the
conservative parties were capable of change and vigour
and, dare I say, a rather more unqualified Australian
demeanour. ~ j97
L 
2
But despite sporadic outbreaks of resistance from some of
his successors, the change continued: the powers that he
insisted should be the Commonwealth's have been invoked
in the interests of the environment and the nation; the
film industry has flourished magnificently; and the not
unrelated question of Australia's independent identity
has become a central element in a national debate which
may yet yield an Australian republic by the end of the
century. So I hope Sir John sometimes allows himself the thought
that he was a visionary.
With the luxury of hindsight, we begin to get a
perspective on the nature of the battle in those years
and in the twenty-five since.
In some respects it was a generational shift in values;
yet I think the battles John Golton fought were of a kind
to be found throughout ouir history between different
concepts of Australia's nationhood and identity which
emerged in the nineteenth century and have been alive
ever since.
In time I expect someone will write the history of these
last twenty-five years.
I know " From Gorton to Keating" has a funny sort of a
ring about it, but under a different title it would be a
rewarding project there is that consistent theme of
change attempted and change denied.
Change, let me say, has won a resounding victory and, for
all the certainties which characterised the sixties, this
is a much better Australia because change has won.
We have seen the remarkable growth of tolerant, creative
cultural pluralism and all the riches this has brought
Australia. We have seen our attitude to the region in which we live
change dramatically and today we are seeing the pace of
change accelerate.
The xenophobia has largely gone.
We have seen the culture of the workplace change
fundamentally from an assumption of opposing interests
to one of shared interests.
The shape of the Australian economy has changed: for
instance, we are seeing Australia become an exporter of
manufactures high tech goods as well as raw materials
and agricultural products.
And we have seen Australians come to the understanding
that these are things we must do if we are to secure our
future. 998 
That has probably been the most profound change of all
and our greatest achievement, our willingness to change,
to recognise that the world is changing, and the way we
do things and conceive of ourselves must change to
accommodate it.
Yet far more than other comparable countries which have
attempted the same kind of economic change, we have kept
faith with our traditions of democracy and social
justice. Like other countries we have a severe unemployment
problem. But other countries do not have our health system. They
do not have an Accord between unions and the government.
They do not have the best record in the world on
legislation to expand the status and rights of women.
Few countries have such a secure social safety net.
We have considerable difficulties. There are all sorts
of imperfections.
But at the end of a decade of the most profound economic
change in our history, and at the end of a generation of
equally profound cultural change, Australia remains among
the very freest and fairest societies in the world.
That is not to be complacent it is to recognise
achievement and re-affirm our commitment to these
principles. So this last twenty-five years makes a great story.
And if someone does decide to write it there is one thing
we can be sure of: we can be sure that the greater part
of the research will be done here in the National
Library. For this is where the national story is contained. Like
the Library of Congress and the British Library and the
Bibliotheque Nationale, the National Library of Australia
conserves the materials from which the story can be told
the story which will tell future generations who they
are and how their country came to be.
Ultimately it will tell them whether this generation
cared enough about Australia: whether they had enough wit
to imagine Australia's future and enough courage to do
what was necessary.
The National Library holds the materials by which we will
be judged.
This audience scarcely needs me to tell them why we
should celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
National Library why it is one of Australia's greatest
and most cherished institutions. 199 
But as one who every day has his history written with an
air of definitive authority in a dozen newspapers across
the country, and served up on three commercial and two
public television networks, and on countless radio
stations where the public are also invited to join in the
feeding frenzy perhaps I can offer a politician's
perspective on national stories.
I don't mean to offer the gratuitous advice that you
shouldn't believe what you read in the newspapers: but it
goes without saying that every one of those dozen
newspapers may have, to a greater or lesser extent, a
different account either of what was said or what was
meant, and the television grabs can be equally as various
as can the radio commentary.
Knowing that these are as much basic sources for
historians as the writings of politicians and bureaucrats
with necessarily defective and selective memories;
knowing that the historian will have to read or speak to
people who are absolute artists at covering their tracks:
knowing this, and that most documents can be read in more
than one way, and are deceptive if not meaningless
without detailed knowledge of the context in which they
are created; and knowing that every writer brings his or
her own perspective and prejudice to the task that like
journalists they frequently have an axe to grind:
knowi * ng all this, I wonder how historians can presume to
write the story at all.
That is the second thing we can be sure of when the story
of the last twenty-five years is told many people will
say it is not the real story. They will say it is not a
true story.
They will be right, of course. There will never be one
true story of Australia and I think we should all be glad
of that.
There are any number of people -Isuppose some better
qualified than others who will tell you that the
greatest work to be substantially researched in this
Library is terribly flawed or even quite wrong.
But I don't think there are many people who would say
that Manning Clark's six volume History of Australia does
not contain fundamental truths about Australia, or that
it has not greatly enriched our understanding of
ourselves and entertained us. He made our lives more
interesting by weaving them into a tapestry.
I'm sure that Manning Clark never intended his history to
be the definitive story of Australia, any more than all
those other works on Australian society are the last word
on their subjects.
1000 
Clark's work was the product of one Australian's view,
one Australian's passion for the place. I think it can
be said that Manning Clark's great contribution was that
he encouraged us to believe that our history was worth
writing and knowing. In doing that he encouraged
academics, teachers and students to think about the
issues and the drama of the Australian experience and
encouraged all of us to think about what we could become.
When you look at the works which have been researched and
written in this library, it is probably true to say that
many of them were directly or indirectly inspired by
Clark's labour.
Perhaps more than any other Australian writer, he
elevated Australian history to the point where all of us
could say that the story of Australia was part of the
universal story uniquely Australian, but at every stage
connected to the world beyond.
I would not want to suggest a parallel between Manning
Clark's history and its great themes and the Labor
government and my role in it.
Politics is too much concerned with the day to day to
discern a pattern. A politician's energy is so often
expended on combating necessities which in the longer run
seem petty and even inconsequential.
We are also required to fight on fronts which historians
of the Manning Clark variety are inclined to think of as
pedestrian and even philistine. Reform of the taxation
system and changes to the regulations affecting banking
these things were not exactly grist to Manning's mill.
Nor do historians have to live out the daily grind of
beating back one's political opponents.
For all these reasons it is often very difficult for
politicians to hang on to the long view the wvision
thing" as someone called it. But let me say that the
Manning Clarks of the world, the historians who work on a
big canvas, can help them do it.
Because, buried beneath the weight of daily necessity and
all the words necessary to meet it, there is something of
an affinity between we politicians and the historians.
For, in truth, politicians who believe in their cause are
always conscious that they have a story to tell. Indeed
the telling of it is an essential ingredient of success.
When a government cannot convey a story a consistent
story the people lose faith in the government.
It is one of the meanings of that expression for disaster
" losing the plot". 1001 
The other meaning of the story in politics is that same
vision thing, one's ambition for the country and a
notion of how it might be realised.
We in the Labor Party take the view that we have the
vehicle the only suitable and reliable vehicle which
can change Australia as necessity and ambition demand.
In the 1970s some of us in the Labor Party formed the
view that if Australia was to realise its great potential
and meet the challenges it faced, the Party needed to be
rid of its traditional phobias.
Labor had to rid itself of prejudice which narrowed the
possibility of change, and which in fact stood in the way
of its great ideals.
It had to embrace the pluralist reality of Australia. It
had to make a virtue of it, extend it, celebrate it.
It had to recognise and accept that, for all their
collectivist traditions, Australians believed in free
enterprise and that they were right to believe in it
because, without question, it delivers more freedom and
more wealth and, in the end, more social justice than any
other.
~ Labor had to open itself up to reality, to the world.
It had to recognise that, perhaps as never before, the
story of Australia was bound to be part of the world
story.
And through Labor, Australia itself could become
phobia-free, conscious and proud of its best traditions
and its capacity to adapt, a modern social democracy and
a substantial and creative player in the world.
For ten years now, despite the political machinations and
the stumbles, despite all the interventions of forces
within and beyond our control, this is essentially the
story the Labor Government has been telling.
The point of the last decade is change and improvement:
to change the culture and the structure, to build on our
material and human strengths and give ourselves a chance
in the world.
This is not the time or place to tell you why I think we
now have that chance. But in the emergence of
unprecedented opportunities in the Asia-Pacific, and in
the fundamental changes in the Australian economy and our
business and industrial culture, the chance is there. It
is a better chance, I believe, than Australia has ever
had before.
And when the history is written, I think it will be seen
that it was in these two decades that we grasped the
1002 
chance and set Australia up for the twenty-first
century. The danger is always, I think, that a country's story
or the story of a political party should ossify.
In our national life there are things we should hold
sacred, things which no generation should be allowed to
forget.
Among these I would number our commitment to democracy,
freedom, justice, fairness, our love of the land and our
best institutions and traditions.
We should keep these values forever in the foreground and
of course we should honour all those in peace and war who
have defended them.
But, because it is anathema to those very traditions, we
should resist the temptation to say that one individual
or group has a monopoly on these things.
I can vouch for the temptation to do this in the Labor
Party. I venture to say Sir John Gorton can vouch for it
in the Liberal Party.
Legends give a nation strength. They give us coherence,
confidence and belief. But they also have the capacity
to freeze us in our tracks. They have the capacity to
exclude new generations. They can underpin democracy and
they can undermine it.
Last year was the 50th anniversary of a number of major
battles fought by Australians in defence of their
country. They were as significant as any fought by
Australians in a sense, more significant, because they
were fought in defence of this country and the life that
Australians had made here.
They were fought by men and women of my parents'
generation. It seemed to me that they had not been spoken for as the
soldiers of the First World War had been, because they
were not there at the birth of the legend of Anzac.
It seemed to me appropriate last year to speak for them.
And it also seemed to me that there had to be lessons to
learn from these events in our region, and that we should
not be afraid to confront the controversy which has long
surrounded some of them.
There were some who took offence at what I had to say;
there were others, including veterans of the battles, who
supported me. 1003 
My point was that in paying the respect that was due, it
was necessary to recognise that the Australian military
tradition like every other tradition does not belong
to anyone except the Australian people.
It is not the basis of a political party, interest group,
religion or sect.
It is not the preserve of one generation if it is
allowed to become so it will die.
What is more, it can most certainly withstand re-thinking
and re-interpretation, just as it can withstand the
addition to it of neglected episodes in our history
like the Sandakan death marches, or Vietnam. In the past
twelve months I have been present at the inauguration of
memorials to both.
My point is that if we don't question we can't imagine.
It is bit like the gift an historian must have to see
beyond the received wisdom and what has been set in
stone.
An historian has to have an imagination.
So does a nation so does a government.
If we can't imagine we can't determine our future, we
can't act, we can't change. And we'll fall behind.
That is the point about honouring our legends and
traditions. We fail ourselves, we fail future
generations and we fail those whose memory we are
honouring if we do not re-think the meaning of received
wisdom in the light of contemporary need.
It seems to me the same with political parties.
In the Labor Party we honour our heroes. We make much of
our history and traditions.
But it would be fundamentally silly to live by the letter
of their thought.
I have no doubt that, confronted with the necessities of
this era, Ben Chifley and John Curtin would have
responded with measures quite different to those they
thought appropriate to the forties.
And while I-know my opponents are outraged when I venture
on their territory, I have to say the same is obviously
true of Menzies.
I mean, in recent years three historians have written
books based on the Menzies papers held in the National
Library's manuscripts-collection. Yet Allan Martin,
Judith Brett and David Day have reached very different
1004 
conclusions about Menzies, about what he stood for and
what he means to us now.
This seems to me to say not only that it is impossible to
arrive at the one true story, that it depends on one's
perspective; but that it is foolish to conceive of one's
heroes as bearers of the Holy Grail. Or to let the ' ir
life and times determine ours, or what the future will
be. It is one thing to honour heroes and heroic acts, and to
memorialise and see the lessons they teach. But it is
another thing entirely to let them hold up the progress
of succeeding generations.
Let me conclude by drawing a parallel with Mabo. Just
under two weeks ago, I spoke at the opening of a memorial
in Sydney to the men who died in what was surely among
the worst episodes in our history the death by torture,
execution and disease of nearly 2000 Australians at
Sandakan in Borneo.
No Australian would for a moment question the propriety
and historic justice in the erection of the Sandakan
memorial or in the very moving ceremony that was
conducted there.
Yet there are people who will say that the memory of
death by massacre, torture and disease, when it was
inflicted on Aboriginal Australians, should be expunged.
That to pay tribute to their memory is an exercise in
guilt. That one memory is legitimate, the other the
product of a guilt industry.
I say we can't be so selective. I say that we must pay
tribute to the good and the bad in our history and that
when we honestly do that we are not held up but given the
strength to make progress.
I spoke earlier about the daily machinations,
misinterpretations and accusations which are the daily
stuff of politics, and which sometimes make it very
difficult to keep a grip on the story.
With Mabo, it is essential that we do.
With Mabo, I am prepared to wear short term politics for
the long term result. Mabo is part of the big story and
it can't be left to short term expediency and cynical
compromise. Mabo demands a mature national response. We need to see
Ribo -not as a problem but as an opportunity to solve the
problem. A mature national response demands honesty and
imagination. Honesty because we can't build this country
on a lie. 
We need imagination because we need to imagine an
Australia without the blight of Aboriginal dispossession
and disadvantage.
We need also the capacity to imagine what our failure
would mean. What it would mean to the self-esteem of this
and future generations. What it would mean to our
reputation in the world. What it would mean to a future
generation who, on coming to the National Library, saw in
the documents here that we once had an opportunity to
solve our oldest and deepest problem and we did not care
enough to grasp it.
1006
-L IL-II 



PRIM MIPISTE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
IDGELL BIRDS EYE POTATO PROCESSING PLANT
ULVERSTONE, 23 AUGUST 1993
I'm very pleased to be here in Ulverstone.
Some mainland Australians are inclined to think of
Tasmania as coming along behind the rest of the countryas
a beautiful billabong cut off from the mainstream of
the rest of Australia.
But in fact as we learned on the evening of March 13-
in many ways Tasmania leads the way.
For some time now Tasmania has had some of the model
export industries of Australia innovative, premium
quality industries of the kind which Australia can and
must have to succeed in the modern world.
There are tremendous prospects for Australian industry in
the nineties and beyond, and no sector of industry has
greater prospects than the food industry.
Today I am here to congratulate the people at this plant
for their initiative.
I am also here to urge everyone in the-food industry to
get behind the program being developed h_ j my colleagues,
Simon Crean and Alan Griffiths, and the 1Agri-Food Council
to treble the level of food exports-.-high quality clean
food exports by the ye~ i -2000.
McKinsey and Company have estimated that by the end of
the decade the food market in East and South East Asia
will be worth in excess of $ 200 billion per annum. 
we in Australia are very well placed to take advantage of
this growth: for the first time in our history we have
the advantage of proximity to our major markets;. we have
a highly efficient agricultural sector; we have enormous
agricultural capacity; we have a much better
understanding of what is needed to succeed in Asia
better marketing, better delivery, better product.
And, crucially, we also have the elements which make this
plant such an exciting reality we have innovative food
processors and a union movement which is behind
Australian industry, including the food industry.
It is a measure of the collective spirit driving the
initiative an6 a clear indication of its potential
strength thatiwe have on the Agri-Food Council, along
with the leading manufacturers, Martin Ferguson from the
ACTU, the CSIRO and the National Farmers Federation.
Above all, it demonstrates a mutual understanding of the
economic imperatives facing Australia the economic and
social imperatives: our national wealth depends on our
ability to export, and on this also depends our ability
to create jobs. Exports and jobs go hand in hand.
we're inclined to talk ourselves down in Australia
we're inclined to underestimate both our chances and our
ability to grasp them.
I don't underestimate them. I think the best chance
Australia has ever had awaits us in the Asia-Pacific
and, indeed, in the rest of the world.
And I think we have changed so dramatically in the last
decade there can be no question of our ability to
succeed. I could read you out a lot of figures which prove beyond
doubt that we are much more competitive than we were a
decade or even five years ago.
I could statistically demonstrate how the economy is
changing in size and shape, and changing as we need it to
change. I could provide all the evidence needed to convince a
reasonable person that, despite our problems and -despite
the legions of naysayers in the press and among some
elements of the business community, we Australians have
good reason to be very confident about the future and
equally good reason to be proud of how far in recent
years we have come.
Yet I think the best evidence I can produce today is this
project itself. 1199 
3
For it is in many ways a model of the change which is
occurring around Australia now and which will secure our
future. It is a model for its vision and for its execution. The
vision is of Australian food exports to Asia. The
execution is through cooperation and World Best Practice.
The redevelopment of the Ulverstone Factory has been
assisted by both the Commonwealth and the State
government. The Commonwealth provided $ 620,000 to assist training and
re-training of employees and a best practice program.
State Government support has included assistance with
acquiring the site and a workplace reform program.
This was useful strategic help, but the driving force, of
course, has come from a company with sufficient faith and
vision not to say resources to invest $ 30 million in
making the plant the most modern and efficient in the
world. The project has required a shared vision a shared
belief. It has required the company and the unions to come to
fundamental agreement.
The Company signed the Agri-Food Council Memorandum of
Understanding on workplace reform and introduced
innovative workplace agreements which among other
things allow the plant to stay open 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, processing 220,000 tonnes of potatoes
a year.
I understand the next step along the road to securing
significant export market in Asia is to increase the
supply of potatoes at a competitive price.
When Simon Crean and I were in Mackay in March this year
launching Labor's rural policy statement, we said that we
would be introducing a world best practi. ce scheme for
farmers.
With the allocation of $ 11.2 million in the Budget we
have now delivered on that election commitment.
The world best practice program will1 help get the
linkages between production and processing working more
efficiently. Because we do not expect growers to carry the burden of
this alone, we will be making grants available to_
industries seeking to improve these linkages acrcss the
whole of the rural sector. 
Today I am pleased to announce that the first proj~ ct to
be supported under that program will be a farm best
practice program for vegetable growers in Tasmania.
As I said, Tasmania is very often in the lead.
Due to the initiative of the Agri-Food Council and, in
particular, the Minister, Simon Crean, Tasmanian potato
growers and processors are going to work together in a
three year program of farm best practice with the aim of
lowering production costs and increasing yields by at
least 20 per cent.
The program wili involve a joint investment of about
$ 800,000 over the next three years, with contributions
from both the Conunonwealth and State governments and from
processors. It is a very practical operation: by working in small
discussion groups, farmers will identify the obstacles to
higher yields on a paddock by paddock basis.
This is a good program for the industry and for Tasmania.
It is a good project for Tasmanian farmers.
But more than that it is a good model for the way we in
Australia can and must work to guarantee the nation's
economic future to create jobs and to realise our
potential as never before.
It is a model because it is inclusive, cooperative,
clever it speaks of the recognition that in the markets
of Asia lies so much of our future prosperity and so many
of our jobs.
But the people I want to congratulate today are the
people who made this plant possible and who are
continuing to work towards its success.
The management, the staff and the growers whose vision,
belief and energy are giving Ulverstone a great new
future and playing their part in doing the same for their
country. 1201 



4 K N
PARTIAL EXTRACT FROM SPEECH BY TBZ PRIM W4O1SITRI THE
JiOI P. ) CEATLVG MP. -ERICSSON AUSTRALIA EXPORT LAUNCII,
DIROADMEADOWS, MLBOURNE THUMSDAY, 26 AUGUST, M99
Wha we arc oin as a Govcricni is encouragh thi cbang. And tNs a=
culvad chang has now ovtakcn Australi a3 th. whole tedetcy on protwcton has
drop. The whiole nodmr that wuff priion was the way forward for AusrAli--
a th. ( owmmient hia weaned Apzahan hiduty off tarff protecton ad opened te
oppostiied to develop products we could novar have dreamued of yewr ago, in
makuwe would never hawe thought moostd for Australi procts~ l. Wbich onl
prome the poiA1 if you look ot and look up you ha~ ea fiMnm=;, but ifyou look down
and you we unmetain of youmsef and you lack cozfdene and you seek to axtificiall
potedt yours4f It the end all you do is let Austrakia living tdads decline.
Now, we hmv a chance of being a paut idustrial ntiot, a nsuaczignadon. I
guw up int MY9 sn ulk to tho imme, atIwet to the House of
Reeeit mb* A with ibe notion that you cW&amp; bav a compoitiv inanufictn
ecfto awtng beside a wmoq. Uetit pdbuay export sector t* A an ki. ialay"
conttde soctor M ineirals and wieulturc mant tha it was irup ible becaus
Of the Otew ~ psum on t exchange rate it was imsible to have a burgootdig
And I alwmy thout tis was essenti* l wromg And ave thouth t was &amp; meth e
7opular WWsdM of t Secittaty of te Treasury an thc Treay it was, in wsence,
wroog. AMd it i am t othr~ mpe of how die politWi em leads the wxy and not the
burewcacy. because die few of us HiMn frough die stnies with low growth,
watchig 1acforics close onc aftr te other, wc mai, ' Why mws Austalan be doomed
to a sbctrein nianufacturing simpl becaus@ of t n~ tAken view tha yu ean't
hmv a good MvtccftU* sector sitfizg besid a good pzimmy exp" i sector
Andso wte = wct abotdoft allthe V* that nedd obe doeto luangeth
Fromn opening up our financial rnaket to &amp; oa~ in the Austraian dolla, hang ithe
tax sse" thnde Pro&amp; l and wage shame in the emoM~ right promoting mosarch
and deelpm ntchng the education qftm to food our reearch and devlopntd
bAse and Our Ngtic technologies and taig down the tariff Wall. Anid in the end what
w4ve damei we'e sacocedod inchanging te view. Nobody toda Mubscibes to the
view tha we mal' havea burgcoinza nuacwt sector. But jWs a lite Over tena
,20/ 10' d 910* ON OG: 91 5œ 6 6flW97 1 
yers ago bweaucray in this coumty, pto view of the former Ge= ntmwn was that
thse sorts of produwtg couldn't be made and sold cmpeiti* ly. And dats changed
and changed eomously.
NO Vuy had to get as t Gorirnment In a period of groat change x W' makin
Alm the com MCentatoS in ts COtrY who of cous, Alway, lag behd the gm..
They are awas about soin it befae than we am ad being up the frovt showing to
way. But, i hot, they're most* tailng Whin&amp; Becaue none of them oer articulated
a modem b= Vonhi# industria AustrAia lioked Into the Asia Pacc. It had to come
om tie POkiCj system and frm the Austaian wmmznity. And we're now seirg
Ig oft poiies home
And the Budget which weCvt just inftdlwed which has had more tha its share of
flAk again is about doing thi. Were gening ot budget dcfcit down in the mickte
nimewss so that When the next phase ofinvstment goes foug AustrW an
nanzzfaU&amp; Ctg it doesn't Put too big a stri of 4oi curerl accom and on out
domuede irAvnW Now, by the tiddl nineties well hae die Au* r* mia Budget deficit
down to aba. 1 o0f ODP. The tnIed States -,* whicb ha justbeen trough aheati
rendcitg proess of gcitg the Bils * sou* u the Roes ofRepie tatives in the
ConUssB, Resident Clintos s Budge4 with Oe Viso P Castig the caiting voe in
the Seate &amp; CY2 be down to 3% Of GDP only'by the middle 199&amp; s. J other words
asai in fical tetv, ive're going to be ahead of &amp; e world. As wc ae now with
vusmiabfy low inftion and the rest
Now, the AUtra&amp; ia cornmurity has got to think about the long rm and to umderstad
that the Gvenent has to think about their lon rim interests. And if we want hiher
levels of employment and lower levels of aeamployment we have got to get mom
wh. we an't got mom growth without mor uvest ent and we cant get the
investMent if the Government's got its hands in the Uavi cookie jar, tairg the sVh
for publi consumption. But right now we want to kick the economy along with some
Cxta speafin which wil come viato tax cuts, hocaun we need that aw push to
make * e ecooy grow. But as it st growing and we get the investment raly
caciing again we want to pull the public sector ow of the way so te pdvato sector can
come through and create thcjobsL So the balnces have got to be ther.
And a of the people who have urged upon the Govermuet this kind of policy, when
you produce the pokiy they say, VWeo tanrks very much for that but we don't qite at
the way you got thee You know, you should have cut outlays moe, you should have
relied less On reenuC) you should have done this and done that' Well te fact; z, lets
Pay for &amp; e medium to long tm. And nor think about thiMp just tomonmow, bu think
abo6t 60medium te and in doing &amp; Atwell be them ready with pui e policy to help
the hices of campanies ike Ericsson Auwtralk to be in there o develop a fure for
themselves as we see these stroger growth policies come trougL
Now, wyloymet is Australia's grat problem And you know, wodg in a plant
like dd that higher productivity those macbn.. Mibh are doing the stamping and
j : 131
/ O~ d ST0* ON OS: 9 6n 9 
puttin the compomets on an not eznploqiag people. But it dom Make te busine
campetib and it does gi~ the business a fgtim. And ihan as it rows it cmplays
fm peope. $ mr, it's ftwe peope for the gvmi uabt of producton. But in die end
if * mee at nui nme un of produatio tre will be many mmr people Bt Owe
cWference is, in abusimwhchwMIA d p owasbn otsin uic~ h willbe
Pmb-eooltWyipU and which is static. -So this is wby wr'v .1was got to ty
and blend higher producv* t and mechanisaton in wMt amploymmn And the key to
that is growth and the kcy to go%* is low Wfaion, a competiMv exchanrw, good
budgetary policies, good * naee of t proft and ws~ s in dt econom and a decent
education sita pimnpin rmsarch and dmvlopincmt capacit and innovafmo imt our
kwtriml product.
Thr/ ng an the thinp tha ave sit* in thene now. For a coufty wbich has got a grem
htM.; " o jUSt alone hen. In Aumlia buit abroA, iA the Asia Padci&amp; and the wodid in
generaL Wher, in the 1970' s im wmr consipe to bcln a qury and a fam, where
compaties WVe this and industries Mie this were witn off as not having real c. pacity...
ENDS.
r%-T lkiAC T cR * 6nti : 1 



26/ 08 * 93 17: 46 '&amp; 06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE 002
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING, XP
ERICSSON AUSTRALIA TELECOMM( UNICATIONS
BROADMEADOWS, AUGUST 26 1993
It is a great pleasure to be here today.
In manufacturing, the name Broadmeadows has usually meant
one thing Ford Australia.
Without the slightest disrespect to Ford, let me say that
Broadmeadows should mean one more thing in Australian
manufacturing Ericsson Australia.
It gets the balance right small items here, large items'
up the road.
Both innovative, both exporters, both very significant
employers. Both multinational companies with their parents abroad
but both making vital contributions to the Australian
economy and helping to take it in the direction it must
go. To the Asia-Pacific, and to the world.
Ericsson have been here for a long time they've been in
Australia for a century, and in Broadmeadows for thirty
years. They have long been a company of the kind Australia needs
and, I'm pleased to say, is now producing a company
which believes in success through innovation.
The changes in telecommunications over a century have
been remarkable of course from the phone you bolted to
the wall to the phone you put in your top pocket.
But there has never been a change like the one which is
occurring now.
There has never been a change so dramatic, nor one so
full of possibility.
We are seeing Australia assume the status of a regional
and, indeed, world leader in telecommunications. 
2 6/ 08 ' 93 17: 47 '&amp; 06 273 2923PMRESOIC j3
2
We are seeing that leadership translated into rapid
export growth in the Asia-Pacific.
The Government estimates that Australia has the potential
to achieve telecommunications exports of $ 2 billion by
1997 and much of that will undoubtedly be in our
region. It is a strategically important industry for Australia.
With one of the most advanced telecommunications networks
in the world we have the base for expansion into Asia.
I was in South Korea and China a few months ago and the
opportunities were plain to see: over and above our
traditional minerals and energy and agricultural
products, there are burgeoning markets for things we do
well and things we make well things like computer
software, education services, processed food,
environmental services and, perhaps most obviously of
all, telecommunications.
And the same opportunities exist throughout the region.
If telecommunications is a strategic industry for
Australia's economy, Ericsson Australia is strategic to
the industry.
Ericsson Australia has extended its markets in the Asia-
Pacific to China, Vietnam, Hong Kong, Sri Lanka,
Cambodia, Fiji and Papua New Guinea.
And there can be no doubt that in these countries
Ericsson's reputation has contributed to Australia's
reputation as a telecommunications leader.
Today I am pleased to be given the opportunity to
announce some of the initiatives in the expanded role
Ericsson Australia will soon be playing in the Asia-
Pacific. The company has decided to extend its operations in
the rapidly developing economic regions of China by
expanding its marketing of Australian manufactured
telephone exchange switching products into two new
provinces Sichuan and Liaoning.
Also in China, Ericsson Australia will supply
support for the operations of mobile telephone
networks in 11 provinces, catering to more than
600,000 existing customers.
In future, where Australian companies win major
overseas contracts that involve the supply of
Ericsson product, that product will be supplied by
Ericsson Australia as they are already supplying
the mobile telephone operations of Telecom Australia
in Sri Lanka and Vietnam. P) I PRESS OFFICE( it 003 
Ericsson Australia has also been designated as a
major supply centre for analogue mobile telephone
network equipment f or the Ericsson Group's worldwide
market.
In a decision which establishes the company's
Research and Development Centre as a major exporter
of Australian technology, the Ericsson Australia
designed and developed Queuing System, which has
already generated $ 180 m~ illion in exports, is to be
incorporated in Ericsson PABX systems and sold
world-wide
And, finally, I understand the Group is
considering the feasibility of establishing an
Information Technology Centre in Australia to
service the communication needs of the Asia-Pacific.
I was in Tasmania earlier this week at Ulverstone, where
Pacific Dunlop are investing in a potato processing
operation which promises to secure that region's future
by securing a major slice of the Asian market.
The key to their operation is the faith to invest coupled
to international Best Practice from the ground up.
In other words, making the growing and processing and the
management and labour, as sophisticated as any in the
world. I could have gone to any number of other companies around
Australia this week and seen the same sort of thing
happening and I intend to go to many of them in the
next few months.
The lesson everywhere is the same Australia's economic
future rests on companies like this.
Companies which are innovative, determined to export,
intent on establishing at every level from the technology
to the labour force, standards which are second to none
in the world.
The Government is encouraging the growth of these
companies. In fact I might say I have been encouraging them for a
decade since as a Government we decided that Australia
could be a modern manufacturing nation indeed had to be
a modern manufacturing nation and set about the task of
making the necessary changes to the economic structure
and the business and industrial culture.
We are now seeing the fruits of our labour. 
The increased export business that flows from today's
announcements here, make it very clear that the reforms
we are introducing for the telecommunications industry
extend well beyond the measures which put Telecom and
Optus into competition.
In the 1990' s we're seeing Australian companies change
direction. We're seeing the emergence of new companies born of the
new export culture, and the new awareness of
opportunities in the Asia-Pacific.
And we're seeing when we look at the growth in
manufactured exports how absolutely essential it was to
make those changes.
For without that growth we would now be in a genuinely
dire economic circumstances, and we would have a
genuinely dire future.
Today, despite our problems, we have a marvellous future,
As a nation we have the best chance in our history to
secure the kind of long term economic security which will
underwrite our way of life and assure Australians of
employment. We have to find the solutions to unemployment and we
expect the major study we have commissioned to give us a
more comprehensive and effective strategy than we have
ever had.
We are not alone in this. President Clinton of course
has called for an unemployment summit. In Europe they
are doing the same.
Unemployment is the great curse of our era and overcoming
it will teat our ingenuity and our commitment to the
nation and each other. It will test all of us.
But we do know that at least part of the solution a
large part of it lies in the initiative and success of
companies like Ericsson Australia.
Because through them and I mean from the upper levels
of management to the men and women who work in the
offic ' es and on the factory floor through companies like
this one, our economic success will be assured and
employment in substantial measure restored.
That's why I say that for all the hard work we in
Government put in and even for all the flak we took
along the way ultimately success depends on not on
Government but on companies like this; and it is
companies like this with the vision and the courage who
properly deserve the credit. 
You will know that in the Budget and in other measures
taken in recent times the Government is seeking to
encourage the development of small and medium sized
manufacturing exporters.
But we also encourage the role of multinational companies
like Ericsson, with their broad exposure to world markets
and the market access they can provide for Australia.
Ericsson Australia have earned their expanded role on the
world, and by doing that they are helping take Australia
into those markets where our future lies.
So I congratulate you all and thank you for inviting me
along. 



PRIME MINISTER
* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DEUVERr*
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF COLIN LANCELEY EXHIBITION, SHERMAN GALLERIES,
SYDNEY, FRIDAY, 27 AUGUST 1993
Colin and Kay Lanceley, Gene Sherman and William Wright, ladies and
gentlemen I'm very pleased to be here this evening to open this exhibition of Colin
Lanceley's recent work.
I wanted to make time for this event among the post-Budget feeding frenzy
because I like Colin Lanceley's vision and ideas. I also like his paintings.
I mean, how could you not like someone who says that great art looks as if it was
breathed onto the surface by angels?
It's always tempting for politicians to try and draw analogies between what they
do and what is done by the people we talk about in our speeches. Real people
like painters, and opera singers.
Some of you may remember a previous instance when I did this, and the
interesting events that followed.
So rather tonight I'll content myself with saying, quite seriously, that I think I
know what Colin means when he says that in trying to come to terms with
Australia, you've got to try and put it together in some meaningful way, so that if
it's real it will live in the imagination afterwards.
I have to say that I find the way he puts it irresistible: he says, " Ve need to
develop a profound understanding of our place and to shape it with what is our
finest sensibility. I think we've got to create the kind of place where we get
echoes all the time, and resonances. In a soulless environment where we
aren't able to have those resonances our culture won't develop, and we'll
become a satellite."
Dare I say it-sonds-a-bit like-Manring Ctark. whose great achievement was to
imagine Australia what it was and what it might become. And he did it so well
he helped us all do it.
It is not Manning Clark's politics which some conservative Australians object too.
His politics were hardly radical. And it's not the way he wrote history the way is
always open to anyone who wants to write it better.
1338 I
I tWerhreit achi, Whi, arts will F
The diffe I knc
con, It w.
at al
and I knc
enot We culkt And Asl' arts The mult The notl The wha AblE Aci Anc I kn(
Too mur Yet theE And ach 
2
What they fear is his imagination, and imagination like a sense of humour is a
terrible threat to people without one. When it is coupled with a massive
achievement and imagination becomes a source of envy as well as fear.
Which is why I suppose Manning Clark will always be under attack: Why the
arts will always be a bitchy place: And why the conservative parties in Australia
will never support the arts as the arts should be supported.
The Australia that Colin Lanceley returned to after eighteen years away was very
different from the Australia that he left in the 1960s.
I know that in those days many creative people felt the need to leave what they
considered to be a stultifyingly conformist society.
It was an era when the arts were treated by politicians if they considered them
at all as at best a subject of bemnusement, and at worst a matter for suspicion
and hostility.
I know too that the situation has changed from those days, but not changed
enough.
was cWuelt usratilll ndeeevedl otop mberinntg ac uplaturtr aolf coounrc nearntiso nmaol rdee vinetloo pthmee mnta. instream. To make our
ey -And we'll get there, with help from people like Colin Lanceley.
.) le -As I've said before, my view of the arts is a simple one. I believe that when the
arts flourish we flourish with them.
They are a measure of our identity and our guiding force. In an ever changing
multicultural Australia, the arts are out there at the front, leading and defining.
The arts project to the world the truth about Australia in a way that no-one or
3t if nothing else can.
They show, as I'm sure Colin would agree, that we are a people able to imagine
what we might be.
ur Able to imagine our future in the region and the world.
A creative people, able to make things which the world wants.
And a people prepared to lead rather than willing to follow.
el I know that most Australians are enormously proud of our artistic achievements.
Too often I think we project ourselves as a pretty unsophisticated bunch without
too. much care for the life of the mind.
ly is Yet the achievements are there daily in writing, painting, dance, film, music,
theatre. And I have no doubt that Australians are very proud of their artistic
achievements. 1339 
It is my belief that we should be doing more for our artists, and for those who will And
follow them. imm
And we intend to.
That's why we are working towards putting into place a national cultural strategy. RPereaf
Bob McMullan, as some of you may be aware, is currently engaged in a wide Bec
consultation process around Australia. In fact, today he has been here in doin
Sydney at an Evatt Foundation forum on cultural policy in Australia appropriately expt
entitled, " From Fossils to Films". supr
Which gives you an idea of the size of the task. And'
cBoyn sthidee erendd ovfie thwe aybeoaurt, thhee wroillle b aen idn rae sppoosnitisoinb iltioti ecso mofe t hbea cCko tmo mCoanbwineeatl twhith a tsoc~ dhe
Government in relation to our cultural life and heritage. From this the Allo
Government intends to develop a cultural map to guide us into the next century. thin
It's an ambitious enterprise, and one that hasn't been attempted before. And itsper
will be of great benefit to us all. The
But we haven't just pulled up the drawbridge while we wait for this to happen. Nothat
In the Budget last week we delivered a 12 per cent increase in arts funding. to a
It's perhaps hard to believe, but some people have viewed this with alarm. You
One commentator in the Sunday papers last weekend suggested that " thethan
electorate can look forward to an explosion of Balmain basket weaving" which So i
to say the least, showed scant regard for intellectual copyright. abot
I don't subscribe to this notion that, unlike every other human activity from I wo:
bpahniliksitninge tov ibeaws. e bI athlli, n kth iet' sa rptsri mdoitievse . b eIs tth ionnk ait ' ss taar vfuantidoanm deientt. a llIy t hTinokry itv'sie aw which itshe ar(
confuses excellence in the arts with exclusivity in the arts.
I believe that the approach we developed in the Budget was a sound one. One wIt'istht
which was economically responsible, practical and efficient in its delivery.
An approach which not only provided direct Government assistance for artists. Colir
bouptp owrhtuicnhi tiaelss of oern ncoonu-rgaogveesr namrtse not rgsaupnpisoartti. o ns to be innovative in exploring tAos Fth
iTnh sep a-6rt-sn onresehdip poaft rtohen aagrets. . WIte is n ae esadd tofa gcet t thmaot rAe uAsutrsatlriaanlia nb ucsoinmepsasn iiess n oitn vinol tvheed noaf tUu
habit of providing patronage at least not on the broad and imaginative scale And
that it is done in many other countries.
Artists should be rewarded in ways that are commensurate with the rewards they LaaMdLi
bring Australia. I look forward to the day when more Austraiian companies come
to the realisation that by helping Australian artists they are uitimnately helping Thar
themselves. 1340 
4
And I hope this day comes soon, because the arts are in need of more
immediate assistance than the Government is able to provide. Furthermore I
suspect that this will always be the case.
Real artists, I'm inclined to think, don't choose to be artists. As Colin says in the
Preface from which I've already quoted, painting is compulsive.
Because they reward artists of excellence like Colin who really shouldn't be
doing anything else and give them the kind of mid-career support they need to
expand their horizons and go on to better things, I've always been a strong
supporter of the Australia Council's Creative Fellowships.
And that's the other reason that I was delighted to come and open this exhibition
today. It's a tangible expression of the results of the Creative Fellowship
scheme. All of these works were created while Colin has been on his fellowship, and I
think that no-one could deny that this has been Commonwealth money well
spent. The more observant among you will have noticed that this is the first reference
that I have made tonight to the works that actually comprise the exhibition.
Now it's no secret, I'm sure, that hitherto my attention has been primarily directed
to a different school from that of the Australian Modernists.
You will also probably not be astounded to hear that I have a somewhat less
than nodding acquaintance with the Annandale Imitation Realists.
So in these circumstances you will undoubtedly all be relieved that I am not
about to embark on a detailed critique of the exhibition.
I would however, make the observation, that even with a limited understanding
there is a real spirit in these works that no one can fail to appreciate, and there
is a real feel of Australianness about them.
It's hard to put my finger on why this is so, but I suspect that it has a lot to do
with the colours.
Colin Lanceley clearly is a great colourist.
As Robert Hughes says, his paintings " record a rapturous sensitivity of response
to the light of high summer, to the weird buzz in the bush... There are no artists
of Lanceley's generation to whom the diction of colour seems to come so
naturally." And none whose work I would think it a greater privilege to open.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a sincere pleasure to open this exhibition. I hope that
a multitude of people have the opportunity to see it.
Thank you. 13411 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FAREWELL TO WWI COMMEMERATION MISSION
SYDNEY 27 AUGUST 1993
This is a rare privilege.
I am delighted to have the chance to farewell people who seventy five years
ago were among those who made an Australian legend.
The human cost of the Great War was so terrible and the political cost of the
peace so catastrophic the Allied victory has never been seen as an
unmitigated triumph.
With the possible exception of Sir John Monash who was never given ultimate
command, the conduct of the war produced no heroes among the generals on
either side on the contrary, as one writer said, It contributed more than any
other war to the widespread belief that military commanders were less
intelligent than average.
The unmitigated heroes of the Great War were the men who did the fighting
the soldiers, sailors and airmen.
And while the war produced many astonishing acts of valour and many of
these were duly acknowledged with medals it was the common soldiers, the
mass of unacknowledged individuals who marched into the most appalling
battles and endured the most terrible suffering and who died in the most
unconscionable numbers, who were the heroes.
I think it is true to say that history judged the Great War to have returned little
of any good except this the bravery and endurance, the comradeship and
humour of ordinary men and women was confirmed for all time.
In Australia it became a by-word.
Building on those nationalist and democratic sentiments which had found their
voice towards the end of the previous century and which the First AIF in
fundamen-ways-ef eoted,-those who.-erwed in the Great War created a
leg end the ideals to which future generations of Australians would aspire, the
evalues by which they would live.
So, as I said, farewelling you today is a great privilege, and it is with a mixture
of wonder and some humility that I do it.
It is also with appreciation: my generation of Australians, all Australians, are in
your debt.
Z0O/ TOd I00ON OV: O 1 6-6nbi-Z 
We owe you for more than your service in war but for the service you gave in
the peace, building this country undaunted by depression and another war.
We are grateful for the service you have given and the faith you have had in
Australia for the example you set.
And we are grateful that seventy five years later you have been prepared to
volunteer again.
Your return to France is a reminder of what a hardy and tenacious generation
yours was.
It also reminds us that the Great War has lived on down the years. It found its
way often tragically into countless homes long after the last battle was
fought and it has profoundly affected the character of the nation and its
people. I am only sorry that my schedule will not permit me to be in France when you
are. I will be paying a brief visit to Villers Brettoneux and Hamel in
September. It is a visit I have always wanted to make.
I am also very pleased that on November 111I will have the opportunity to play
a part in the great project to bring home to Australia, and entomb at the War
Memorial in Canberra, the remains of an unknown Australian soldier.
The Tomb -of the Unknown Australian Soldier seems to me to be an act of
quite prolound significance. It is a grand gesture of recognition to the men,
and women who served in the Great War, but more than that, It is an act
which can help bind Australians together now and in the future.
The soldier, to be selected from one of our war cemetries In France, will
represent all Australian servicemen and women, who have given their lives in
all the conflicts in which Australians have served.
It can help bind the generations, help us recognise that we are all part of the
-same story of Australia.
And in all the legacy of Australia's Involvement in the Great War, or any other
war, there is surely nothing more appropriate to symbolise.
It remains only to wish you on behalf of the Government and, I am sure, the
people of Australia a very happy and a safe trip.
It will certainly be a quite extraordinary experience.
-Theaother-side-of-he-workd-ws a-much more -remote place when you first
went there, and all the more so because it was a battlefield.
We can only guess at what memories this trip will bring back to you we hope
that among the inevitable sadness there will also be a little happiness and
pride. Thank you. 



PRIME MIISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPD
LAUNCHING CEREMONY FOR SUBMARINE COLLINS, PORT ADELAIDE,
SATURDAY, 28 AUGUST 1993 PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Todays launching ceremony of the submarine COLLINS represents the
culmination of a commitment made by this Government in the mid-eighties not
only to Australia's defence, but also to Australia's defence industry.
The submarine project went much further than a decision we made to replace
the ageing Oberon class submarines: it is the first part of a determination to reestablish
Australia's shipbuilding industry.
The second part of that commitment was to build in Australia the ANZAC class of
ships for the Royal Australian Navy.
And I am pleased to say that that project is also proceeding on schedule. The
submarine project was ambitious, and not without significant risks.
COLLINS is the first submarine to be built in Australia.
A whole range of new and diverse technologies for Australia had to be set up
from scratch: the production of high-strength micro-alloy steel; high-technology
welding; new construction methods; micro-electronics; visual and electronic
optical equipment; and the manufacture of lenses and submarine periscopes.
The Australian Submarine CorporatiorrtASC) was awarded the prime contract in
1987. The decision to select an Australian prime contractor reflected the Government's
confidence in Australian capabilities and the Government's commitment to the
-polivyoft-a ~ tlr-i, ldiittju~ iJ~~ vndUstry.
The fulfilment of this vision has been a tall order for Australia's manufacturing
industry at a time of great change.
1344 I 
2
It has been an enormous challenge for management, the workforce, and their
unions. I am pleased to say that the companies and people concerned have met that
challenge. The result is a new defence industry culture which is now looking for
opportunities elsewhere.
I pay tribute to the Australian Submarine Corporation's ability to so effectively
pull this very complex project together.
ASC has successfully ensured that the submarine construction is on schedule,
on cost, and meets or exceeds all performance criteria on quality, Australian
industry involvement, employment opportunities, and technology transfer.
ASC is exceeding its Australian industry involvement goal of 45% for the combat
system work and 70% for the balance of the contract.
Of the contract price of about $ 4 billion, more than $ 3 billion will be returned to
Australian industry.
Put simply, ASC has built the most advanced conventional ly-powered submarine
in the world, and a lot of people deserve credit and congratulations.
Among many other things the success of the project represents a major
industrial relations achievement. Before work commenced management and
unions negotiated a three-union on-site workforce.
And more recently, they have negotiated a two-year Enterprise Agreement
based on productivity improvements.
The workers, their unions and management are to be congratulated on their
example to Australian industry.
We should also credit the South Australiao government's foresight in. backing
the project.
It goes without saying that their initiative has brought great benefits to the people
of South Australia.
The Corporation's fabrication and assembly work, together with component
manufacture by South Australian industry, accounts for an injection of $ 1.6
billion into the South Australian economy over a period of 14 years. 13415 
3 I b,
Over 1000 new jobs have been created at the Australian Submarine the
Corporation. m
And several thousand other Australians have gained work through sub-Th
contracts. oul inc
The ASC, of course, has not done this alone, as the presence of distinguished inc
representatives from Sweden and elsewhere testifies. Thi
The Australian Government has appreciated the strong support of the Swedish O
Government and the assistance provided by the Royal Swedish Navy to thece
project. Their support exemplifies the cooperation that can be achieved between two S
countries in a joint venture. Without this level of cooperation, I doubt that we
could have achieved todays success. pe
Minister Bjork, Au! to r
I would like to express to you Australia's most sincere appreciation for the strong
support provided by your government in ensuring the success of this project. Bul
I am sure that you are as proud of Kockums' performance as we are proud of theca
Australian Submarine Corporation. An(
We look forward to continued close cooperation as we both seek to reap the full
benefits in the international market place. It is
Adr
The construction of this submarine is an outstanding example of what can be
achieved when Australia embarks on truly international joint ventures. Thi
The multinational character of the project demonstrates that, in cooperation With n
other countries, Australia is able to develop major new high-technology industry Bot
capabilities. of i
I am pleased to see here today the Ambassadors, High Commissioners, military Sir
officers and officials of the many countries involved in the project. a
in t'
I am pleased also to see representatives of the East Asian region with which we i
seek closer defence ties. Sir
Australia wants to develop defence industry relations with our neighbours. A he Witt
1346 
I believe that such cooperation will assist the countries in our region to support
their own security and defence needs, as well as assisting Australia in
maintaining its industry skills.
The Collins class submarines increase our confidence in our ability to defend
ourselves, and illustrate how, through joint cooperation ventures Australian
industry can contribute to the security needs of our neighbours, and help
increase regional security and stability.
These shipbuilding projects, and other defence acquisition programs, such as
Over the Horizon Radar and high-technology communications programs, are
clear evidence that Australia's industry and technological base is diversifying.
Shipbuilding involves the entire spectrum of technology-based skills and
capabilities including project management, information and communication
systems, electronics, software, electro-optics, integrated logistics support and
perhaps most importantly, customer service.
Australia's defence industry may never be totally self-sufficient. It will continue
to rely to a certain extent on overseas technology.
But there is no question that Australia has developed specific skills and
capabilities that are world class and internationally competitive.
And I believe that these skills and experience will enable us to assist regional
countries in their defence needs.
It is fitting that the first submarine, and the class title, take their name from Vice
Admiral Sir John Collins.
This is the first time that Australian naval vessels have been named after officers
and sailors who have served their country and their navy with great distinction.
Both the submarines and the their namesakes represent the highest standards
of Australian professionalism.
Sir John Collins entered the Royal Australian Naval College in 1913 when he
was 14 years of age and from where he began a along and distinguished career
in the Royal Australian Navy.
Sir John Collins saw service in both the First and Second World Wars.
As Captain of HMAS SYDNEY in the Second World War in the Mediterranean,
he engaged two Italian light cruisers, sinking one and forcing the second to
withdraw damaged. 1347 
During the Pacific War, Sir John Collins returned to help in the defence of
Australia. As Commander of the Australian Squadron, he attended the surrender of Japan
in September 1945.
He was later promoted to Vice Admiral, and created a Knight Commander of the
Order of the British Empire.
Sir John Collins served Australia marvellously well, and I am sure HMAS Collins Inpo
will too. not h
Australia can develop the most advanced technology and manufacture This:
technologically complex equipment, on time, within cost, and to world-class
standards for quality. Ther, unem,
The challenge of the future is to ensure that this new defence industry capability . exci
is maintained and further developed for the benefit of Australia and regionalBu
countries. . geari uneur
I congratulate the Australian Submarine Corporation and the people who built
HMAS Collins; the Swedish company, Kockums; Rockwell Systems Australia; all
other sub-contractors; suppliers and the Navy.
You have all done a superb job and I know all Australians would want me to
extend their warmest congratulations.
Thank you.
PORT ADELAIDE
28 August 1993 Thes and howe, is t
econc
1348 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE ACTU CONGRESS, SYDNEY, 31 AUGUST 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, Martin ( Ferguson), members and executives, and
delegates. Well, the newspapers were telling me that I couldn't come to the
ACTU a week or so ago, in one of our celebrated spats over industrial
relations and now more latterly over the Budget, they said a Labor Prime
Minister couldn't speak at the ACTU. Well I would have broken the door in if I
had to, to get in here. So, you have no doubt about me, if only for the video
show, if nothing else, and that song at the start, I wouldn't have missed that
for quids.
But the fact is, why wouldn't we be together and why wouldn't be true
believers after such an epic triumph as we had. We absolutely stole the
election of the Liberal Party, when they so smugly believed it was theirs, it
was in their lap, and they thought they only had to canter home to election
day and that was it. You can see today's newspapers where we have the
election contributions published, you know, generally it was Labor 20,000,
Coalition 100,000, Labor 17,000, Coalition 75,000, and it goes on. That was
the most well healed campaign they have ever had, their best organised, but
they had at their core the hard right-wing agenda, as Malcolm Fraser has
called it, and we came at them horizontally, vertically, laterally and swept
them up on March 13. It was a great victory for Labor, and a great victory for
the Labor movement.
I can say that nothing moved me more than the meeting I had with your
executive just after the election, about ten days after the election, when one
really understood what it was all about, and when it had sunk in just how
extraordinary a win we had had, and w hat it meant to everybody, those who
did believe in a better Australia, who did believe in decent values, who
believed in an inclusive society, who believed in a clearer sense of our
national identity, and who believed in for justice for Australians, but in a
society which was economically changing and economically efficient, and
where we had all the social and economic balances largely brought together,
and I think we had them right. And so it was a magnificent win and I am
particularly indebted to the trade union movement for their faith in the
Government, for their financial support which was very material, but beyond
that the enthusiasm and commitment which each one of you gave in the 
I 2
course of the campaign from the various sectors, I mean, this made a real
difference in the election, and it had the Labor movement together as last
before perhaps in the early 1980s, but really probably never since 1972. And
the amalgam of people we had, the various interests groups just made it so
obvious to all of us.
So, we have had a magnificent win, and we have now got to do something
with it. Now, we have worn a bit of flak over the last week or two, and I wore
a bit of flak yesterday as a matter of fact from some of the colleagues, but I
am a flak taker and a flak giver, as Lee Matthew's said, a couple of months
ago in Collingwood, there are only two kinds of players in this game, there is
hitters and hitee's, and he said, I am buggered if I will be a hittee, well ditto
for me, ditto for me. So, I think that we have got to come with the ebb and
flow of these things. Now, look, I could have followed up the election with a
round of warm inner glow speeches, quite easy for me, I can get emotional at
the drop of a hat, and roll one of those off my tongue with comparative ease.
And I am sure we would have all felt really good about the long tail on the
comet, the long after glow, and then we could have had a Budget, nice and
pat with a few things in it which paid passing lip service to the social wage,
and everyone said well that's ok, we're back here and we are the crowd we
thought we always were, and we are in office and we are carrying on, but
instead of that what we have done is really hop into the big issues. I mean
the biggest of the big issues. Like dealing with a two hundred year old
problem of Mabo, which most every other Labor Government passed, found
too hard, and where the great stain of dispossession and the shame of the
injustice which came with it, has never been dealt with, that we have occupied
the continent and not recognised the fact that the Australian indigenous
people were here first and that they had truly to be given the same rights and
entitlements in our society as the rest of us have, but perhaps even more
than that, that we recognise a special cultural relationship that Aboriginal
people have to the land.
Now, it is only twenty years ago that the white Australia policy was put to bed.
And we were dead lucky in the 1960s we were not marginalised like South
Africa, dead lucky, running the kind of policy we were in this part of the world.
And there are harder assessors of Australia watching now, all around us in
the countries of the Asia-Pacific region saying, ok these people say they want
to be part of us, that they are a multicultural society, that there is no basis in
race or creed in their selection of their migrants, or the cast of their society,
let's see what they do with their indigenous people, let's see how they deal
with this challenge, the challenge of the High Court decision on Mabo. So, it
is a real test for us, this one. Now, conservative people think we can fail ttie
test and that rights conferred on Aboriginals are ok, but inherent rights are
not. Seeing Aboriginal traditional law and custom in the common law of
Australia is too much for them to stomach. They just don't want to give land
to black people, and that's why we have to come to terms with this essential
and basic requirement of our society, that is, that we are on terms and at
peace with the original inhabitants of this country. Now it is hard, but we are
moving towards it, we will have, I think, one of the most impressive pieces of
common legislation ready in September, for introduction into Parliament and 
the draft bill ready this week, the comment by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander community, by the States and other interested parties.
So, we have taken that Mabo challenge up, in the immediate period, from
March to September, six months to put into place a body of administrative law
in land management, in a decision which most countries would not have been
able to handle in a decade. In six months we will have built, with a lot of
consultation, a well thought through set of principles for the body of
administrative law governing social justice and land management in this
country. And it will be one of the greatest achievements of Labor ever, when
that bill gets the Governor Generals assent. So, that's one of the things we
have been doing since the election.
The other thing is putting together AP EC, trying to find for Australia a place at
a very big table for the first time in our history. Because we have seen the
world moving into blocks in North America and in Europe, we don't
particularly want to be in a restrictive trading block, in fact, we don't. We
want to be in an open regional arrangement. So, Australia, this Government,
has put together the concept of APEC, and in the last 18 months, and
certainly since the election, I have done as much as I could possibly do to
develop and promote the concept of an Asia-Pacific G7. That is, to take
APEC from simply an information exchange, a body which is talking about
economic change and getting a better idea of its constituency and its
features, to one where there is real executive power, and to turn APEC into a
heads of Government organisation. Now, we are still moving through this, but
now President Clinton has invited all of the APEC leaders to attend a leaders
meeting in the United States in November. And that means within a few
years we have taken APEC from just an idea to a body, to an organisation,
and when it comes together with countries like the United States, China,
Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand. I mean, when this group comes together it will be representing over
per cent of world gross domestic product and will be very much the focus
of the fortunes and power of the Asia-Pacific.
That is coming off, and it is coming off because in part of the work of this
Government and the work since the election. The other thing we have been
doing is working on our major fiscal challenge which is the Budget. To see
that by the time we get through a strong recovery and private investment
picks up in the middle ' 90s, where our demand on savings the Budget deficit,
which we expanded through the One Nation period to kick the economy
along, is winding itself back. It is 6 challenge we must meet. Because this
time we have the option of a low inflationary long term recovery, the only
thing that can spike it is a short fall of national savings, and the time to get
that done is now, and we have been working on that, as we have been
working with you on the industrial legislation and putting a package to
improve our industrial relations system.
Now, I should have thought a reasonable set of things to do in the five
months since the election, that was Mabo, APEC, major fiscal challenge, our
industrial relations, and of course we have also advanced now the processes
on moving towards an Australian republic, with the establishment of the 
committee to bring back options indicating in which ways we can make a
competent change to a republican structure, and those processes being
considered, those terms of reference had to be written, that committee set up,
I have had some consultation with the committee now, and that committee is
now in the process of writing its report.
Now, I had some people in the media say, well the Government won an
election it didn't expect to win, and after the election it is not sure what it is
doing. I mean, really, really, with Mabo and APEC and the republic and the
Budget, and industrial relations. Have a look at it, I mean the agenda is so
huge, I mean it is unconventional maybe, but the Government takes on issues
this large. But what's the bloody point in being conventional, what's the point
in being conventional, you may as well, if you have got the mandate, hop into
the big issues, and get the work done, get the thinking done, but the thinking
on these things has got to be done properly, privately with time and
consideration and when you have got it together well then is the time to go
and sell all these things.
These, I think, have been as time well spent, and time we well and truly well
used, but the Budget of course has been a big part of it. And I want to say a
couple of things to you about the Budget, because a lot of the essential
strategy behind it has been lost in the public debate, but to put a major
Budget together with these issues on the table at once takes a lot of doing.
And we have got a Budget there now which does two things, it provides a
stimulus of $ 2 billion this year, which is as large as One Nation and it also
provides for a lower Budget deficit in the medium term, in 1996-97. That's the
point of it. In other words we have given the economy a kick along with One
Nation doing then again the unconventional thing, when we had everybody
telling us to hang on to the low Budget deficits, don't expand fiscal policy,
don't give the place a kick along, public demand has now played a very big
part in kicking growth along. We have had 3.1 per cent growth for the year,
for the last quarter, 1.2 per cent for the last quarter, and we have got a
conservative 2.75 per cent growth for the year forecast in the Budget, we may
do better than it, we may. But we have got a conservative number in there.
At any rate we are growing faster than most OECD economies, in fact, I don't
know any growing faster than us at the moment, and the One Nation package
was the right thing to do, as well building good public infrastructure and
getting it up.
Now, we have given in this Budget another stimulus as big as One Nation, in
other words we have got the ball rolling, but what we want to do now is keep it
rolling so that we have a full blown recovery on our hands, and so that comes
by way of the outlays changes and tax cuts, but we then get the Budget back
to around 1 per cent of GDP in 1996-97 by the revenue measures which will
then come in in the nexfone, two and three years. Now, you remember the
United States debate and the television pictures of Vice President Gore
casting the casting vote in the Senate on President Clinton's Budget, and
there was great celebration in the United States that finally they got a Budget
through, and that President Clinton had done more than his predecessors in
dealing with the American fiscal policy. Well in 1996 the American Budget
deficit will be at 3 per cent of GOP, ours will be at one, one. In other words 
we will be fully set up for a recovery, while other people are still limping along
with the Government's hands in the savings jar constraining private
investment. We are sifting there with low inflation, a very competitive
exchange rate, a profit share which is already high, stronger investment
which we will see in this period and the savings balance adjusted via the
public sector to let it all continue.
Now, is that good Government, or is that not good Government. And what
are our opponents doing? They are going to oppose the lot. They are going
to oppose all the changes because they don't want to get to 1 per cent of
GOP, after telling us that's what we should be doing. That change to 1 per
cent of GOP was a key election commitment. It was as key as any other
commitment, and part of it of course, part of the whole Budgetary scene is to
make certain that the tax revenue to GOP comes back to about where it was
in the last couple of years. That's all we are doing there, it's not as if there is
a big tax hike. In fact, in every year between now and 1996 we are giving
away more revenue than we are getting back. We. are giving away $ 3.8
billion a year in the tax cuts each year, and we will be raising about $ 3 billion
when the revenue measures are up and running. And that will mean that
people on the tax cuts, particularly for people between $ 20,500 and $ 50,000
will be paid from November and the result of that will be that we will see a
substantial tax cut of around $ 8.00 to $ 10.00 a week being paid to workers in
that average weekly earnings area of the economy.
Now, even with the revenue changes, revenue to GOP, the key indice in the
Budget, revenue to GOP this year is falling, it is a decimal point below last
year, last year it was 23.6 per cent this year it will be 23.5 per cent. It is just
that it won't be falling as fast because of the changes which we have made.
But that will provide a stimulus as will our monetary policy. Let me just bear
this in mind, we have just cut another half a percentage point off interest
rates, how were we able to do that? Because the Reserve Bank and the
market were convinced that the Government was going to take the Budget
deficit down, so we have now got bill rates of 4.75 per cent. I mean, we had
bill rates of 4.75 per cent when I was a teenager. And not only that, we have
now got a housing rate of about 8.5 per cent. Now, you remember before the
interest rates went up, the standard housing rate was 13.5 per cent, this was
before the rise in rates in 1988-89, up to 18 per cent for cash rates, and I
think housing peaked at 16 per cent or 17 per cent. But let's forget that part
and just look at the standard rate which was 13.5 per cent. It is now 8.5 per
cent, roughly, that's five per percentage points below that norm, and on a
$ 70,000 mortgage, that's $ 70.00 a week. There is a $ 70.00 a week benefit
going to ordinary wage and salary earners by way of their reduced interest
rates because of lower inflation and because of a decent Budget going into
place. So these are all part of the conferred benefits which are there, and I
think the other important thing is the tax cuts.
Now, I want to say something to you about the tax cuts, because we have had
a bit of a view, a campaign, indeed, that we should abandon them, but at the
time they were introduced in One Nation they met everybody's approval. But
what happened after One Nation is the world dropped, the OECD area
dropped by four percentage points of growth for two successive years, and 
the OECD and IMF revised down their growth in two succeeding years, which
meant the second round of tax cuts we put back, but we brought the first lot
forward and maintained them. Now, some people have said, well look, these
tax cuts go to higher income earners, well that's only in part true, they also go
to people at or below average weekly earnings. So I asked the Department of
Prime Minister and Cabinet last week to go back and look at all of the outlays
and tax changes since 1983 and look at a number of category of people and
see how they have been treated in terms of increases in disposable income.
And it is quite interesting the result. Between March 1983 and July 1983 a
process worker who was married with two children experienced an increase
in real disposable income of 15 per cent, real. Not nominal real. That is a
process worker with two children over the period, both on the tax side and
through things like the family allowance supplement and other changes on
the outlays side. If we take in the same time period a female machinist who is
a sole parent with two children, she experienced an increase in real
disposable income of 32 per cent. Between March 1983 and July 1994 a
single income family with two children earning three quarters of average
weekly earings, so this is someone payed above a process worker, obviously,
at three quarters of AWE will have experienced an increase in real
disposable income of 19 per cent.
But a person on AWE with two children, on AWE with two children, the
increase in real terms is really quite small. Because what happened in this
period was all of the tax cuts were going in their greatest measure to those
people below $ 20,000 and just above it. And, of course, a lot of the family
payments were going in that area tailing off in the middle 20,000s. And the
people at the top end, they had their tax cut cut from 60 to 47, but in part was
paid for by the capital gains tax and the fringe benefits tax which basically
covered the budgetary costs of that reduction. The people who deserve
some support now are those in those areas of 2/ 3 of AWE, AWE and above
AWE. And that is what these tax cuts do. So the notion that every tax cut we
ever give has got to be skewed only down the bottom is a notion which I think
is not fair to those who have waited last to get the kind of tax relief I think they
ought to be getting. And who is to say anyone on $ 30,000 or $ 33,000 is
wealthy? Or $ 36,000? Because if we even look at 1996 in three years' time,
even with modest growth in average weekly earnings, we'll have AWE around
$ 36,000. And if we don't change the tax scales those people will cascade
into a marginal rate of 46 per cent. So every dollar they earn at weekends
they will pay 46 per cent at the margin. Now I don't think the Labor movement
can live with that kind of rate and I don't think this Government could and that
is why we thought it was important to do that. And can I just say over the
same period, for what it's worth, for a man on average weekly earnings who
began receiving award superannuation in 1986, and of course, since
enhanced by the SGC, the accrued benefit at Juine 1993 was $ 7,050, and in
two years, that person's accrued benefit will be $ 11,150.
So if you look at the tax~ and outlays side of the Budget, you've got the
changes I've mentioned and superannuation, of course, underpinning it.
Now in this Budget, we have kept our election commitments and funded them
in ways which we think are advantageous to the economy and the community. 
But let me go through some of the measures and I will also tell you what we
decided yesterday in terms of revision to some of the Budget measures.
Since the election, we have introduced the legislation for the home child care
allowance which will go to 840,000 families paying $ 60 a fortnight, or $ 30 a
week, and that will go to the dependent spouse who is looking after the
children in the family. $ 30 a week, $ 60 a fortnight. Now $ 54 of that $ 60 was
formerly paid as a dependent spouse rebate to the taxpayer. That is now
being cashed out to the dependent spouse at home. But $ 6 of it is new, $ 3 a
week of it is new.
Then we have got the generalised child care rebate which* provides a rebate
paid at Medicare counters for child care so that families who spend money on
child care don't have to wait till the end of the year to get a rebate or
something else, they can get it over the course of the year by going
periodically to Medicare offices. And that is a generalised thing, it recognises
child care as an expense in earning income and, of course, gives families a
chance to earn that income and women, particularly, a chance to participate
in the workforce.
The labour market programs. We've increased those in the Budget. We
doubled them last year to $ 1.6 billion, and in this year increased it so that
now 500,000 unemployed people are being touched by those labour market
programs. Where we are giving them either a wage subsidy, and/ or training
and work experience for half a million. In the Budget the Newstart allowance
for single adults increased by $ 6 a fortnight. Basic dental care was provided
for health card holders, that is pensioners and beneficiaries who often find
they just can't afford basic dental care. We created an extra 29,000 child
care places in the community over the course of this year. We've diminished
the waiting period for rental assistance for young homeless unemployed
people, we've abolished that. There are improvements there for pensioners
and for the arts and also, of course, there are other changes in respect of the
labour market as they effect industrial relations.
And, I suppose, the best guide to that is since 1983-84 spending on health,
community services and social security. Well in 1983-84 it was 38.4 per cent
of the Budget. This year it is 51 per cent of the Budget. So outlays on health,
social security, community services and housing has risen from 38.4 per cent
in 1983-84 to 51 per cent of Budget outlays this year. So they are the Budget
measures and, of course, on top of those, the tax cuts.
Now let me say a couple of things about the measures we have decided in
the last day or so. They key changes are that we are going to increase the
rebate from low income earners from $ 100 a week which we have in the
Budget to $ 1 50. And that coupled with the home child care rate increase and
other outlay benefits will improve the position of those people below, say,
about $ 23,000. A reduction, we're reducing the differential between leaded
and unleaded fuel from 5 cents to 2 cents a litre. In other words, the price of
leaded petrol will go up now by 7 cents, not 10 cents and the differential with
unleaded will be only 2 cents. 
We are restoring eye tests under Medicare for full rebates for optometry.
That is, optometry will be as now. And we've-amended the unused long
service leave lump sum payment so that unused long service leave paid as a
lump sum, accrued up until the 17 August 1993 will continue to attract a
concessional rate of tax. Future long service leave lump sum entitlements as
well as all unused annual leave will be taxed as normal income.
Now those changes amount to about $ 110 million roughly this year, and just
on $ 400 million in 1996-97. And that brings the Budget deficit to a projected
1.2 instead of 1.1 per cent in 1996-97. Well the government has made a
commitment to bring the Budget deficit in around 1 per cent, so that still fits
that category. And this year we're putting the tax cuts back 2 weeks to make
sure that the Budget is neutral in terms of those changes. So they will begin
now on the second week of November in stead of 1 November.
So those changes mean that there will be not only no detriments, but benefits
for practically everybody. Now yesterday the Treasurer had these changes
run through the Prismod model. The one which the Treasury constructed to
look at the Liberal Party's Fightback and GST proposals. And when you put
the tax and outlays changes in the Budget together in the Prismod model, it
shows there are no detriments, and benefits right through the quintiles and
the only place where there are any detriments whatsoever, are for those
actually running down capital who have no relationship with the Government
through the tax or social security, or spending systems. In other words for all
the people in your constituency, there are no detriments and only benefits.
But can I say, that even before these changes, on an earlier run of the
Prismod model, there were only very few detriments anyway. Because what
has been overlooked in the Budget debate, was all the outlays changes I've
just mentioned and people focused on the revenue changes and thought that
was the only way to make a judgement about it.
But the key thing, of course, of all this in the Budget is employment. And in
there, we have a forecast of 100,000 job growth over the course of this year
and 500,000 more jobs over the next three years. At least 500,000 more
jobs. Now we're confident that we can meet those forecasts. Because they
are based on fairly conservative growth estimates. And that being the case,
we will start to see improvements in the unemployment rate. And, of course,
as you know we have got this major study into employment and to
unemployment which will be concluded later this year and upon which the
Government can take decisions.
But if you look at the settings we have got now. We have got the Budget
balance which has gone from an $ 8 billion surplus to a $ 16 billion deficit. A
$ 24 billion change which has held a floor under the economy and provided a
shock absorber to relieve a lot of the pain of the recession from the
community of Australia. That was done by a Labor Government and it
wouldn't have been done by a conservative government. We're adding a $ 2
billion stimulus this year, to keep that going, to keep activity and growth and
employment coming through. We have now got very low inflation and low
interest rates and a high profit share. And that profit share now needs to be
spent on higher investment to guarantee higher employment and better 
employment levels over these next few years. And, of course, with the
Budget balance tailing back to a 1 per cent of GOP deficit by 1996 as the
private economy comes through, we should start to see a return to better
rates of employment growth of the variety we are talking about. And on top of
that, the labour market programs sifting there dealing with 1/ 2 million people,
particularly those who are long-term unemployed, of which now over 300,000
are in that category and 180,000 who have been unemployed for more than 2
years. So those programs are particularly focussed on those people to give
them job subsidies and training and work experience to get them back into
the labour market while out in the economy, the big aggregates should be
pulling employment along about 100,000 this year and 500,000 over three
years. So that is our great challenge, to deal with unemployment and to get back the
growth. And I am pleased that profits are picking up in-the economy and we
are starting to see profits come through. But we want those profits spent on
investment and the business community knows if they think they can just
store up profits to levels above the 1980s experience, not just the golden
years of the 60s, but as well as that the really high levels, the peaks of the
1 980s. That if they think the profit share can get to above those levels and
simply stick to it and not invest it, well I'm quite sure the ACTU will have a
strategy to share some of that with themselves. And so we want to see it in
investment, and if we see it in investment, we have got a chance of getting
better employment.
Could I just say a couple of things now about superannuation, very briefly.
And that is, that the superannuation legal minimums will increase
progressively to 9 per cent by the end of the decade. We are supporting that,
and of course then we can look at taking it further, perhaps to 12 per cent,
beyond then to that stage. And on the industrial agenda generally, let me say
that we are supporting you before the Industrial Relations Commission for a
safety net adjustment of $ 8 and we are supporting the development of
enterprise agreements.
Now I know there has been some discussion between us, some may say
dispute between us, but I don't think that is true, about extending enterprise
agreements. And we want to see enterprise agreements extended to the
non-union sector. But we won't see it done in ways which allow for reduced
wages and conditions or weaken trade union responsibilities. And I have got
no doubt a way can be found to do that. We have already established a
working party to consider with the ACTU, with your negotiating committee, a
solution to the problem and I think one can be found. And the Cabinet will be
giving that appropriate attention. But, I think, the thing is, this is a great
opportunity for the labour movement because this election has given you the
breathing space to get out there and organically expand the tentacles of
unionism to make enterprise bargaining work, to involve your members and
include, and bargain with your employers, and train people, and recruit
people, and win the hearts and minds of young Australians who might not
have been coming to unionism but through enterprise agreements. 
So we see the enterprise agreement path as a sensible and organic operation
of the organisation of the trade union movement which lets you build a more
relevant place in the industrial culture of this country. And where you're not
sitting at the whim and caprice of some centralised structure and where we
have a golden opportunity in this next year to legislate in ways which really
sets up a new industrial relations system for Australia, but one which you are
a key part of and which give you all the opportunities to exploit.
Let me just say a couple of things about the Accord and just say that the
Accord has changed and you were discussing it here yesterday. In 1983 we
had an Accord of detailed policy calling for detail commitments from unions,
actual individual union commitments. We are not asking individual unions for
those commitments in 1993 as we were in 1983. What we are asking for is a
commitment to the basic ideals of the Labor movement, of Labor in
government and a recognition of the need for the economy to be productive,
to maintain low inflation and to keep our focus upon employment and
unemployment. I do not think in asking that we are asking a great deal of you any more than
you are asking of us. But together we have done so much and we changed
Australia, we have made it a more competitive place. Just imagine where we
would be if we didn't have a competitive manufacturing sector now. Imagine
where we would be if all those new industries we have created were not
created in this last decade, or if we were still only exporting 13 per cent of
GDP instead of 20 per cent of GDP, or if the debt service ratio was where it
was five or six years ago instead of where it is now, or if we were still drifting
around that old industrial relations culture of a decade ago. Where would the
country be? Where would our constituency be? And where would be the lot
of ordinary Australians without the Accord and the processes?
Can I say the opportunity is there for us, we are going to be in a growth cycle,
the business cycle in on the upturn over the course of these next three years.
We have already generated a recovery and a low inflationary one. We are
setting up fiscal policy for the medium term so that we can capitalise upon it.
We are dealing with employment in the best way we know how by bringing
growth and investment back on again and dealing with those unemployed by
a very expansive program of labour market reform and now looking at novel
ways in ways we can deal with the unemployed on a long term basis to see if
can do again something in Australia which is unique and interesting in the
world. Our opponents of course, they have no such ideas. They met last weekend
at their Federal Council which was the one meeting they had after five
election losses on the trot to sit down and say well, what's wrong with us?
Where have we gone wrong? In which way should we change and be more
relevant? Basically they passed the opportunity up. They sat there and
smothered with a lot of motions which were put around; which John Hewson
weakly voted for and everybody sat there and sat mum on the whole thing.
Maybe it was because of difficulties we were having with the Budget and they
thought well, the Government is having a bad week, we won't distract 
attention from them. But they passed up a great opportunity and if the
problems of the Budget debate has meant that we have succeeded in
keeping John Hewson as Leader of the Liberal Party for longer than his
natural time cycle would have kept him, then it has been a damn good
weekend all round.
People say, he is walking around saying well, I told you so about the election
he told us so we are raising $ 2.5 billion this Budget. The GST was going
to raise $ 24 billion, over eight times as much and it was paid back not to the
people who paid it. $ 7 billion going off payroll tax, $ 6 billion going off petrol,
more than half of which is paid by business and $ 9 billion to abolish the
wholesale sales tax. So the people paying the $ 24 billion would not have
been the people who got the rebates in the other tax changes. And then to
pay $ 12 billion of tax cuts, he was going to cut $ 10,000 million from
government spending. We tried to take $ 90 million out by taking one of the
ancillary medical services of optometry from the Budget. Now, if there is
something easier than optometry, do you think we wouldn't have done it?
You are looking around saying well here is one, oh no, that is too easy we will
do the hard one.
Here we are in a society like this flat out knocking in a major element of a
program, $ 90 million out and they were going to cut $ 10,000 million out, but
they are still committed to it. Griener, not Griener, what's his name
Alexander Downer, Shirley Temple as I call him he was up there at the
Press Club last week, committed to the $ 10,000 million still, but won't say
where the $ 10,000 million is coming.
Look, here is a Budget which is raising over the course of three years, $ 2.5-3
billion and giving back Compare that to raising $ 24 billion and giving it
all to different people who pay it and then cutting $ 10,000 million out of
outlays and seeing the tax cuts from that go only to those on the top end of
the tax system.
Now, it is not to be compared with what we are doing. They are running
around, these characters, trying to make a case for themselves about what
we said in the election about taxation and I'll tell you what I said, so I will give
you the full quote in full. I was asked a question and I said this to maintain
the tax to GDP ratios we roughly have at the moment what's your policy?
and I said to maintain the tax, that is the revenue to GDP ratios we roughly
have at the moment. In other words what I'm promising is not to put up tax,
that was not to put up revenue to GOP. In 1996 with these tax increases and
the tax cuts, revenue to GOP will be about where it was last year and the year
before. In other words, we are keeping our commitment absolutely, but because they
run on a high tax policy with a GST and were canned for it, they have been
seeking to imply somehow we are running on a low tax policy, well we are in
the sense that revenue to GDP has been falling. But we can't let it fall to
pieces, we have got to maintain it at some reasonable level to bring the
Budget deficit down and as I said to you when I started, this year revenue to
GOP is a decimal point below last year even with the revenue changes. In 
1996-97 when we get there, it will be as it was a year or two years ago way
below what it was in the middle 1980s.
So we have kept our commitment absolutely on tax while at the same time we
have kept the tax cut promise to see that people between $ 20-50,000 get a
tax cut and because of the changes in the Budget, those under $ 23,000
secure an increase in the rebate, a cash rebate, plus the home childcare
allowance seeing not only do they not wear a detriment, but they wear
benefits as well.
In all of this we face a Liberal party which is now turning itself against any
norms of decent governance. In the Senate they are opposing everything,
they are opposing all of our fiscal measures how does John Hewson go to
the business community speeches on a Friday telling them about how we
should have a lower Budget deficit, then on Tuesday in the Senate, his
Senators down all the measures. How can you live with that kind of duplicity
and hope to get away with it? Well, of course, he can't. That is why he is not
taken seriously in business he is a low impact player, as I said to him
yesterday, a low impact player with a limited future and he has.
I do not know whether some of you saw the ' Sunday' program on the Liberal
party it was quite interesting. One fellow said well, the problem is we have
got a hole in the centre, he said there is no core, nothing at the core of the
policy. Malcolm Fraser said it was a right-wing group; they have turned the
Liberal party into a right-wing party. I have got the quote here somewhere,
but you all know what he said I think. That is, ' that it wasn't always this way'
he said, ' but it has been taken over by a small group who have turned it into a
right-wing conservative party'. That is really what has happened.
On Mabo, John Hewson sat at his National Council, his Federal Council on
the weekend while they carried a motion which said all options consistent with
the responsibilities of the states for control of land use including a
referendum. In other words he was running around weeks ago saying a
referendum would be divisive, on Sunday he sits there doggo while they pass
a resolution, he weakly puts his hand up for it, like a mouse, hoping he is not
sighted, voting for a thing which abolishes native title and overturns the High
Court decision. Is that leadership? Is that Leadership when he knows
better? On the republic he said when all the younger, brighter people in the
Liberal party were urging a conscience vote and support for the republic, he
put his hand up for a motion which said the onus is on the Government to say
why the Constitution should be changed.
In other words, I have to say why we shouldn't have the Queen of Great
Britain as Queen of Australia, as our Head of State forever. He-ioted for that
Vproposition, the hand went up weakly for that one as well.
In other words, the Liberal party which is always telling us about the rule of
law, I mean how many times have they told us about the rule of law? Until
our most supreme of Court the High Court says that Aboriginal custom and
tradition is now part of the common law of Australia and they are not
interested in the rule of law. It is the same as their behaviour in the Senate. 
They have just a father of a hiding in the election what are they doing?
Three months later, trying to deny the Government's legitimacy by voting its
measures down in the Senate.
Always they attack the legitimacy of the Labor party whether it is endorsed
in popular mandates at the election always they attack you. In other words,
this has never been the Liberal party, the party of convention, it has always
only been the party of shabby convenience. And now where it is a rule of law
and you have fops like Hugh Morgan, well dressed dandies, whose only
clever thing was choosing his parents wisely and out there in the High
Court. You would think butter wouldn't melt in their mouths three years ago
about the High Court, now of course, it is a social 4peri mental group they
say. All now attacking the legitimacy of our measures in the Senate because
we didn't really win the election now they are saying won on a false premise.
What false premise? John Hewson was roundly rejected and at their meeting
instead of saying look, we have lost five elections on the trot, for God's sake
let's sit down now and say what is wrong with us, lets have a good hard look
at ourselves. No, no, they put these mealy mouthed propositions around and
out goes his weak little hand up to vote for them.
That is OK John, I have you covered four square covered. I have got you
right in the sights. The trick for me will be preserving you.
But I tell you this once we get things really rolling, that is we get this solid
budgetary position into place, we get the great principles of Mabo established
in our law and then we really get onto focussing about our place-in Asia and
our right to an independent identity where we are represented by an
Australian as our Head of State, that is when the heat will go on the Liberal
party. That is when the heat will really come on and there will be no weak
little motions then. We will be after them for 1996 like we are after them for
1993. So I say this. Keep the faith as you have, you were true believers and I
amongst others appreciated it ever so much that you were. We haven't let
you down not in the Budget and we won't let you down. This is always
going to be a traditional Labor Government, but it will never be a do nothing
Labor Government. I won't see this be a government of shame, passing the
parcel on Aboriginal rights like other governments before us have done. I
won't see us lose the chance of making a statement about our identity, but
more than anything else I won't see us lose the chance of seeing every
Australian have as much chance as possible to a job and a chance to
participate in what this society can hold.
We will always have arguments rattling through trying to get things right, but
that is part of our strength. At least we can have an argument. We do not
have to have pap resolutions which we all vote for and then go out and rise
and turn and twist afterwards. We can have our debates in public, at the
ACTU Congress, at the Executive, at the wages committees, at your industrial
organisation committees, in our Caucus we can have the debates because
we truly stand for something, we represent Australian society and Australian
culture as no political movement in this country does. 
If our opponents who seek to deny our legitimacy or seek to face up to the
issues, who weakly skirt the real issues in Australian society think they can
sneak under our guard they can think again, because the public are more
conscientious than that. They know we have got the big issues on and that
we have been considering them for a few months we have been
reconnoitring, working out how we deal with them and in which way we
advance them, but get our act together on these things as we are on Mabo,
on the Budget, on these other big issues and you will see, I hope, past
breaking ground, big ground, 200 year old ground, the sort of ground that
only a Labor government can break.
That is what we are about and always remember this: together we are always
strong, while ever the trade unions and the Labor party stick together we are
too strong for the others. If they couldn't beat us in 1993, I think they have
got buckleys in 1996.
Thank you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING, UP
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR THE HIS EXC ELL ENCY DR VON WEIZSAECKER,
PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 6 SEPTEMBER 1993
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I
extend to you and your party the warmest welcome to
Australia. Might I say that as one who rarely goes through a day
indeed would f ind it dif ficult to ge~ through a day
without listening to Beethoven or Brahms or Richard
Strauss, I am in almost constant touch with your
homeland. But, of course, Australia's links w ith your country go
well beyond the legacy of music which Germany has left
the world.
Nearly a quarter of a million Australians have German
ancestry and their contribution to our industry and
culture has been profound.
To take the most obvious and tangible example, the wine
before you is purely Australian, but the Australian wine
industry was fundamentally the creation of German
settlers in the nineteenth century.
German emigrants were there on the frontiers of
Australia's development almost from the beginning in
exploration, in agriculture, industry and intellectual
life; and in the post war period they have continued to
play a prominent role in building modern multicultural
Australia. The bonds of friendship between us are made so much
stronger because these historical and cultural links are
strong.
Mr President, let me say that your reputation precedes
you. 
As we Australians consider the future of our own
constitutional arrangements, it is of more than casual
interest to us to observe how effectively you have used
the office of head of state to promote an enlightened
view of Germany's international role in the changed
circumstances your country is now experiencing.
And, Mr President, we regard with great admiration your
appeals for tolerance and civility in addressing new
social challenges in the reunified Germany.
Through you we extend our greetings to 80 million Germans
re-united in freedom after four decades of division.
in doing so we know we greet a friend, a partner, a
people with whom we have more than a little in conmmon and
who face challenges similar to our own.
As we approach the end of the twentieth century we are
both confronted with a world of increasing complexity and
dynamic, gometimes bewildering, change.
The hopes engendered by the sudden end to the Cold War
have been dashed in many cases the post Cold War era
sometimes seems bleaker than we ever could have imagined.
Developments in Central and Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union have necessarily been a major preoccupation
of the German government, and Germany has done a great
deal to assist cotntrieg in these regions towards
democracy and economic efficiency.
In Australia we admire Germany's constructive engagement
in these problems.
In this fluid post Cold War environment Australia has
also focussed its attention on regional dialogue and an
emerging sense of regional common interest and identity.
We have promoted the establishment of the APEC process
which builds on the growing linkages and immense dynamism
of the Asia-Pacific economies.
With a world economy struggling to emerge from recession,
we desperately need the contribution that a fair and open
multilateral trading system can make to sustained global
growth.
Germany is in a powerful position to advance the cause of
such a system. Your country's influence in Europe is
crucial to a successful outcome of the Uruguay Round.
You will be aware that, particularly through the Cairns
Group, Australia has done all it can to bring the Round
to a positive conclusion. 
Mr President, for many years Germany has played a
constructive role in disarmament and non-proliforation,
on the environment, and on international development.
we value your willingness to help keep the international
peace; including in Cambodia, which for nearly 20 years
stood out as the focal point of suffering and instability
in South-East Asia, rather as Yugoslavia tragically does
today in South-East Europe.
We know that the development of a more engaged
international role for Germany is no easy task. We know
it is complicated by frequently conflicting expectations
abroad. It must be disconcerting to be at once
criticised for exercising too much power and too little.
For our part, we regard the Federal Republic as a good
international citizen and we welcome your commitment to
assuming all the responsibilities associated with being a
member of the UN and a major player within the
international community.
We also welcome the fact, Mr President, that Germany
continues to look beyond Europe. We are pleased that the
German government and business community are seeking to
cooperate with the countries of the Asia-Pacific region.
Your visit underlines this interest.
Just as we see scope for enhanced direct business
cooperation between Australia and Germany, so we will be
seeking opportunities for joint ventures in the region.
The presence of senior Germany business representatives
at a major trade and investment conference in Melbourne
in November we hope will lead to practical developments
of this kind.
Mr President, far from diminishing our ties with Europe,
we believe that Australia's increasingly strong links
with Asia will make us a more attractive partner for
European business, politics and culture.
We do not forget our long-standing links with you; nor do
we fail to recognise the opportunities which exist for us
in both the mature markets of Western Europe and the
evolving markets in Eastern Europe.
Germany is a perfect example of a valued European trading
partner both an important market and an important
source of investment.
In 1992 Germany was Australia's eighth-largest trading
partner with total two-way trade of $ 4.3 billion; and
there is $ 6.4 billion in German capital stock invested
here. 
Although we will remain a competitive and reliable
supplier of raw materials to German industry, we also
have, I believe, much to offer as a partner in
manufacturing and there is perhaps no better example of
this than the construction of the ANZAC ships which I
understand you saw last week at Williamstown in Victoria.
New areas for cooperation are emerging.
Our two countries recently signed a memorandum of
understanding on environmental cooperation. Australian
firms are engaged in restoring the environment of the new
Eastern states of Germany.
Australia is to be the partner country at the 1995 Cebit
Information Technology Fair in Hanover.
In the same year, the Australia Abroad Council is
planning to hold a major promotion in Germany, the focus
of which is likely to be Art and New Technologies.
And we have big plans to convert more and more Germans to
the pleasures of drinking Australian wine and eating
Australian food.
Despite our differing regional focus, our relationship is
strong and full of potential. Certainly the prospects
are extremely bright f or our companies to work together
with yours in our nearby markets, whether they be in the
Asia-Pacific or in Eastern Europe, Russia and other parts
of the former Soviet Union.
Kr President, of course our success in the future will
depend in a large part on the extent and the quality of
the contact between our two peoples. If we bring to our
relationship some of the spirit and imagination, the
energy and ideas which the early German settlers brought
to Australia, we are very likely to succeed.
The legendary German explorer, Ludwig Leichhardt, wrote
back to Germany in 1842:
Few come here to stay. But many change their minds
when they have come to discern the attractions of
this rich country, and to find its disadvantages
less irksome. Families of this kind he said who
are taking an interest in the colony, and who have
come to look upon it as their own country,
constitute, in fact, its only real wealth. And it
is through them that a powerful state will gradually
arise, a state which may possibly consign old Europe
to oblivion.
One does not have to believe the last part to see the
truth in the first. For it is true that Australia's
success is built on the faith of those who, abandoning
the old world, made this new world country unequivocally
their home.
T 0 Ob I T T f(' T !-A 
And it is also true, Mr President, that 19th century
settlers and late 20th century tourists and business
people alike, have come to Australia and found that the
attractions far out-weighed the disadvantages.
We hope there will be many more such people, Mr
President, and that you will in future, number yourself
among them. That you will leave Australia assured of the
friendship and good-will which exists between us. And
that you will come again.
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to join me in
welcoming the President. 


9 September 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
&nbsp;It is nice to be here to be able to say a few nice things about Bob. I could actually say many nice things about Bob.
Bob is actually going to break the mould by getting out with some accolades. I think that as a Party person this is a great achievement. Someone said well, he hasn't had a lot out of it well, I think he has. He has a great sense of pride and achievement and he didn't need the word ' senato1 in front of his name or the initials ' MP' after it to think he made it. I think the fact that he has never suffered from an inferiority complex means he didn't need a label to actually prove to himself that he was worth it. So, I think he got a lot out of it.
I first met him in 1979, it was the time when Tommy and Arthur had adopted me for the second time to head Hawkie off at the pass in 1980. 1 went down to Victoria and I met Hoggie in the terrace house, at the Party office and Gerry he put Gerry in charge of me. I suppose he thought I was a bigger problem than Richmond council or another black bastard he said from Sydney. I had a terrific time with him. When I got back I said to Graham look, they are not all bad these fellas. Graham said look, I find that pretty hard to believe. I said to him no, no look that Hand actually I said look a great characteristic in the Left is there is no bloody sense of humour amongst them. I said that Hoggie, he gets a laughs out of most everything, I said and Gerry is a smoker, and a punter, a story teller. I said there is hope for the rest of us really with this crowd.
Of course what was happening was quite an important transition in Victoria and Bob's secretaryship meant the reaffirmation of the Party and Barry earlier mentioned himself and Michael Duffy is here tonight Mick and Button and others and John Cain who are on the outer and who Bob recognised as a force in Victoria and put together with a lot of tolerance and good sense an amalgam which saw the creation of the Victorian government. That is a hell of a thing to have on your CV putting a Labor government together in a place which hadn't had one for a long, long time.
Then, of course, as John Bannon said a moment ago this was the start of something big and we then went on to a Commonwealth Labor government and a State Labor government for most of the 1980s around Australia.
Bob played a substantial role in that. Then, like the BBC say when you get a good program, kill it when it peaks - he jumps straight off when he was doing well killed himself and resigned and went into Bob Hawke's office as Prime Ministerial Adviser and that is when he meet Peter Barron. Some one said to me today about him, he said God! they were a pair; he said Barron smoking his head off and talked to Richardson and Hoggie read The Age but between them, the pair of them they got it together and were a great force in those years and a political office which I think we will rarely see the like of.
The thing about Bob is an eminently successful person and the value of him is that he has already made a life for himself, chartered a course for himself outside of public life, outside of the Labor party. The very elements of his personality that have made him such a successful person are now giving him the promise of an interesting and varied life outside of public life, but of course still with a gaze on public life and employing those skills which he developed. Making the transition is as important as being able to do the task in the party, in the movement to be able to make that transition and still remain a useful Labor loyalist as he always will be is, of course, important.
The key thing about him is I think, that he was never self interested and he was never a slick apparatchik, that he did things which needed to be done at the time, he put himself outside of his own faction which is hard thing to do in the clubbie atmosphere of Victorian politics particularly on the left of the party and as John has said quite courageously he took positions which made a very great difference to the Labor party's future in matters like uranium in South Australia where probably John's government might not have been formed without that change on uranium policy at Roxby Downs. And of course, latterly with the great privatisation debates which have been important in dealing with areas of our commerce which we couldn't deal with while they were public authorities and also having large implications as they did for fiscal policy. Again, when ever the opportunity arose or when ever the need was there he was always there, prepared to take a lead and took enormous opprobrium for his stance his stance on uranium meant he lost friendships and lost regard amongst colleagues he lived twenty years with, but because he is consistent and because he is quality, he has lived to tell another story and to come back where others could see their ways and the correctness of his judgement.
So, he is a person of substance is our Bob and it is a great pity for us, in a sense, to lose him, but a pleasure for us to see him succeed in another way, in an industry which he has developed a long professional association with and where no doubt, his contacts with the Labor party will remain in tact. Bob will always be a Labor person. Whether he is in the employ of the party or what ever he is doing, he believes in Labor, he believes in the great strength of the Labor party and the way of the movement and its great goodness and I suppose, it is an important thing for us that we have in our society, beyond our party a whole spattering of people who are significant, influential and share our view of life.
So Bob, could I say on my behalf that I have always while I have had a few fights with him on occasions I have always liked you and I have on many occasions supported you and I know that you leave this very august position as our National Secretary with respect and regard of everybody.
Can I also just refer now briefly to 1990-1993 and say that in these two elections in which Bob was so influential, that we had the chance to give ourselves our longevity in office and in 1990 in that campaign where we were really facing as I suppose we have for so many now, difficult circumstances, we had our act together and that made a great difference to us and the same in 1993.
Here we are now in office, ten years going on eleven with thirteen ahead of us and a chance in the up cycle of the recovery and economic growth to turn thirteen into sixteen if we really want to do it. That is tremendous for the Labor party and for the Labor movement to see a generation of people come, serve and be replaced with another to give you the kind of continuity which we really never had the opportunity of having as a party and the chance to give Australia and present to Australia the real image of Labor which in many senses we were always cheated in giving that sense of social democracy which we have developed, built on the Australian ethos, the values of working class Australia and where we have now modelled this society, to a very large extent in our own image, turning it into a modem industrial economy, a competitive, outward looking economy, but grafting on to it one of the best safety nets and social fabrics in the world.
Very few parties get this chance, but we have been able now to do it because we have had time in office and to consistently apply ourselves to these very big questions. I noticed in today's Financial Review there was a front page which had a very graphic illustration of commodity prices and it showed them back at 1986 levels. You really have to ask yourself where would Australia now be without the Labor party? Where would we be if we left ourselves dependent on commodities as our conservative opponents would have left us in these years? Where would Australia be without the Labor party's breadth and ingenuity? On the same front page in the left hand corner was a stor-y of Telecom succeeding in picking up a telecommunications contract in Hong Kong which a decade ago would have been undreamt of. As you leaf through the paper there are stories splattered through it, just in one day which so typically indicate our success as a party in changing Australia, hedging our bets off it being simply a quarry and a mine, investing in our greatest resource our people and our children and developing innovative products which we are now marketing aggressively and successfully to the rest of the world.
So, I thought that said a great deal about the change we had made and also a day or so earlier, looking through the economist magazine we are now growing as fast as any western economy, in fact faster the only country that comes near us is the United States and that means we have been able to do, in these last couple of years what many countries have not been able to do and they are now growing negatively, if I can use that expression. Most of the OECD has got a minus in front of it for growth and we are sitting up there now with these growth rates.
The funny thing was Bill Kelty made the remark a few minutes ago to me on the table, he said God! it is hard to get a bloody break in Australia with the way things are in the media. You have got an expansionary Commonwealth Budget putting $ 2 billion into the economy, kicking growth along which has already been re-started, being roundly criticised, but a reactionary Budget in Victoria being hailed a day later followed by an unemployment rate of over 13 per cent in that State. You have got to say there is something screwy about the world which doesn't focus on the value which we in the Labor party have seemed to bring to things.
I think it is worth saying that in this Budget and the debate which has followed it, just how meticulous we have been in meeting our promises and doing the things that we have said the things that I said to people on election night, saying that we wouldn't leave an underclass of the unemployed to themselves, that we would reach back and pull them up, that we would actually focus on the big issues like unemployment and do the things we said we would do in support of Australian women and all of the other range of policies in our social platform. Meticulously we have put those into place in this Budget be it the home child care allowance or the generalised child care rebate or the extension of dental services to pensioners and beneficiaries and a wide range in fact we published a document with the Budget which listed the promises we had already met including cutting the company tax rate to 33 per cent, putting in a second investment allowance, all of those things which we have already done and accomplished and accommodated.
One hopes that as a bit of time passes we get a focus on the real issues again and the notion that the Labor party will always be into social progress and into its basic loyalty to those groups which have so earnestly and always supported us and that we won't be doing regressive things as we didn't do on this occasion.
I was pleased tonight that at least one person in conservative Australia, the leader of the National Farmers Federation had the courage to stand up and say to John Hewson what you are doing is wrong and indecent and it is bad for the economy, it is bad for public life. That you don't go voting against the Government's Budget measures in the Senate a point I had made a few days ago, a point some of the columnists had made in the last couple of days when I said last year if we were to have lost the election, we as an opposition would pass the GST and pass the money measures of a Coalition government. You would have at least thought with even the most elementary power of observation, the most cursory power of observation the Australian media would've said it is wrong for you John Hewson to turn your Opposition senators wilfully against the Budget so that the Government has to take the Budget down the highways and the byways of the minor parties. Morality in our public life will always be important and it is not too late for John Howson to do the right thing. He would earn more marks doing what is right than being wilful and stubborn and spiteful and continue to do what is wrong.
At least then we could say that the Coalition government recognises that they lost the last election and they give up the notion of trying to say that Labor governments are illegitimate by attacking at the first opportunity they have, the work of the Government which was fairly and properly elected.
So, there is at least some people prepared to call it as it is.
We have had our share of problems in the last week or two. I think, one would be less than honest not to admit that with the Budget and its reception. We have made some changes and they have probably been some good changes and made the Budget more acceptable. But be that as it may, we are not going to ever pass up the big issues simply to make sure that the cosmetics of our work is more acceptable to the electorate. We are working as we promised on the big issues and the biggest in Australia is unemployment. We have now again introduced another expansionary Budget, with the same fiscal stimulus as the ' One Nation' package, an economic policy that has worked, which as fired the economy back into growth, which is growing faster than any western economy, which is now going to get another $ 2 billion kick coupled with low interest rates, which is doing as much as we possibly can in macro-economic terms to promote growth and to promote employment.
Beyond that in the Budget, we expanded those labour market programs to now reach nearly 650,000 people who are unemployed and in November I will receive the Taskforce report into the labour market to see in which ways we might be able to do something novel in world terms here in Australia about a systemic approach to unemployment and particularly the problems of the long-term unemployed.
On this key issue of Budget and Budget measures and Budget debates notwithstanding, we will be focussing on that issue as promised later in the year when we receive that report. Similarly with the other big issues of the last few months MABO and APEC. On Mabo last week we presented our draft legislation. It is easily the best piece of social work the government had done in a decade in terms of its time, it attention, clear principles, it enunciates the long lines of logic which are there, hoping that we can produce a national settlement, an amalgam between the Commonwealth and the States, that embeds in Australian government and Australia society acceptance and not grudging acceptance, but whole hearted acceptance of the principle of native title and the fact that Aboriginal tradition and custom are the source of Australian common law and that native title exists in our common law. On this very large matter for Australian society and for our party which has always been committed to reconciliation between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australians on this very large issue we will continue to press for a principled solution, a principled ar~ d workable solution to a revolutionary problem in land management and one which seeks to meet the twin goals of justice for Aboriginal people and..
And also I mentioned APEC to you. APEC perhaps more than any other thing has the chance to provide jobs for the next generation of Australians and to guarantee our standard of living as perhaps nothing else we can do can. I leave on Saturday to meet President Clinton in the United States. Naturally, this is one of the issues I will be speaking to him about.
Normally, when Australian Prime Ministers go to the United States, the issues on the top of our agenda are rarely if ever the issues on the top of the US agenda. On this occasion APEC is one of the issues on the top of the US agenda and it is also one of the issues on the top of our agenda. So, I am hoping with that opportunity to be able to talk to the President about the opportunities in the Asia Pacific, about the importance of the role of the United States in the Asia Pacific, its power for good in putting the stamp of the largest liberal democracy on APEC, of keeping it involved strategically in our region and opening up the opportunities of open regionalism and freerer trade in which Australia can participate. If we get APEC to a strong, multilateral body which is given authority at heads of government level, we will have given Australia a seat at the largest table in its history a table that it's largely, in a way, created for itself. But one it can only create with others, but one which has got tremendous influences for Australians; for the standard of living, Australian employment and the way we will be as a society into the next century.
These are all very large measures, very large issues and core issues which we are intending to over the course of this Parliament and indeed this year.
So people in the Party should not for a moment think there has been a bit of this comment we have lost our way. Well, pigs we have lost our way. We haven't at all lost our way and we should not be a moment discouraged by the fact that we have had difficulties with the reception to the Budget because in this game it is a game for the long term and the medium term it is not for this week or next month it is for the long run. Our conservative opponents have got nothing to offer. John Hewson has junked his GST and he has junked Fightback. At the moment he doesn't even have a policy, and his policy is to wilfully oppose the legislation of the Government in the Upper House of our country the Senate, and supposedly pass this off as basically a solution to Australia's problems. It is no solution and while they are doing that, we are working on issues so large, like Mabo and APEC and a long-term solution to unemployment, so large that I think they give the promise of being able to sustain our Party a long time into the future.
Let's be grateful for the fact that we have had ten years in office, that we are on our way to thirteen and that we remain a party of imagination and principal and that we do fight for good and worthwhile things and while ever we have breath in us we will always seek to do innovative, imaginative things which are good for the society, good for this country.
The Labor party is the only real political party in Australia as we all in this room know. The Coalition parties are really like business organisations, more than they are political parties. The Labor party is a real political party with feelings, with loyalties, with notions of fairness many of which they have developed themselves. This in part comes from the ethos of the people we represent working class and middle class Australia and the people who join us and participate in our affairs.
Let me return to where I began. Tonight we are sending off one of those people Bob Hogg. One of the people who in a relatively long political life, but in not a very long period has made such an outstanding contribution to Australian public life and the culture of Labor in Australia.
Bob, let me say as the Party's parliamentary leader, again, recap and just make that point that we owe you a debt of gratitude, we appreciate the things you have done, we appreciate your integrity and your sense of what was right and what needed to be done at the time and say how much influence it has had on all of us and how much influence you have had on all of us and make the point that it is because of people like you, we are the Party that we are a Party of principle and a Party of achievement which will go on to do other things and which will generate more Bob Hoggs and keep the Australian Labor Party the great Party that we in this room know it to be.
Thank you
&nbsp;



TEL -I
PRIME MINISTER
RMOMRGOED: Against Delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE NON P. J. XEATING, MP
ASIA SOCIETY, ME YORK, 15 SEPMhNER 1L993
" AUSTRALIA, THE UNITED STATES AND) THE NEW ASIA"
It is five years since I addressed members of this
distinguished institution. They have been five years of
extraordinary, momentous change. The end of the Cold War
has greatly increased the level of uncertainty in the
world, but as events in Washington on Monday this week
dramatically showed, it has also greatly increased the
level of possibility. The new world order now emerging
is rich with possibilities which could scarcely be
imagined'a decade ago.
within the brief span of the last five years some of the
deepest and most intractable issues of the post-war world
have been put on a path to resolution.
The Soviet Union has ceased to exist, Germany has been
reunited, and we saw on Monday the beginnings of what may
be a permanent peace settlement in the Middle East.
For the first time since 1945, the United States is now
free to concentrate on new challenges in new regions.
my address today concerns one such possibility. I mean
the opportunity presented by the economic advancement of
East Asia the " new Asia" of my title today. For the
centre of gravity in world affairs is moving inexorably
from the Atlantic to the Pacific: and it is in the
interests of both our countries to recognise the promise
the region holds.
in recent years and particularly in the twenty months I
have been Prime Minister a substantial even a
preponderant amount of the Australian Government's
energies have been directed in varying degrees towards
equipping Australia for the Asia-Pacific era which lies
ahead. Equipping it economically, of course, but also as
a society and as a nation. T1EL6:. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 01/ 09 
TEL 2
In the five years since I last addressed tis institution
we have taken the reform of the Australian economy Rauch
further# to a point now where it is as competitive as any
in the OECD, and in certain essential respects, such as
the rate of company taxation and incentives for research
and development, comparable to the Asian economies.
There have been profound changes in the shape and
orientation of the Australian economy; namely, towards
sophisticated manufacturing, towards exports, towards
Asia. Equally priofound have been the-~ hdnges to the
business and industrial culture necessary to initiate and
sustain the pace of reform.
But in making these essential changes, the Australian
Government has been determined to ensure that social
policy keeps up with economic change.
We take the view that change comes more effectively and
more rapidly when it comes cooperatively and with a
substantial degree of social consensus. For example, we
won industrial peace, a much more creative industrial
culture, lower inflation and much else through an Accord
between trade unions and the Government.
we have always taken the view that a more competitive
economy should not and does not mean the sacrifice of the
social fabric. on the contrary, we have stuck fast to
basic social democratic principles because we believe it
is in them that the faith of the Australian people lies,
and on that faith our progress depends.
we recognise that the re-orientation of Australia towards
Asia gives rise to a certain amount of apprehension among
Australians accustomed to old European ties and
attitudes. But we go to Asia without compromising our
heritage or our beliefs or our democracy. In fact, we
need to make them stronger.
As a result of policies which might be generically
described by the word " inclusive", we emerged from the
1980s with an economy much more competitive and much
better placed to take advantage of our opportunities: And
with a first class national health system, And a social
safety net the equal of any in the world, An the most
advanced legislation effecting rights and opportunities
for women, An-d a richly pluralist and remarkably peaceful
society. it is in this-broad context that some other recent
initiatives might be seen. We have opened up debate on
the prospect of an Australian Federal Republic because it
would seem to be singularly more appropriate to the
reality of our position in the world, and our national
identity and aspirations. T1E6L:. Seo. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 02/ 09 
TEL 3
We are in the process of legislating a new deal for
indigenous Australians because justice is long overdue to
them and because, by delivering justice, we will raise
the level of national unity and notional self -esteem.
we are continuing to actively encourage the development
or a multicultural Australia because, as the United
states well knows, there is enormous strength in
diversity. We are conscious of the fact that the reality of
Australia does not accord with the image of Australia
projected abroad. Pond as we are of our national legend
and our native fauna, we are fonder still of our social
and democratic institutions and values.
You will understand how irritating it can be if you
imagine the United States defined exclusively by coyotes.
By way of a corrective I might quote an article in the
Sydney Morning HaralA earlier this year written by one of
your own -Susan Gaetner, a resident of Manhattan. She
had gone to Sydney in 1991 believing, she said, that it
was a place populated by " rubes and yahoos". She found,
I am pleased to say that the standards of urban chic were
at least as high as her home tows, the health care and
social programs " light years ahead" and the quality of
life " stunningly, resoundingly, overwhelmingly better."
I imagine New Yorkers would find this hard to believe.
More is the pity, so would many Australians. But I should
hope it makes the point Australia is an advanced social
democracy and a complex and modern even post modern
society.
The recession hit us hard in Australia and we have a
major unemployment problem which, in the face of world
recession or feeble recovery, all our efforts so far have
failed to solve. But the reinforcements to the social
fabric we have made have served us very well in binding
Australian society together and making it possible to
maintain the momentum of change and seize the
opportunities which the world, and particularly the
region, offers.
Ladies and gentlemen
in Australia, we understood very well when President
Clinton emphasised in last year's campaign that foreign
and domestic policy are now two sides of the same coin.
These days, trade policy most decidedly is high policy.
And there is no more iiiportant focus for trade poli~ cy
than East Asia.
Right round the Western Pacific we watched with great
interest as, step by step, Hr Clinton began to swing
America's interests towards the Pacific. TEL: 1~ 01: 62.1S eNpo.. 9031 6 ru~ u 
TEL 4
We saw early on that he recognised the link between the
US budget deficit and its poor trade performance through
the eighties. For the nations of-the Western Pacific,
Mr Clinton's deficit reduction package meant he was
acknowledging that America's trade problems cannot be
solved without change at home.
Then we saw that despite the clamour against it, he
reaffirmed American commitment to the Blair House accord
on world agricultural trade. A little while later, hie
committed his administration to a speedy conclusion of
the Uruguay Round and sought a renewed fast track
authority from Congress to complete the round.
For the nations of the Western Pacific, which have
depended for their growth on an open world trading
system, Mr Clinton's commitment to the Uruguay Round was
good news indeed.
Month by month Mr Clinton continued to confound the
sceptics on our side of the Pacific, and confirmed that
the US was on the right track.
His American University speech at the end of February
recognised the centrality Or Asia and of APEC to a
strategy based on economic growth, increasin
international competitiveness, and stronger trade.
For the Western Pacific, Mr Clinton passed a crucial test
when he successfully sought an extension at China's HFN
status, conditional on human rights tests.
in June, he began to reveal a long awaited package of
proposals for enhancing US excports to Japan and we were
relieved to find that the US would not seek preferential
access, or trade quotas.
Finally in July, in his Waseda University speech in
Japan, Mr Clinton proposed to convene the first meeting
of the leaders of the economies of the Asia-Pacific
region. in mny discussions with the President yesterday we shared
our visions of the future course of the Asia-Pacific
economic community.
The discussions confirmed my belief that the Clinton
Administration has found a path out of the puzzling
uncertainties of the late eighties.
The path out is trade, and it goes west across the
Pacific. Now in all this I believe Mr Clinton was recognising an
unmistakable economic imperative. T1EL6:. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 04/ 09 
EL: 16. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. Ut / U'j
South-East Asia is now in the throes of an~ industrial
revolution which is transforming the ASEAN economies from
primary producers to major manufacturing centres.
Manufacturing now accounts for over one-third of their
GDP and around 60 per cent of their exports.
Importantly for Australia, our . near neighbour, Indonesia,
has achieved 25 years of sustained economic development
and transition from one of the world's poorest countries
to one standing on the threshold of the middle-income
group. With the fourth largest population in the world, it is
now launched on a strong growth path.
For the first time in its history, Indonesia has become a
significant industrial exporter.
At the same time, radical reform of the Chinese economy
has unleashed powerful forces of growth and
industrialisation. I visited China in June this year and, particularly in
Shanghai, was impressed by the resurgence of
entrepreneurial drive and skill.
The IMF and others have recently recalculated China's GNP
on a purchasing-power basis.
These calculations suggest that it might be more
realistic to regard China's GNP as three or four times
the official figure, making China already the world's
third biggest economy after the United States and Japan.
Each of the East Asian economies has started from a
different base, with different resources and different
economic circumstances.
But there are common threads running through each story
of success: the determined pursuit of economic growth qnd
social progress, and a willingness to embrace domestic
economic reform and outward-looking trade and investment
policies. in the wake of sustained economic growth, East Asian
societies are being transformed.
Across diverse cultures, there is a common commitment to
modern isation.
There is a high premium on education and technical
training which relate to modern economic sectors, as well
as an international orientation in government and
business. Demand for quality consumer goods, fashion,
entertainment, leisure and travel is steadily growing.
TEL 
In developing East Asian economies including those of
South-East Asia a substantial middle class is rapidly
emerging.
This has political as well ' as economic consequences.
East Asian middle classes valui-political stability, but
they also seek greater participation in the political
process. Circumstances vary from country to country, but there is
a welcome overall trend towards political pluralism and
libera lisation.
Indeed, judging by the examples of Korea and Taiwan, one
could argue persuasively that, beyond a certain point,
dynamic and internationally-oriented economic growth
almost certainly requires progressive steps towards
political liberalisation and democracy.
in the cases of China and Vietnam, the question of how
long economic liberalisation can be insulated from
political reform is a fundamental question for the future
of both countries.
I think it should be emphasised to an Asia Society
audience that the United States is benefiting enormously
from the economic dynamic in East Asia and stands to
benefit more as time goes on.
The two sides of the Pacific now form an integrated
market of two billion people, accounting for half the
world's production and halt the worlds trade.
it is a rn~ rket, a production zone, an economic community
which for a decade has grown more rapidly than any other
region of the world, and which is likely to continue to
grow at twice the rate of Europe.
we often think of the European Community as a model of
economic integration. Or we think of the economic
relationship between the United States, Canada and Mlexico
as an example of a naturally integrated group.
certainly these groups are closely integrated, but it is
a surprising fact that the economies of North America and
the Western Pacific are actually more closely integrated,
without a regional trade agreement, than are the
economies of Europe or of North America, with a regional
trade agreement.
man Americans think of East Asia primarily as a source
of Tmports competing with US industry here or in thirdcountry
markets.
Anid certainly, it is true that the us market remains
vitally important for most East Asian economies. 
TEL: 16 Sep .93 1 U: 21 NO. VU,) LQ v
7
But over the last decade East Asia, Australia and Niew
Zealand have become an increasingly important market for
US exports. A
Less than a decade ago, more than one third of Western
Pacif ic exports came to the UniLted States.
Today the proportion is less than one quarter.
And over the same time-frame, the proportion of US
exports which go to the Western Pacific has risen to well.
over one quarter, on a par with those to the NAFTA
partners and well ahead of exports to the EC.
Since the mid-eighties the trend rate of growth of US
exports to the Western Pacific has been three times the
rate of growth of Western Pacific exports to the United
States. in other words, East Asia is no longer just a production
2one for exports to the United States it is also a
thriving and rapidly growing importer of US imports.
I believe that the Western Pacific today is your key
market and it is not too much to say that the success
of the United States In the international economy, Its
success as an exporter, its success in regaining its
confidence and belief in itself, depends on its
continuing success in Western Pacific markets.
Australia's trade orientation towards East Asia is even
more pronounced.
Around 60 per cent of our exports now go to East Asia.
Indeed, without any formal arrangements, there is already
closer integration between the economies of North
America, East Asia and Oceania than between either the
members of the EC or the members of NAFTA.
Given the enormous stakes involved on both Bides of the
Pacific, it seems to me important that we think
creatively about what sort of policy and institutional
framework will best maintain and strengthen the highly
valuable economic linkages which now operate between East
Asia, Oceania and North America.
in my discussions with President Clinton in Washington
yesterday, we were in ready agreement that the Asia-
Pacific Economic cooperation or APEC process has the
potential to play a decisive role in this regard.
APEC is already showing great promise as a forum for
promoting economic cooperation on a basis of open
regionalism among the main economies of the Asia-Pacific
region. 
TEL: ib. Sep. 93 10: 21 rio.-
APEC'a members are the United Statesi Canada, Japan,
Korea, China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the six ASEAN countries,
Australia and New Zealand.
But to succeed, this process will " also require close
attention to other aspects of trans-Pacific relations
outside the economic realm.
We need to recognise, for exampfe, that the favourable
strategic circumstances and promising economic outlook
that now obtain in East Asia are partly the result of
enlightened US strategic policy towards the region since
the Second World War.
Judging by the quality of the discussion I was privileged
to have yesterday with the President of the United
States? I am sure your country is sufficiently
imaginative and big-hearted to meet this challenge.
I left my meetings in Washington with a deeper conviction
that Mr Clinton is putting the United States on the right
path.
A path west to the pacif ic.
But at the same time as he resolved to rebuild America's
competitiveness, he has signalled his determination to
rebuild hmerican society as well.
I was encouraged by his commitment to the Asia-Paciric
economic community. And I was struck with the unanimity
with which the President, his Cabinet and the
Congressional leadership in both Houses and both Parties
expressed their conviction that the US should assign a
higher priority to its trading relations with the western
Pacific and the Asia-Pacific economic community.
May I also say that I appreciated the Administration's
high regard for its relationship with my own country.
We also discussed the importance of the Uruguay Round and
the need to have a result by the middle of December a
schedule which in the view of both my Government and the
Clinton Administration leaves no room at all for
reopening the Blair House accord on agriculture.
Ladies and gentlemen
Tomorrow I go from New York to London: from a, country
which scarcely notices the presence of an Australian
Prime Minister to one whose popular press is driven to an
orgy of insults by his impending arrival. There it was
recently written that I was among other things a
" barbarian" -which in the London tabloids is pretty well
a synony m for Australian that I was bent on taking
Australij towards " some hellish Japanese future": that
the only solution to we hustralians was, to " shoot them
all". rr. 1 Voi n 
TEL: 16. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 09/ 09
Ii 9
I expect it will get qult-abusive when I
arrive. I must say my sympathies are fundamentally with
the British people who have to endure a press
like this every day.
Of course Britain remains an important trading
partner, a firm friend, and, as with the United
States, a source of much In the way of culture
and institutions that we value.
The British Foreign Secretary, Douqlas iurd,
has made this very point to the Australian
media in the past day or so.
Certainly, the historical ties between Britain
and Australin are unhrnnknbln. nut tlin ( AImn
changnd a long timo ago, In pursuing tho
possibilities which the Asia-Pacific holds
Australia has simply recognised necessity,
which Is to say the future.
Thank you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, NP~
ANNIVERSARY OF AUSTRALIA HOUSE
LONDON 17 SEPTEMBER 1993
it is a great honour to welcome you here to commemorate
the 75th anniversary of this most famous Australian
institution Australia House. I
For once at least-the word " historic" can be used without
the risk of exaggeration or cliche.
For this building has played a unique and remarkable role
in Australia's modern history, and in the history of our
relationship with Great Britain.
Australia House was built during a dramatic and-defining
moment in Australia's evolution as a nation, the First
World war.
It has stood through the Second World War; through the
growth of Australia from an all but infant nation,
through all the changes in our association with Whitehall
from the Statute of Westminster in 1932 to the
Australia Act of 1986 through the growth to maturity of
our relationship with the United Kingdom.
This is not only the oldest Australian overseas mission,
it is also the oldest diplomatic mission building in
London. The architects who designed it were Scottish;
the materials, English stone combined with Australian
marble and timber all of it highlighted by the works of
Australian painters and sculptors.
The building was opened by His Majesty King George V
before an audience which. included a quite extraordinary
gallery of Australians the Prime Minister, William
Morris Hughes, former Prime Ministers Andrew Fisher and
Joseph Cook, and our greatest General Sir John Monash. 1903 
2
In opening the building, the King said:
it will not only serve those useful purposes for
which it was designed, but will also call to mind
f or all those who pass by the immense opportunities
and limitless resources of the great continent under
the Southern Cross. I
And of course this is precisely what Australia House has
been in the seventy-five years since: the Australian
promotion house; the place that issuied the passports; f or
countless thousands of British people, the first contact
with the country they made their home not to say, a
reminder of home for thousands of Australians living in
or visiting Britain.
Those British migrants were told in various terms over
the years that Australia was indeed a land of unrivalled
opportunity and vast resources. There were politicians
in those days who imagined that by this stage in our
history Australia would be supporting a population in
excess of 100 million with an economy the size of the
United States.
Yet, if these predictions have turned out to be a little
inflated, the fact remains that the human opportunities
Australia has provided are beyond measure, that those
opportunities still exist and, in my view at least,
there is still no better place on earth to live.
Indeed, it is a very much better place now than it was in
1918, or 1948, or 1958, or at any other time in our
history. Better for many reasons.
Better for the principles Australians have stuck to down
the years and the traditions they have developed which
continue to underpin the social and political ethos of
Australia: principles and traditions of democracy and
fairness which, translated into policy, make Australia in
the 1990s one of the truly advanced democracies in the
world. Better also because Australians have not interpreted all
their traditions as immutable and inviolable. So
Australia in the 1990s is much broader, much more open,
more tolerant, more diverse infinitely richer because
new generations of Australians chose to welcome settlers
not just from the United tKingdom, but from all the
countries of the world.
1904 
And better because, like our population, our economy is
part of the world economy. And particularly because it
is part of the most rapidly growing, and assuredly moat
promising region in the world the Asia-Pacific. So
immense are the opportunities there, the words of King
George V hold truer now than they did when he spoke them
here at Australia House seventy-five years ago.
Necessarily, with these developments in the composition
of the Australian people and their society, and the
aspirations and imperatives facing the Australian nation,
a new sense of identity will emerge.
And if we give expression to it through the reform of
those institutions which were appropriate and effective
in the past but not so appropriate and effective now, we
will be that much stronger.
Let me say here in London, as I have said many times in
Australia it is not because our affections for Great
Britain are reduced, or the friendship, between us
frailer, or our respect and admiration for the culture
and institutions Britain has bequeathed us in any way
diminished, that now, in this last decade of our first
century as a nation, we are considering the option of
becoming a republic.
It is not because the machinery is brokeni that we wish to
change it. It is because a great many Australians in
all likelihood a Zaligrity of Australians believe the
machinery is no longer the most appropriate.
I believe the Australian Government believes that
most of the people of Great Britain, if they were asked
about the issue, would agree with us. I believe they
would find it unexceptional and inoffensive that
Australians should consider taking this step at this
stage of their history.
Indeed, I am quite convinced that were Australians to
choose the republican option, this expression of their
identity which has inevitably changed so much in the past
century, our friendship with Great Britain would be
stronger, as any friendship is stronger for being more
mature. But the decision on this will be made by the Australian
People. It can 2aJ be made by the Australian people:
the people descended, as mine are, from these islands,
and those from all the countries of Europe, and the
Mtiddle East and Asia and-throughout the world.
I find it very hard to believe that if Australians decide
that their country shauld be in future a Federal Republic
Of Australia, anyone of good faith in this country will
not consider it a wise judgement as well as a democratic
onle. 1.905 
4
And let me take this opportunity to say that we
appreciate the way Prime Minister Major and his
government have handled this issue.
The Prime Minister echoed my own comments when he said
earlier this year that each of our two countries had been
" driven by the imperatives of geography, economic
interest, social change and political vocation to give a
new priority to its region", that this is " perfectly
natural" and constitutes no threat to the strength of our
friendship, the memory of shared experience or the future
of our exceedingly healthy and flourishing trade and
diplomatic links.
What we are talking about is a new relationship as I
said, a mature relationship.
And I think that maturity was perfectly expressed by the
British Foreign Secretary in Australia earlier this week
when he said that the matter of the republic is one
between " the Government, people, Parliament of Australia
and the Queen of Australia", and that the relationship
between us is one between " two modern countries, with a
great deal of shared modern interest" and should remain
quite unaffected by our discussion about the republic.
And that is what will happen, I am sure. The issue is
complex and sensitive and cannot be rushed. In theI
meantime friendship and commerce between Great Britain
and Australia will continue to grow.
I consider it an immense privilege to stand here today in
a place steeped in the history of our two countries, anI
organic part of the relationship between us, and a place
with which surely millions of Australians have had some
connection. It is a privilege because this building, and the peopleI
who have worked here, have played a dynamic role in
Australia's nationhood. Australia House has always been,
by its nature, a contributor to the growth and
development of Australia.
So it seems to me particularly appropriate that on this
all too brief visit to Great Britain I should be able to
make this the occasion for these remarks.
I thank all those who have made this occasion possible
and all of you who have come along today.
1906 



TEL: 21. Sep. 93 6: 43 No. 004 P. 01/ 05
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY TUE PRIME MINISTEKt THE HON J. KEATING, M. P.,
STATE DINNER. DUBLIN CASTLE, DUBLIN, IRELAND
SUNDAY 19 SEPTEMBER, 1993
Taoiseach, Mrs Reynolds, Kathileen, our distinguished Ambassador from Australia,
Terry McCarthy and Margaret McCarthy, distinguished leaders of Ireland, both past
and present and distinguished ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much for the warm welcome, Taoiseach, and the warm welcome
particularly from all of you. Its always said in Australia that the warmest welcome
you can have around the world is in Ireland and at first hand Annita and I had tha
experience this evening. We appreciate very much that warmth, the generosity, the
sincerity and the fact that so mnany of you have done us the honour in coming this
evening. It's a great pleasure for someone of my background to come to Ireland in any
capacity, but to come here as Prime Minister is even a more singular honour than
simply coming as a visitor, because one comes representing the Australian nation and
one comes with the thought in one's mind of those great traditions and shared values
which we in Australia have with you the people of Ireland.
So Itfs great to be here and no better day than the grand final of the Gaelic football,
because just an hour off the plane I was trvatc4 to a pageant and It's the only football
stadium in the world, certainly the exception from Australia, where a politician is
warmly received. And I know I was beside such a popular fellow and that's why I got
the claps. I'm sure if I wasn't with you, Albert, there would have been no clapping at
all, but the fkct is that is was warm; and when the band broke to the strains of
' Waltzing Matilda' and the crowd sang the words of that famous Austraan son&amp;, I
couldn't help but be deeply touched by that great sense of kinship betwee us and that
understanding of Australian values,
Those Australians values: support for the underdog, had me barracking for Deny all
through the day. And they are strong right to the e4d and that last ten or fifteen
minutes showed their great athletic form, but rm a member of an Australian rules
football club, which has also been the unedoS club. A great working class club, one
of the great sports clubs of Australia the Collingwood Football Club. And it had
not won a premiership since 1958 and being a Sydneysider of course Fin not a
member of a Melbourne football club. but I joined bcase I could only join the
underdogs club and the year I joined they won the flag. They won the premiership.
7 
TEL: 21. Sep. 93 6: 43 No. 004 P. 02/ 05
.2.
So there are great similarities between Gaelic football and Aussie rules, as the
Taoiseach said. No doubt we're sharing a gene pool, somewhere, because the
contortions and the athleticismn and the bounce and the ball control and all of the other
things which are so common , which we saw there today are conmon to both games,
so there's no doubt, for certain, the Irish have influenced Australian sport in terms of
Aussie Rules. So it was a great game, it was more than a game, it was a pagean. To
we all those flags and that great roar when the two teamns came onto the field and then
the singing and the enormous spontaneity of support for Deny at the conclusion was
indeed something to behold. And as visitors, Annita and I were charmed that as an
introduction to this official visit to Ireland we were able to go to Croke Park today.
Thank you Albet, thank you one and all for that rare privilege.
Australia, of course, has an unbroken relationship with Ireland going back a couple of
hundred years but as the Taoiseach said, we are very different countries now.
Australia is very much a multicultural country While, I suppose, Ireland is probably a
more a monocultural country. But, that said, for all the differences the shared values
and traditions and history ame still there. The Taoiseach took you through those
statistics about Irish inumigation to Australia, there is no doubt that Australia is the
most Irish of all countries outside of Ireland. It mightnt have had the absolute highest
numbers of people fronm Ireland settling in Australia, but it had the highest proportion
of any group settling anywhere in the world. And it~ s had an enormous influence on
Australia, on my country, at every stage of its history, and because the Irish arrived
early, relatively early In Austrlias history, in my case, my family in the midnineteenth
century, in the 1950s, we had the opportunity of having an impact on the
whole society.
So, rather arriving as of late, as was the cam with Irish immigration, say to the United
States, the Irish permeated all Australian culture. As the Taoiseach said, through the
professions, through teaching, through education, through literature. through the axts
pervasively across our country, and of course most obviously in politics where talking
18 required of course the Irish have always done so well. They're great talkers, they're
passionate talkers, passionate people, and so where there were not natual barriers,
where there was an open opportuity, of course, their great sense of passion and skill
excelled. And so. the Impact was so broad across the whole nation and across the
wholo society and as a consequence the Labor Party was in many respects influenced
by the great democratic traditions of Ireland, that sens of nationhood, folklore,
egalitarian values, values of fainess and values of decency.
And if's had a greater impact on my Party than any ideology, any ideology that we
could speak of, and there were many of them in the late ineteenth century and they
had a big impact in the twentieth century, but none greater than that Irish sense of
nation, folklore, egalitarianism, what we now call In Australia the ' fair go'. One of our
former leaders, Arthur CalwclL, who led the Labor Party, said the Irish were among
the great colonisers of the world, but not among the imperialists, the exploiters or the
conquerors. And that, of course, is so absolutely true. He said they brought their 
TEL: 21. Sep .93 6: 43 No. 004 P. 03/ 05
-3-
culture and their virtues with them to enrich the heritage of whatever land they chose
to dwell in. That's a vcry large accolade but a true one.
I'm looking forward to the next couple of days as I rarely look forward to anything.
The Taoiseach has said,-wc have our formal discussions but as well as that, apart from
getting to know Dublin better, and having the opportunity of speaking at the Dail, I'm
also having the opportunity to see rural Ireland and Tynagh in Galway, from whence
my famnily came. And I was deeply moved and very honoured tonight that so many
members of the Keating family fromn Galway have come tonight. I'm looking forward
to seeing them and to meeting them in Tynagh in the next day or so.
But before I do that, of course, we do have a chance to discuss our relationship. As
the Taoiseach said, we have more in this relationship than so far we have taken from
it. There's so much warmth and generosity And good feeling between the Australian
nation and the Irish. And I hope this blossoms into a larger economic relationship
than so far we've been able to manage. it's true for many nations that their sons
and daughters, as they've gone to other countries, have managed in some ways to
build a tight relationship which has had social and economic manifestations. We've
had the social but not much of the economic. This is not entirely true of ; ourse
because we are now doing it much more than we've ever done and Australian
companies are now developing In Ireland and Irish companies arm developing in
Australia. And some very famous ones among them who are represented here
tonight. But we need to do more, becuse I think there's a very natural backdrop
there for the Irish doing business In Australia, and I know with the opennms
and warmth of this relationship for Australians doing more in Ireland.
The Taiosech said we've got things to settle in world term and we have. We've
got te GATT round now about to complete after seven years, to provide for what
all of us widlget most and that is to provide a really good backdrop for multilateral
trade. The thin that lifted the Income3 world wide in the post war years for
countries, great countries WiJka pan and Germnany was a firee trade in goods. We're
now tring to do that in servioes, in intellectual property rights and in agriculture.
And that guarantees us the best opportunity ever to actually participate in the world
and through the velocity of trade lift incomes world wide so that we can have a
period of wealth and growth In prospec unparralleled at any time because In the
world today we've lant seen the world lik this before the First World War, with
great nations reJoining the world economy and society like the old Soviet Union,
R~ ussia and the States of the Commonwealth of Independent States. And China and
India and South America, who are now in the world economy as they've never been
in the post war years. Soif we get this rightin the GATT, we can turn this world
into a place wher incomes really do go up sharply andi where many disadvantaged
societies open themselves up to some bounty and advantage.
Now, in Europe, of course, Ireland's focus has been In Europe and on the
Community which is entirely natural and good and correct, as Ausftralia's has bee 
ItL--4.
in the Asia/ Pacific. But, these opportunities abound for us but nothing greater tha
the wider one of an international agreement on trade and servies and agriculture
etcetera. We'll both go our ways in our respective areas of the world, In the Asia
Pacific with this enormous weight of population and this huge rate of growth. It's
not just for us to participate in but also for countries like Ireland as well, as we are
participating in the European Community. So I look forward to discussing these
things with the Taloseach in the next day or so.
The other thing we have In common is the blight of Wnmploynnt, and this is the
thing I know which touches the hearts of the people of Ireland, as it does the people
of Australia. We're determined that we will not consign a generation of young
people to unemployment, that wc won't accept the damage, the generational damage
of a generation Impacting on the fabric of our society, with unemployment. And
we're in a world today where, through higher productivity and mechanisation we're
getting more output from fewer people. But we can't be content to say we live in a
more productive world, we're getting more output from fewer people. We have to
say therefore we must produce mre products that means we mnust grow more
quickly. And that means we have to deal with idfltion and all these other things in a more
novel way. Now we've done it in Australia with a wonderful accord between the
Australian trade unions, and this governmen and I ) now in your country this is
your hope too. That is, to develop a long standing relationship with your trade
union movement so that there is a national commitment and consensus to growth
and to employment, so large numbers of people are not left unemployed, bearing
the brunt and carrying the load themselves, of economic change and productivity so
that only those who are unfortunate enough to be unemployed should Oanv the
burden and of course, most particularly the young.
This we can never accep. Blecause if equality, and fairness, and egalitarian values
start In any place, they start withgWp-Lojqnent-The way in our socetes you get a
piece of the action is through employment. And we can never accept high levels of
unemployment as part of, " Well, that's that, we have have to live with it." We can
never have a bar of that attitude. So we're now looKing at novel ways to deal with
unemnploymfent. We've got a task force looking at our experience and hoping to pull
something novel from it and I know that you're thinking in the same termns too. and
lt's hope we can share somne experienc there.
The Taloseach mentioned Mary Robinson's visit to Australia last year, it was, I
think, one of the most succesfal tripsiby a Head of State In recent timnes. And for
Australians, I think, a persuasive Illustration of how a Head of State can be an
ambassador for her country and for her people. I enjoyed very much that visit. It
gave Afuter expression to this great relatiowNsp which we have togeter and
reminded so many Australians of the democratic values and traditions of Ireland
I2 L1L.. Sep. 935 b: 46 NO. UU4 r. uq'UD 
i L 2 1 b e p 1-u 4
which were expressed in your President and expressed by your President while she
was with us.
I know at the moment she's In New Zealand, back down in the Antipodes. a long
way from here. And no doubt having the same impact there as she had with us.
So, she Invited me here but I'm pleased to say she's there doing her good work in
the Antipodes. while I'm here, trying to do zine. So Taioseach, ladies and
gentleman, It gives me very great pleasure to remember your President's visit to
Australia. To remember, with it, the great warmth in that relationship. Again
visible here tonight in the warmth of the welcome you've given my wife and
myself. And so can I propose a toast to the President of Ireland and the people of
Ireland and to another two hundred years of Irish Australian friendship.
The President and the people of Ireland.
Thank you.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPUcZX Y Mn Pa! W IWRRTT WM8TINI " M NO F J'DAT o, U
" M bAIL
O~ ftZIWIO A&amp; Y 20 S3PT= WRf : L103
Let me say it is a pleasure to be in the great city of
Dublin; a rare feeling, as ever, to be in Ireland from
vbenCe Came my own people, so many of my fellow
Australian&amp; and so much of my country and an honour to
address the Dail.
I wanted to cone to Ireland as Prime Hiniater of
Australia for the good reason of history.
While I aim here, I will be talking to the Prime Minister
and other Mnisters end busineas people about tra*,
particularly in relation to the GATT Round. I will be
puttinq a particular point of view.
We are both now players in the international economy and
inevitably we have overlapping economic inttrsts.
We will be talking about investrnt in Australia.
I will be talking about the European Community an4-rA1BB
the forum for economic o-opratioh in the Asia-Pacitregion.
Noecssarily, I want to talk about related social issues,
particulaVy unemployent vhioh to a problem afflicting
both our cow* ttle-d virtually all the develgpe4
cOuntries of the world.
I Vfnt to bear Irish views an these watters and I want to
put my own.
But I am also here for the less tangible but utterly
inescapable and irresivtible attraction of hictory.
Pow. I have a feeling that the people in this chamb.. r
might inwardly gruan every tima a politician of Irish
ancestry a8mes through here and signals that he or she is
going to give them a history lecture.
it would not surprlse an it you are t" Intking here vO g
again, he is going to tell us about the Irish past, or
n J Il 1 C. 
-our li~ terary tradition. we is bound to quote Yeats at us:
or tell Usn about 1700 or give Uas hie views on Our
. uaracter.
I would dearly like to $ pare YOU this.
A. s a vcet-colonial couP~ try OUrselv**, soe of us raawsh,-
the preamptions of visitor.
Vat the f at remains tikat Ireland in poasibly unique in
thie world for the hold it has on the conecioushess of
other countries.
I knewoi my rra~ cemsor, Rob Hawk*, e aul~ reesed this
Parliame~ nt several yas ago he spoke about the fseline
he had whan arrived at Shannon Airport he said he
felt he had come home.
Xnud Sob Hawk&amp; is nowhere nlear as Irish as I am. if Bob
felt at homes, It o~ ust he I never left.
And wihen President Rh4" senn nat year made w. hat has
b-M aCluite famous tour of Australia, I fuii.&amp; n myself
unconecioisy repentingq thin * hams at a luncheon in her
honour in Canerra.
because Austr-alian*. do~ feel unoannily at home with the
Irish.
They do feel a qreat arftinity whiah apparftntly transcends
ahetral connections.
Anad * bt see to " e to * peak of the immesane power and
Laportenca of history and semory and lanoquaqe and
culture.-I awk not talking about 9ona quaint showcase of the past.
i am not talking about museiums, Or curioUa 9iAMPsee Or
Cadad agwarian life, or even Coorgian architecture.
X couild ) Look at caargisun arahiteoture all day, myeelf.
3iat the attraotion of Traland is an elemental things it
tuifile a need in us.
It is 611mogt as if one can Say that It Ireland did not
siijat, eountrioa like Auetralla would have to invent it.
knd perhaps we should.
I politician, or oj~ arnu~ mants of all 6apl* exing and
bureaucrats and business people, all those of us in a
postion to inflmenc, pfii ey, xho5uld kniow what it losans
to J~ o'e hi&amp; toi-y and heritage and language and culture.
Yet thoro 1.4 always a tondllnpy in political thought
tovarda' otthocoxy razher than tribes broad and less
readily definied oena* Ae-
SOOON 60: T I 
On the way hors via the United States and Britain I war.
r". ding 2~&amp; I O'?. olainow b. ook jh&amp;_ jxj~ h betlevo jo_ or
nojt. At on* Doint. writingj about Wolf Tonia, he says;
one realm~ that his laughter * 1nd his huAianity WOU14
haVe blown all thee away ( he Deania ort~ xoxy,
sectarianism, pi~ rinteno, aant) would h~ ave defiled
Political 1 1be-ty not merely ln term~ s of rnnuart but
of gaiety and tolerance and a great pity and a free
mind and a free heart and a full lift,
OV-nIatin of ecoirse was talkin~ g about Ireland, wrtich I do
not mean~ to do.
X moanf to talk about my own rnouftry.
many ut the Irish who played loadilng parts in~ Tone's
rabe'klion of 1798 were transported to Australia -among
them premlnont lead-ore or the rebellion like Xiohaol
DvVov, . Tcoeaph Holt, James Meehan anld MKiael Hayes.
T might ^ t4d intar alta that a concentratlan of l7VV
veterns, took u~ p lend to tit* fouth-wast of Sydney in ouch
nunhoro a* to earn the place the name of Irichtown.
Yt In now nim11. od Unketown and It is where I was b~ orn,
qrew up andJ spent most of my life.
Zt is my hometown and tho heart of my volitical
oonstituen~ y and the most obvious * thn-to groups thoec
days axe Lebanese and vletname..
" Lo curious thin5 aboo~ it the 3.798 00oNViott in that! in the
Colony Ot NOWi BOUth W9le8 the . xp0Ctati0o that U1069g
Ftble would rebel was never really met.
The px-ofound opportunities for economic Indae" nne
Which Auatralia prnv( ded for mais and women of ordinary
mea&amp;, combined with the liberal hulmanity of individuals
like Governor Macquario, put paid not just to their
rebelliounnoss, but to the notion that tne Irish wiere
born rebels -that they were .* aaa2 hostile to
society.
Or at least it MAU have put paid to tIC hOttn.
ka the Autraliai historian, Patriek O'Farrell, has said,
then myth of rebellion c. entinued but th) e reality vas
generally rather dirrerent.
In 1416 Nichool Hayes, wrote, " There is room here for
sonis millions if they were allowed to * migrate. what a
happiness It-wniid-b&amp; to, the unfortunate Irish tenantry
woes they here to partielpato in tfluae blesQI1ae9." 
It has' been' a those In the Correspondence or Miaraflta
ever since.
ekn. hundred years later a huge Oi~ n was erected in
London's AldvYch near the site of Auatralii mouse. it
said-" d tn Australia. you will have a hearty welaone, 4
97norous return tor your energy and enterprise and a
Climate that is the healthiest in the w'owld."
Astral. ia has always hold out this crest promise that
it c~ ould tftke the PoOr and the 6PPV6eSmd And give them
the liborty, eConOMic independence 0X% 4 the material
comforts denied in their own country mind beyond that,
by " onme OblevainquO, winnow troa their hearts and minas
all the ancient bittornae and unreason.
As if Australia could do what a Wolf 1kone. mieght have
done. if thaer has been a ipantinucium theme to Australian
history one MIfA~ tn" It to iperh. a 9! hl one. it there
is one, standard we have set ourselves, It has been how
vell ws have lived up this promis..
The th~ eme begins with th~ e British and Irish convicts. it
follows the trail of hLigration through to the present
4^ v. Tt tincludes not just the Irish but the Italionm andl
Croeke and the Lebanese and % Yews and Latvians and
Vietnamese and the Chinese an* Cambodians.
h'aople, in fact, from more thlan 150 countries or the
world. It has beon a 4ifficult ambition to live uip to.
consider the appellati~ ons the 0O~ mtr bAs gone by over
theyears. it has been known as tharlb~ tter neuntryft, tha
I~ ndof t~ bettor obahoem, the 0working man's
paradise", thte usoial laboratory of the world",
Ohmetravlina Unlimited", and, alkhimugh it was originally
meant ironically, " the LuoXy CountrWy."
Occupying a land * o vast. with such bountifull resources,
such a splendid climate, suoh tree inetitutiona being
heirs to a land seemingly so blessed, MAY be why
1AUozallano are sometimes rather severely melf-aritie~ al,
In MeOt, depending on which columnists one reads and
therm sems to be no consensus even amonj the several. of
Trish extraction one would think sozetim** that we
live in a diabolically Impoverished and inadequate place.
iseaconatant ofTpolitictal auiumt In Autralia and
cultural arcument tnAt we n~ ave ralked to cdeliver our 
unlimited oentiali indeed, that our great good fortUne
in paaossln a vast continent had made 49 complacent.
There iA a view, I tninXc. that thome things5 we have
achieved might have been * ere the product or good jucX
than Eloeid wenagemotnt.
Tt Is not a view I share.
With rare OX~ e~ tions, we have delivered liberty. it
material prospeiotty has ocoasionally been hard to come
by, and there have bs~ n enough inetarleem Of Conflict to
indicate that the resentments were not entirely swept
away, kugtrali&amp; has always boon and remains by any
standarda, both a prosperous country and a tolerant~ une.
1 do not know any way to measure the eXtent to Vhich an
i1migirant culture has been responsible for this? how much
it has both obliged us to practise tolaranee and provide
value then.
It's a famillear quetion for mistrais* s how uuh we
are a produot ot our iretzastanees, and how muoh we are
what we have made ourselves tobo
la truths by the ect of mirtion the country was mades
by that voluntary act, end bY then emigrants' ambitions it
was built.
An a politician 2 know that little of a lasting nature
happev'e by virtu&amp; of some latent inoral or pdlitical
torce. AS a general rule we don~' t got blown where we
want to go we have to take ourselves there.
In politics, an in aueb else, it requirets imagination and
a politiCal will which In uy view is the sme as saying
a will to &amp; mercis Political power. hnd that depanda ani
having not just the Irish rebel's sane of in3u. sties, but
the nIneteanth century Irish emjq rant'. ability to
izaqin. a better life. knO to find it.
Indeed I would like to thinc that I had more ot the
qualities of the emigrant.
better a politician who not only confronts an
unsatisfactory reality, but has the wherewithal the
will and the Skill to change it.
Better one willing~ to go toc sea buat not in a boat
withouat erm.
in Australia in the 19806 We embarked on.: voyage of
-conomic ceform. ife deregulated the Icoaomy and opened
it up to the wnrld. 
Zn doing this we did what the emigrant does we
confronted necessity.
Had we not done this, tn* modern world and the
opportunities it otters would have pauced uA by.
it took political will. More than will, it took
persuasion and persistence and the ability to resist the
terptntion to turn back.
souetimes it doen feel as It one hau gone to sea in a
boat without oars. Sometimes there are mutineers.
ComettimeB one thinks it would have been vasier to stay
put in the first place.
Those nnnvict vasel* on which the rebels at 1798 made
their voyage sometimos took nearly twelve xuonths to gut
to Australia.
it nuct have felt like an eternity.
The process of economic reform can feel the sae way
one day flyin along with the sails threatening to rip
apart, the next day beaalmed.
And then, of course, theto are the days when the ship is
Lmaouilately on coutne and travelling at a manageable
rate and you are thinking not of home, nor even of the
journey, but of the destination.
The destinatioA wa and remainm an internationally
esmpetitiva Aconomy: which mena, * Uong other things,
one less deipendtnt upon our mineral and agriCultural
couoditi t and more eapaclo of nauufacturing products
for glonal marketw, particularly the markets of the
XaLa-Paifio region which is to say the fastest growing
markets in the world.
Anid we have gone a long way towards reaohing this goal.
Our 9oonomy has been completely transformed. Extprts
have doubled. Service and manufacturing exporti have
more than tripled and are now equal to rural exports.
Our economy is much ore diverce and the fastest growing
setor ot it by far is elaburately transforied
manlUfactures. A decade ago less than half of our exports went to our
own region. Today two-thirds go to east-haia.
Three-quarter* of all hustralian axporta qo to the
Asia-Paoific region, a region of two 1illion people
producing half the world's output and ngagerd in halt the
world's trade.
These Cigures basically desewibe Australia'w ruture.
CNr I.
.1 
They marX the staqg OA the touarney toward3 an economy or
which it will never be possible to say they got it by
chance. It fell into thour 14p.
Zt will only he possible to say that, like the emigrant,
we recognisei necescity when we saw it an~ d we did what
had to be don.
Of course we were not the o nly country in the world to
reform our economy in the 19$ 06. Much that we did was
donle elsewhere in the world as countri.. reelisad that$
in the modern cra, if they d( A not change they Would rall
behind. There It A* o doubt that we have boon served well by the
* cenomIc -ef crmw we ma~ de.
And we are all the better for having Alan made Anial
A large eleaent of the Improved international
Compatitivenamn we achieved was got by mane of an Accord
between thu Government and the trad6 unions.
The Accord dramatleaily Iaduced induiitrial disoutation,
hold wage&amp; to conpetitive levels, made a muajor
contribution to roducinel Iiflatlin to a rate oymong the
lowiet in the OECD, and sponeored a creative and
~ n-operativa eulture in the workrplace which is radigally
increasing level* of productivity.
rmplamenting the concelpt of the social wage in the 19809
mYIaflt that in the 1909 we have a first class h1ealth
system: a qoe. Ia net an extAnalve and sophisticated an
any in the world; legislation attectinij the rights and
well being of womon a* eduanced an any in the world: and
thr~ vugh poaltive government programsa assiating etnic
groaps and encouraging cultural diversity$ a
multicultural society of Infinitely more richness and
strength -including economic atrength.
In other uwds as tho Australian 0overnment has stepped
out of the market plane&amp; in many reg~ ards, it has atepped
inXJj its sooldl responsibilities.
hs I said, we did not put to sea without oars. Or
lifeboats, and a safety net, or expanlded opportunity
including, AS of this year, an a~ t~ n~ ive system of child
oare and a home care allowance.
It i3 essentially for the same reason Lhat w9 have made
thte biggest effort in n'ir history to at last deliver the
baeis* of social-justice ror indigjenous Auatralians.
I seen the rcason of social unity and social justice oC
axtendMd opportimity which new world countrien like our
own are intended to provide. 
? or the great casualty of immidgration waa Ahenriainal
kuatralia. " ae dostru1etion of this * xtraordinarl ancient culture,
and the brutality and Injusticee inn Icted an the firet
Astralians can nover really be sat to rights, any more
thaen the injustice and dispoegasslon which occurred int
this cuntry can be.
SUt we Can heal woun~ ga&amp; nM &amp; ar* now Vonaratione from the
hurt and bitterness of the pnot.
We anu Include Aboriginal Australia In the scial
* qasation as clu'ltOuBrieo rw;~ tidll~ be over so
alloh strongqer, and the self-esteem of all Auetralians s0
much greater.
2% seems to me a oarf act example of the fact that
nocasity des not or itself load to change.
There ham been a moral and 9ovial nactsity to rig~ ht
those wrong* Inflicted on Aborsiinal huftalin for
geaneration* what has I" d to chary. Im will. Will and
the imagination noceacary to conceive at uiniathing
bettiaw. Go this last decade of &amp; ustv. allia's national lite has been
a decade of Quite remarkable chance. The newt docada
shows every &amp; sii of keelping up the pace.
knd, if we have laarne4 a lesson in the onurea of the
Sourney# It is that tn* Dace will be best Ypairtairaed and
he ohanq* wilil ho nor&amp; affective it the viaop2. avo
included.
No politloel principle van so thorauvhly confirmed for ae
in recant yea an thin nos that one suoaads boat by
trusting to the people's best feelings. I baslieve it In
thei aamenwtial w~ apn of the political reformer.
Chtange will never be made by hAIt. ng the negwi4~ ive the
cervatism, or myopia, or prejudice or pedantry which
eXists in any society. Then@ e prone tn " Arvvuenea Could
dictate to a ref orw agenda.
Chang vil2l be made by looping over the; ;. byataihing of
Soimething better. Of sill t~ he lesson* f &amp; h emigrant for
the politician this is the moot Lrndmental.
And I bmalLeve it is the leascn conltain"~ in those wvrd* 2
quoted about Wolf Tone thtat political reform moans t6~
entlare 3L*.
It me&amp;" s oftewriq an alterative to cant and narrow
orthodoxyv and a11thie debilIitating' conatre Into in Which
historiyI a fovr wrapping us, and to which o,% aorvative
edIt-interest alwIayt appeals. 
Po'itioal reform Means otterinq tq the people wilat
migratlion oftered to the Irish in the hinetaonth
century, to Zurpanm after WorlS war Il, to CImbodian
and Vietnamese in recent tines I lan quite simply the
prosepect of a better life in a better country.
fkrnodm thIrien latnadke. s Me back in turn to those laboons we learn
That if we are drawn to Ireland by the hiatory and the
language and caulture not to Pay by the beauty oC the
Place then goverrments ignore these things at their
peril. Ana tor that reason there is a link between culture and
between the art&amp; and reform, botwen the life of
the mind and refors.
It is Wny, I think like the extension of social policy
the * Xteneien Of policies encouraging cultural
Coveloiakent are eaaential In timac of dramatie economic
change. They feed the national iemainatlon, encouraqe people to
contemplate alternativan and Cf course they soothe the
savage boast in us,
you see vhat lesson&amp; can be drawn from Ireland. seal,
hard, political lessons.
Not that we Vero thinking of Treland when we drw them.
The porallole only begin to present thiemeslves as we
approach the old snores.
Nor were we zninkinq ot Ireland when we thought of the
repubi. 1M.
Rather we vere thinking that we are a ocuntry separated
from these islands ) iy twelve thousand miles and 2Oo yeaiv
Ot experience.
That we era a people eomprisod of poe than 150
nationlities and Cor som tine now we have been
encouargint all of them to retain their cultural
identity.
That our mople live etraordinarily varied lives on an
* Wtr* 6Pinarily varied continent.
And that the time had come in this lae docade of our
first century a* a nation to put a border r'una tins
tapestry of our national li* t * ime e eftchrined the
Ltumigranto traditions ot couraqe and Cai( h together with
those traditions of democracy, tolerance, fair play and
ireatew opportunity uhiah are the haxA traditions of
Australia. 
zt seemed to us that a ropibic might acknowledge and
enshrine the values of a people who have been willing to
imagine something better, vLllinq to conrrant the need to
change* to Make their way on a new frontier and who
have learned that these things are beut done together.
And to those Who went to hold back, who fear change, who
say it is not the right time to do this$ we might say
what if our forebears had said this? What if they had
lacked the imagination and the will? What if they had
stayed put?
Well, I would not be an Australian ard nor would most of
the 17 million others.
And I would not have had the extraordinary opportunities
my country has given ne among then the Immeasurable
privilge of coninq to the land of my ancestors as Prime
Minister of Australia and addressing this national
parliament. Thank you. 



TEL: i. Uct. 93 153: 22 " o. 027? P. 01/ L
PRIME MINISTER1
SPEECH BY THE PRIE MIPiSTER, THE HON P4J. KEATING MP
SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE HONOURSv SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE
FRIDAY, 1 OCTOBER 1993
It is a very great pleasure for me to be here this evening to honour such a distinguished
group of Australian artists, who have given so much to their fellow Australians and the
world at large.
But I know you will excuse mc if 1 don't speak at length tonight about the recipients or
the awards.
Their records are a much more eloquent testament than I could hope to provide.
Having said that, however, theme is one performer here tonight that I do wish to pay
special tribute to.
Walter Burley Griffin, perhaps the greatest architect in Australa's history, oncc very
truly said that " buildings are the most subtle, accurate and enduring records of life."
Tonight I want to pay tribute to such a budlding to the Sydncy Opera House itself,
one of the best architectural decisions that we ever made in Australia.
It was said somewhere that:
".. Whenever anybody begins to look at things in a way that is slightly novel,
999 peoplc out of a 1000 are totally incapable of seeing what is put before
themn. It taikes at least 40 years before they can manage to make it out."
There's truth in the observation, but in the case of the Opera House it is only a half
truth. It's certainly true that when the Opera House was under considcration and in the
process of being built, many Australians just didn't know what to make of it. There 
TEL: 1. Oct. M-3 13': 222 No. 027 P. 02/ C
were no other buildings like it in Australia, and you never saw anything like it on your
overseas tour to Covent Garden, or Paris or Milan or wherever.
So wc got the snide comments about the Danish Blue Danish Bluc, of course, was
then a peak of cultural sophistication.
The doubters and the slaves to cultural conformity were out in force, and it took a
major effort to ensure that what now seems thc only WsibIe design for the site, should
prevail. It did not take 40 years for the people of Sydney and Australia to call the Opera House
their own. In a very short time they were delighting in it, and world wide, with Ayers
Rock it was recognised as one of the two great symbols of Australia.
The extraordinary symbolic importance of this building was brought home to me in
Ireland a few days ago, when a man told me how he had gone to Australia recently and
when he stood in front of the Opera House, he said, he couldn't believe he was actually
there. What he described was the way Australians used to feel standing in front of Big Ben or
the Tower of London.
In Monte Carlo it was quite apparent that everyone related their concept of Australia
to these two images, the Opera House and Uluru, and I do not think it is drawing too
long a bow to suggest that they deserve some of the credit for getting us the Games.
John Douglas Pringle, I think, captured the essence of what we feel about the Opera
House when he wrote that:
" There it stands a perfect symbol liniking the city to the sea, welcoming
incoming ships with its wide open arches, shining brilliantly in the summer sun
or gleaming palely by moonlight, contemporary in feeling yet reminding us of
other ages when great buildings were built to the glory of God or the splendour
of princes and not simply for utilitarian purposes it is a building of which all
Australians may rightly be prud...".
It is also significant, I think, that one of the recipients of an award here tonight, Dame
Joan Sutherland, was a important member of our winning team in Monte Carlo.
Dame Joan, like other award winners, has been a trail-blazer for Australia for many
years. She, and Richard Bonynge, Don Burrows, Ruth Cracknell, Sir Charles Mackerras,
Gracme Murphy and Janet Vernon and Garth Welch and Marilyn Jones have done it
hard for Australia. 
TEL 3
I know that they would all prote~ st that they loved what they were doing, and wouldn't
have swapped it for quids. And I'm sure that's truc.
But tlhat doesn't mean that the rest of us should fail to recognise and acknowledge just
what a debt we owc them.
Not just our young performers who have had opened for them doors which these
peoplc had to prise open for themselves.
But evcryone who has found life a bit easier because of what thcy have done to
establish Australia in the eyes of thc world as a rich and creative culture.
These people dcserve our profound thanks.
They have given us enormous pleasure.
Thcy enrich our. lives.
Their art inspires us to try a little bit harder anid to live a little hit better, and I feel
privileged to be among those honouring them tonight. TEL. O: ct. 973 18: 22 No. 027 P. 03/ C 


Your Excellency, Mrs Aylwin, Ministcrs and distinguished members of the&nbsp;accompanying party, on behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I extend to&nbsp;you the warmest welcome to Australia.
It is my great pleasure to welcome you, your Excellency, as the first Chilean President&nbsp;to visit Australia. The first, that is, to visit voluntarily, for one of the Iirst two Chileans&nbsp;to arrive in Australia was a former President, General Ramon Freire, who was banished&nbsp;here in 1837 after falling out of favour with the Government of the day.
Not only did you supply us with one of your own leaders of course, you also supplied&nbsp;us with one of ours. For Chile was the birthplace of Australia's first Labor Prime&nbsp;Minister, John Christian Watson.
Prime Minister Watson was born in the Chilean port of Valparaiso, on 9 April 1867&nbsp;and came to Sydney via New Zealand at the age of 19.
This was a period when the flow of people and ideas especially ideas of social reform&nbsp;flowed freely across the Pacific.&nbsp;
And Watson was a reformer.A person, we are told, of graciousness and charm, which won him the affection andadmiration of all who came into contact with him, he was one of the guiding forces inthe establishment of the Labor Party at the federal level.This was an age when people thought of Australia as a working man's paradise as asocial laboratory for the world.
2To commemorate this significant historical relationship between our two countries,President Aylwin has generously donated a plaque to the memory of Prime MinisterWatson. I am pleased to announce that President Aylwin and I jointly unveiled theplaque in the Mecmbers Hall just prior to this luncheon.The plaque will stand as a perpetual symbol of the historic links and friendship betweenthe Australian and Chilean peoples.It is noteworthy that a large contingent of business leaders has accompanied you onthis visit, Mr President, and I am sure that while in Australia they will take theopportunity to discuss mutual trade and investment opportunities.In recent years the Australian economy and the culture of business and industry havebeen dramatically trormned. They are now much more outward looking andincreasingly they look towards Asia and the Pacific.Australian business interest in Chile has expanded substantially over the past decadeand is set to grow further as a result of the stable business and investment climatecreated by your government.Chile is seen by an increasing number of Australian companies as an attractiveinvestment destination and business centre as a country with market orienteddevelopment strategies, iscal and monetary stability and openness to foreign trade andinveStment. With the importance of mining to the Chilean economy, it is not surprising that ourbusiness links to date have been fuelled by the very significant investment whichAustralian companies have in Chile's maining industry.One of the largest is in the Escondida copper mine in Chile where BHP has a 57.5 percent majority shareholding.Overall, Australia is one of the largest foreign investors in Chile with total investmentscurrently valued at $ 704 million.Trade between Australia and Chile has increased at a rate of 34 per cent over the pastdecade. Australian exports to Chile have almost doubled in the past three years upfrom A$ 32 million in 1990 to A$ 62 million in 1992.Chile is now our most important market in Latin America for elaborately transformnedmanufactures. To help thesc ties develop even further, last year Austrade appointed a specialist TradeCommissioner for Mining and Energy. We will shortly appoint a second TradeCommissioner to Santiago.Mr President, each of our countries is pursuing the objective of greater economic andpolitical engagement with the Asia-Pacific, our own region.
Australia regards its relationship with the Asia Pacific region as a matter of the highestpriority, and I know from our discussion that the Chilean Government is equally keento improve its economic and institutional linkages in the region.Today, nearly 60 per cent of Australian exports go to East Asia. Chilean tradestatistics show that in 1992, over 31 per cent of Chilean exports went to Asia. LikeAustralia, Japan is Chile's largest export market.Bloth our Govcrnments continue to pursue trade liberalisation policies with acommitment to export driven growth.Australia is particularly pleased, Mr President, that your government remains steadfastin these policics, despite the domestic pressures for higher protection on agriculturalproducts. As fellow Cairns Group members we both know only too well that this is the onlycourse to follow, despite there being other governments less willing to take the difficultdecisions required in this area.There is no greater trade priority for Australia than a successful conclusion of theUruguay Round by the effective deadline of 15 December.The world stands to gain an immense boost to prosperity and confidence fromconcluding the Round and a great blow to the world trading regime if we allow it toslip from our grasp.I know you shame these sentiments, Mr President.The Cairns Group is, howevcr, but one area in which our two countries co-operate.We also have a long history of co-operation on Antarctic matters.And today Australia and Chile sign two formal agreements as a further measure of ourstrengthening bilateral ties. Th~ e first, an Extradition Treaty, was signed earlier todayby the Attorney-General and the Chilean Foreign Minister. The other, a Memorandumof Understading on plant protection and quarantine, will be signed later today.In addition, our officials have recently agreed to explore the potential for closerscientific and technical cooperation.And I understand that during your visit, Mr President. our officials will be exploringthe possibility of negotiating a double tax agreement and an investment protectionagreement. We believe that both will facilitate the expansion of commercial liksbetween our countries.For business links to expand further, however, we will need to improve direct airservices between our two countries. These are not as good as they could be, and Iknow that much work has been undertaken to seek to improve them. The AustralianGovernment will continue to attach a high priority to concluding an air servicesagreement.
Improved air services between our two countries will not only see business expanid, butit will also make family reunion easier than is currently the case.Ile 1991 Australian census showed that theme am~ over 24,000 Australian residentswho were born in Chile. Around 3,500 of these have been granted refuge from formerundemocratic regimes.In their time here they have been outstanding citizens of Australia.Some are now seeking to return home, and while we wil miss their contribution toAustralia, these returnees testify to the democratic principles and stable environmentcreated by ( he present Chilean governmecnt. Of this, Mr President, I believe you can berightly proud, and it can only further cement the tics between our two countries.Mr President, may I repeat that we welcome you most warmly to Australia.We hope that you enjoy our hospitality, and particularly the hospitality of thoseAustralians of Chilean origin who I know welcome your being here.CANBERRA
6 October 1993
TiEl. LO: ct. 93 14: 48 No. 030


The following text was delivered on behalf of the PrimeMinister by the Hon Ros Kelly, MP, Minister for Sport at thelaunch of Evonne Goolagong's biography " Home The EvonneGoolagong Story" in Sydney today.7 October 1993
TEL PRIME MINISTERSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,AT THE LAUNCH OF " HOME! THE EVONNE GOOLAGONG STORY,SYDNEY, 7 OCTOBER 1993Its a very great pleasure to be here today to launch this autobiography of agreat Australian.I have to admit that I felt some trepidation about doing so when I read in thebook that Evonne was never too thrilled about politicians she didn't knowmaking a big fuss over her.However, I decided that it was worth the risk to put my regard for the bookand its subject on the record.At the very least we share one thing in common our admiration for theBritish tabloid press and their ability, as Evonne puts it, to provide athoughtful analysis of the situation.Mind you, * Bold and brash, brilliant and boomingm and * the new Miss World'are somewhat kinder than the headlines that I got.But then, I wasn't a 19 year old Aboriginal woman who had just won the firstall Australian final in Wimbledon's * history, in a mere 63 minutes, against agreat defending champion.As Evonne says, those 63 minutes were long enough to change forever thecourse of her life.That life, which In this volume unfolds from the history of her family in theearly part of this century to her present day rediscovery of Australia and herplace in It, makes for compelling reading.With the assistance of Phil Jarratt, It is told in the same way in which weremember Evonne playing tennis with grace and dignity, with flair andexcitement, with imagination.And, most of all, with a sense of purpose and a palpable honesty.7 Oct .93 11 : t 6 No U ILI t
TEL 2Like other books of note, it can be appreciated on a number of levels.You can read it, if you want to, 8$ a fairytale story of a Princess magazinetype of a young girl from the Australian Outback who gets plucked fromobscurity, becomes world famous, finds a handsome prince and lives happilyever after.But that's not a unique story, even among tennis players.And If you were to read it like that, you would be missing out on so much ofwhat this book has to offer.As Evonne relates, she's had and passed up the opportunity to make amovie, because she always felt something was wrong with a Cinderella script.And she passes up that opportunity in this book as well to our lastingbenefit. To quote her, " From 1953 my family lived in a white town, and from 1966 1lived in a white society, but the former didn't make us white, and the latternever made me anything other than what I am a proud Aboriginal woman, aWiradjuri Koori."' Troughout my tennis areer I now realise I stayed close to my Aboriginalroots: from my early days In Sydney through the occasions when I justcould not go on with the tennis tour until I had once again sat with my peopleby the three rivers and felt the cooling breeze of their commonsense., That'sa wonderful phrase!Perhaps the most moving part of the book for me are the chapters dealingwith Evonne's search for her Aboriginal identity on her return to Australia In1991.Where she drives across Battlecamp Range and has to stop and get out ofthe car because the realisation of the Battlecamp massacre of 1873 is socompelling. Where she returns to Wiradjuri country and follows her mother'sfootsteps the Linda lines that take her into parts of the country, and partsof herself, that she had never seen.The story of Evonne Goolagong Cawley can be read, I think, as a story of ourtimes. A story where a young Aboriginal Australian is separated from her ownpeople and adopted by white parents as the best means of getting ahead.Where she excels to the extent that she becomes one of the most popularand admired Australians, but realises, for all her success, that something ismissing from her life. She finds it In her culture and identity. (. UCt I I NO viv r u),, L
T EL: Ot.. 11 : 55 No .0103She always come back to the same starting paint: that her iffe story and herpreoccupation with her Aboriginal ancestry are one and the same. Thatbeing an Australian champion and an Aboriginal Australian are two sides ofthe same coin.There is a message for all Australians in this process of discovery thatEvonne has gone through and written so evocatively about a process thatwas not always joyful and which sometimes involved considerable pain. Aprocess, nevertheless, which had to be followed through rigorously andhonestly. We can all be enriched by understanding and sharing in our culture and byIdentifying with this place Australia. We-. can all be enriched byunderstanding and sharing In Aboriginal culture. And we can all be wiser andbetter Australians by honestly confronting our past and the tragedy ofAboriginal history since white settlement.That Is precisely the goal of reconciliation the process that we are nowgoing through.Reading Evonne's book provides a good dose of inspiration to carry on withit. And so too do encouraging signs from other areas.I want to say in passing how Impressed I was with the AFL's decision tohighlight the contribution of Australia's indigenous people to both our nationalculture and to football at this years grand final in Melbourne. It was clearlyreceived with enormous enthusiasm by the crowd.You have no doubt realised by now that I don't have a lot to say about thehistory of Evonne's tennis career or Its many highlights.Of course, I don't need to. Her deeds on the court are the stuff of legend,and her place In the history of tennis is secure. To have seen her play, evenon television, Is something I am sure no-one would be able to forget.No tedious two fisted backhand, no interminable baseline rallies, and a sweetsilence when she hit the ball. It Is perhaps an overused phrase, but she wasgrace personifiled when she played.People will remember Evonne for this, and they will remember that forEvonne, perhaps more than any other player, tennis was above all else, agame. I should conclude by saying that one thing In the book which impressed megreatly was the amount of space that Evonne devotes to winning her twoWimbledon titles less than a dozen pages in a total of four hundred.
ILL: (.-UCt .' 1z 1 1 r ci u r4That, apart from a true reflection of her modesty, seems to be also areflection of the fullness and richness of her life.Of this book we can say, as her father Kenny Goolagong did on the occasionof her first Wimbledon win, " Beaut, just Beaut".To which we can surely add Read it, just read itl"Thank you.



TEL: 11. Oct. 93 8: 29 N0. OO1, P. 0J4llU
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING THE ADVANCED MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGIES CENTRE
EAST PERTH COLLEGE OF TAFE
PERTH WA
I am very pleased to be here this morning to open the Advanced Manufacturing
Technologies Centre.
The objective of this Centre is to provide Western Australia with a world class
vocational education and training centre one which will respond to the needs of
industry and which will facilitate this State's value added export oriented
industries. This is an ambitious objective.
It is particularly ambitious because vocational education is still, to some extent,
the " Cinderella" of the educational system, lacking the resources and prestige of
the universities, and often acting as an add-on to a generalist school-level
education. The roots of this neglect are deep, and go back to the nineteenth century. As
one eminent person said then,
universities were institutions designed * to instruct the youth of the colony in the
higher branches of education" whereas technical education existed " to instruct
the working classes in their particular business'.
This dismissal of vocational education, which sadly persists in some quarters,
has cost Australia dearly.
It has caused vocational education to become a second-best option for both
students and governments. 
TEL: 11. Uct. 93 6:' J ru. UUF..)/ 1V
2
Over the last 40 years one working lifetime the number of students at
university has increased more than eighteen fold while the number of students in
vocational education has risen by well under a third of that figure.
As a result, the Australian vocational preparatioii system in the early 1980S was
the second smallest in the OECD we had only one 16 or 17 year old in five In a
program, compared with seven In ten in some ccountries, and an OECD average
of one in two.
Not a great performance, you will agree.
And it is not as if students have been going to university instead. Less than one
third of students actually go directly to universitY.
The sad and alarming fact is that almost a quarler of students are seeking to go
directly into work without having undertaken gn4 vocational study.
It is these students who are most at risk of long.-term unemployment and who,
when they get work, will be trapped in low skilled jobs.
Jobs which will inevitably disappear with the inoxorable advance of technology.
I think that no-one would disagree that we haVE1 an obligation through our
education system to prepare young Australians for life and for the future.
We must create an education system that serve~ s individual needs, and by doing
so, serves the interests of Australia.
In the new world that our children are now inheriting, the nation's wealth will
depend more and more on the skills of our worldorce.
That is -precisely why the Commonwealth Government, in partnership with State
and Territory Governments, Is committed to expanding TAFE and enhancing its
prestige. It is why, in July 1992, we reached an historic agreement to establish a new
national vocational education and training syst!, m.
And a new Australian National Training Authority ( ANTA).
ANTA, which Is due to come into operation on. 1 January next year, will oversee
the growth and reform of the vocational trainln!) sector, and ensure that its
programs better meet the needs and priorities of industry. We will add to our
current outlays $ 720 million in growth funds for this purpose. 
TEL: 11. Uct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 06/ 10
3
In this sense, it is a first for Australia. It will bring together government, industry
and training providers to form a national vocational educational training system
with agreed objectives and priorities, assured funding arrangements, and
consistent national strategies.
ANTA will work towards closer interaction between industry and vocational
education and training providers, and will also improve the links between
schools, higher education and vocationai educat~ ion and training.
This is long overdue.
The same can be said for centres such as these.
Manufacturing Is one of the main wealth creating sectors in developed,
economically vibrant economies.
It is also one of the fastest growing segments of world trade, with significant
growth In high value-added goods.
Australia has taken the opportunity to increase Its share of this international
market.
There Is no doubt that we have made dramatic advances in recent years.
Achievements which surprise many Australians when they become aware of
them. In the last three years the volume of manufacturied exports has grown by nearly
two-thirds.
Exports of elaborately transformed manufactures have risen by 217 per cent
over the last decade.
And between 1983 and 1991 research and development personnel in Australian
industry experienced the second fastest growth among industrialised countries.
But there Is little scope to rest on our laurels.
We need to proceed apace with the improvement of the overall competitiveness
of our manufacturing sector and we can do so b~ y the development and use of
advanced manufacturing technologies, or AMT.
Centres such as this one will facilitate the increased adoption of AMT by
ensuring a supply of well trained manufacturing ':. echnologists who have a broad
range of appropriate skills rather than narrow trede-based training. 
TEL: 11. Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 07/ 10
01 4
They can be at the cutting edge of Australia's international export strategy. And
they need to be tor the Science and Engineering Council found last year that
the level of adoption of AMT by Australian manufacturing industry Is uneven and
generally lagging behind that in competitor nations.
This Centre will make a valuable contribution to assisting Western Australian
industry to take up and use advanced manufacturIng technology, and thereby
enhance the competitiveness of Australian manufacturing in general.
It will also raise the profile of vocational educatioin, and prove that TAFE is
meeting the challenges of the 1990s.
And there is no doubt that TAFE is doing so.
The results of the survey of TAFE students relef ised earlier this week, which
-shows that 87 per cent of students were satisfied with their courses, indicates
that TAFE Is doing a good job.
But we need to Improve it further, and let people know how good it really is.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to open the Australian Manufacturing
Technologies Centre. I congratulate all concerned with the building of the
Centre and wish students and staff all the best for the future.
PERTH 9 October 1993 



!~ q2
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
REMARKS FOR REPLY TO ADDRESS OF WELCOME
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING, NICOSIA
THURSDAY 21 OCTOBER 1993
President Clerides, Your Majesties, Excellencies, fellowi Heads of Government,
Ministers, Secretary-General, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to be invited tc join my colleagues in thanking
you, Mr President, for your welcome to this Commonwealth Heads of Government
meeting. I am happy to see many familiar faces as I look around this room. I met some of you,
fellow members of the South Pacific Forum, recently oil Nauru, the smallest of all the
Commonwealth's fifty members and associates.
I am also looking forward to meeting others over the nfiXt five days.
For a newcomer to these gatherings, the diversity of the~ group is the most striking
thing about it.
The members of the Commonwealth come from every continent and border every
ocean. We are large and small, developed and developing, a very representative
sample of the community of nations.
The Commonwealth gains strength from its diversity, bu-cause its differences co-exist
with important things we hold in common the principl,-s and practices of our law,
administration and education; a shared commitment to democracy; a language even if
often a second language in which we can conimunicatt. directly with one another.
In one important sense, an Australian Prime Minister fe,'-ls immediately at home in a
Commonwealth meeting. Australia's population today includes citizens who came
originally from each of the forty eight countries represeaited here.
Our rich multicultural society drawn from more than 140 nations is a great asset for
Australia, just as cultural diversity gives the Commonw! alth its own distinct and lively
identity. 
Mr President,
Australia like many countries has been going through a period of profound change.
We have been retooling our economy and reexamining ithe fundamentals of our society.
Our economy has been changing at an unprecedented rmte, moving from an inwardlooking
economy to one focused outwards.
We have moved from feeling somewhat remotely connected with our own region to a
commitment to economic, political and cultural engagement with our neighbours.
We have been debating the forms of our own constitution to have it reflect better our
national identity.
And just before I left Australia, my Government put in place the framework for historic
legislation which will provide greater justice for Australia's indigenous population by
recogni sing their original tenure of our land.
We have accepted that Aboriginal or native tradition and culture is a source of
Australian common law.
Australia is not alone in facing change.
Many of the countries represented here are undergoing economic and social changes of
similar magnitude. These changes reflect and respond to profound changes taking
place in the wider world.
The Commonwealth itself is not exempt from this process of change. Like every other
organisation, it needs constantly to re-examine itself to ensure that it is directing its
activities where they are most useful and deploying its resources where they are most
effective. It should not duplicate what others can do better, but u ie its distinctive advantages
creatively and well.
Mr President,
Some of the issues which we will discuss over the next five days will be new, some will
be old, some will come in different form.
One which is different is South Afica. The political change there is cause for great
satisfaction, despite continuing problems and obstacles.
The Commonwealth has had an important part to play in encouraging that change. We
need now to look for practical ways to help South Afiicans to entrench it. 
All of us hope that at our next meeting we will have tile pleasure -of welcoming the
H-ead of Government of a non-racial, democratic Souith Africa as a new member of the
Commonwealth.
I offer my congratulations to Mr Nelson Mandela and President De Klerk on the award
of the Nobel Peace Prize. It is a fitting reward, not just for them but for all those who
have had the courage to negotiate and work together in the interests of creating a new
South Africa.
Other issues will engage us at this meeting.
The challenges of development, remembering I hat more than half our
Commonwealth members qualify as least-deveoped or low income countries
The ways in which we can better use the talents of women and young people to
enrich our societies and economies
The ways we can strengthen the role of democratic institutions and practices,
as the Commonwealth has been successfu~ lly doing with its election monitoring.
One of the major challenges facing the world at present is the need to bring to a
successful conclusion the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations by the mid-December
deadline. Nothing would do more to increase world trade and expand the opportunities for
growth of all countries, developing and developed alik,.
It would mean a boost to the world economy of 213 billion US dollars a year.
The time is very short for us to prevent the Round's collapse.
Some " rich countries" still seem to believe that they cani avoid making difficult
concessions, but still reap the advantages of the Round.
I think they are completely wrong and are Riely to witar the opprobrium and
contumely of the whole world.
It is important that this meeting make every effort to examine what the Commonwealth
can do to help bring about an outcome from the Multilateral Trade Negotiations that
will benefit each of us, and the world at large.
Finally, Mr President, I want to say something about the special pleasure for an
Australian Prime Minister in being here in Cyprus.
More than 50,000 Australians have their family origins in Cyprus, giving Australia the
world's second-largest Cypriot community after this island.
Australian Cypriots have been an enormously energetic and creative community.
Among their contributions to Australian life, has been cne of my colleagues in the
Parliamentary Labor Party, Dr Andrew Theophanous, wvho left Cyprus at the age of
eight. 
4
Our meeting in this city, Mr President, is a reminder that the division of this island,
with all the human tragedy that has entailed, has continued for far too long.
Australian police, whom I met this morning, have beer! helping to keep the peace in
Cyprus since 1964. Their task should have ended long; ago.
We urge those who are not cooperating with the United Nations and its Secretary-
General in exploring a basis for settlement to enter intc constructive negotiations
forthwith. Thank you for your very warm welcome this morning. Like all of us here, I am
looking forward to five days of constructive deliberaticns as well as five days of
Cypriot hospitality. 



/ 7
PRIME MINISTER
COPY OF PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH NOTES
CHOGM EXECUTIVE SESSION
FRIDAY 22 OCTOBEF, 1993 
paech nok'o œ Ce c. utV
Sc'yior 22 o c\-j
CHOGM 1993
AGENDA ITE1 3 . IULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS
TRADE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE CONCLUDING PHASE
Heads of Delegation, delegates
Gratified to hear so many speakers expressing strong support for the
urgent completion of the Uruguay Round of Trade Negotiations
trade has always been the basis for economic growth and
development
Earlier this wxeek, the Cairns Group, led by Australia, and including
Malaysia, Canada and New Zealand aVgeed on a strongly-worded
communique which set out parameters for concluding the Round by
December and Ministers led by Senator Cook presented this to key
participants in Europe
Completion of the Uniguay Round negotiations is the single most
important task on the economic agenda for national governments
and the international trading community
No other action could do more to revive the hesitant world
economy.
After seven years, the negotiations face a real deadline by 15 December
only 55 days away
The Uruguay Round is not just a bilateral issue between the world's two
largest trading blocs
The Round outcome will encourage the integration of developing
countries into the international trading and financial systems of the
global economy
Recent World Bank/ OECD study, mentioned by John Major and others
yesterday, demonstrates that all countries have a stake in the Round 
potential gains for the world economy of USS213 billion by
2002 ( up to USS190 billion of this from liberalisation of
agricultural trade)
developing countries would obtain a direct share of these gains
over USS70 billion from the agriculture package and a
further USS8 billion from the liberalisation of
manufactures
And these estimates do not take into account the Round outcome on
services, the fastest growing area of wrld trade
These potential benefits for developing countries are at least
equivalent to the amount industrial countries annually transfer as
official aid ( around USS55 billion in 1991)
The Uruguay Round has been the mosl ambitious round of multilateral
trade negotiations it has engaged all 111 contracting parties of the GATT
developing countries have been more involved in the
negotiations than in any previous GATT Round in the hope of
obtaining improved access to markets
The outcome will cover sectors of interest to developing countries
such as agriculture, textiles and tropical products
multilateral liberalisation in the Uruguay Round will also remove
the bias against processed exports fiom developing countries
outcomes on intellectual proper. and investment measures will
ensure new technologies and investments are available to share
The result of the Uruguay Round should be a comprehensive,
balanced and coherent set of trade rules to meet the needs of a more
interdependent Nworld 
it should deliver significant cuts in the distortions to trade in
agriculture; reductions in tariff and non-tariff barriers to industrial
products, including textiles; and new agreements on services and
intellectual property, embodied in an overhauled legal and
institutional framework
Failure to conclude the Round risks unleashing protectionism and
unilateralism political will is needed to surmount rising populist protectionist
pressures and resist narrow interest groups in some of the world's
major economies
The Round was commenced covering the full range of interests of all
participants and it must be completed this way
reject suggestions of partial or interim solutions for the benefit of
some
Commonwealth countries have, in the past, expressed their strong support
for the Uruguay Round
it is time for us to say clearly tc the world that the Uruguay Round
must be concluded this year and it must be a balanced outcome.
We have an opportunity to put the Commonwealth's name to a separate
statement calling on all participants in the negotiations to show good
faith and stop using their self-interested concerns as an excuse for delay.
A substantive statement on this subject at this critical time, which had the
full support of this diverse group, could have a positive impact on the
negotiations Know extensive consultations have occurred amongst delegations here
over the past few days on the text of a possible statement
which should be in the strongest possible terms and be conveyed in
the clearest possible way to le2ders of the major countries.
National political expediency for some cannot be allowed to stand in
the way of a global result of benefit to all 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THREE HOUSES. GLENN MURCUTT BY E. M. FARRELLY
SYDNEY 3 NOVEMBER 1993
I am delighted to bc here today to launch this fascinating book by Elizabeth Farrelly
on the work of Glenn Murcutt.-
My delight is all the greater because the launch is taking place here at Tusculum,
which some or you may bc aware is one of my favourite buildings in Sydney.
You may also be aware that its architect, John Verge, is in my view one of the great
Australian architects. As is Glenn Murcutt, of course.
There is a happy convergence between the work of the two, and indeed with the
launch of the book today. For among his many outstanding commissions, Glenn was
responsible for the completion of the one remaining fragment of the John Verge villa
" Engehurst" in Ormond Street, Paddington.
And, as his biographer says, Glenn's solution to completing the fragment later served
as the model for the Rall-Fastaway house, one of the three which are the subject of
the present volume.
The timing of this book is very appropriate. It comes when Australians are concerned
as never before about the role of planning and development in this country. A role on
which Glenn Murcutt has always been most forthright.
I was interested to discover from this book that a perception of Glenn Murcutt as a
peculiarly Australian romantic in his approach to building design has cared him
headlines such as " The Outback Warrior" in the overseas press.
As another Australian with romantic inclinations who also on occasion attracts the
talents of foreign headline writers, I can sympathisc with him about the infinite
capacity of such people to be spectacularly wrong or their ability to go for the
superficial rather than the reasoned analysis.
Such an approach to her subject matter would be unimaginable in Elizabeth Farrelly's
case, and we are all the richer for it.
I on/ tn'A f f ' T Tr, c'AOKI ' C-171 1 
While this work will undoubtedly be a major contributor to a debate of continuing
importance for architects. Elizabeth has also provided the rest of us with a volume
which presents scrious issucs in a way which neither patronises or mystifies the lay
reader. And that is particularly important For thc issues which the architecture of Glenn
Murcutt throws up are ones that are ultimately the concern of all Australians.
The houses which are the subject matter of this book. the three iconic houses, as
Elizabeth describes them, are for many Australians, quintessentially Australian
houses. They are. houses which make a statement about thc sort of country we live in. To use
Glienn's own words, houses which arc his response to the genius of the place to a
land of incredible strcngth combined with unimaginable delicacy.
These three houses encourage us to think about where. we have come from and about
where we are going. They challenge us to contemplate the possibility ( if anarchitecture,
and, in wider terms, an approach to urban design, in which aesthetic and
functional considerations live in harmony.
More and more Australians are coming to realise the importance of urban design to
the attainment of the quality of lifc to which we aspire.
We are, I believe, coming to understand that what makes Australia such a privileged
place to live is in danger of being lost through poor planning through the imposition
or an alien schema, as Glenn Murcutt describes it.
And his remedy is spot on " The land appeals for care and we need to become friends
with the landscape and not be threatened by it."
I might add that we need to temper our approach to the development of our landscape
with an eye to the long term future, rather than exploit it as an easy source of
immediate profit. In terms of development, greed is never good.
This prescription is as applicable to the city fringe as it is to the city centre; as
relevant to the planning of development along our coastline as it is to the preservation
of our inland waterways.
Devclopment is not just a problem for the city or the bush, depending on where you
live. Its a matter for consideration wherever it occurs in Australia.
Recognising the dimensions of the issue sometimes appears to be the furthest thing
from the minds of those who should most be aware of it our planners and
developers. And even when they see a problem, at times we justifiably despair that
they will ever come close to finding an appropriate solution.
It is no secret that developers and planners are Glenn Murcutt's least favourite people.
Local authoritics, he says, are " so often stupid, absolutely stupid and unreasonable.
800' ON 9V': IT œ 6^ ON' 2 -131 
Our building regulations inventorise mediocrity and our councils administer and
police such conservatism."
To quote Elizabeth. " he laments the wholesale slaughter of our city by developers, but
sees this process as complete, describing Sydney city centre as a gagglc of rubbish..
junk and rubbish." He sees the countryside in terms of the " destruction of the flora
and the displacement of the fauna with the blessing, if not active collusion of our
subdivision regulations."
This is a dccply pessimistic picture. But one hard not to share at times.
While Glenn has generally chosen to respond to this situation by withdrawal from
working in the city and by refusal to participate in the design of large scale works
( although I'm delighted that this did not prevent him from working to redesign the
Customs H-ouse) this is not an option which I bclieve is availablc to the
Commonwealth Government.
On the contrary. I believe it is imperative that we become a lot more involved in these
issues, which have hitherto been the almost exclusive preserve of the other levels of
Government. This is why I am announcing today that I have established a Task Force on Urban
Design. In reviewing the quality of urban design in Australia, the Task Force will focus on
ways in which the day to day working, residential and recreational environment of
most Australians might be enhanced by more thoughtful attention to design.
Its not just a Matter of building new and impressive structures to amaze and delight
us, although there will be a place for that where and when appropriate. Who, for
example, could now imagine Sydney without the Opera House. whose anniversary we
are currently celebrating?
And its certainly not a matter of confecting facades, as Glenn describes it.
Nor is it just a matter of preserving our built heritage buildings such as Tusculum
important though that is.
Rather it's a matter of focussing on the total picture. Of looking at towns, suburbs,
regions even, and dctcrmining how they might work better, while at the samne time
preserving those unique characteristics with which their communities identify.
It's about developing on the community scale what for Glenn Murcutt has always
been crucial in his design of houses a scnsc of place.
It's about better relating whcre people work to where they live. It's about getting the
children to schools which they look forward to going to. It's about being able to go to
the shops without having a car or waiting for hours for public transport which may or
may not arrive. It's ahout having the right housing mix for the location, and proper
oo eon, . j onnflnm Oft-TT ( 9' AkJ cI 
health and recreational facilities. And allowing our elderly citizens to enjoy their
retirement. It's about making better use of existing infrastuceture, rather than a process of endless
urban sprawl.
We will probably see the usual knee jerk rection to this task force.
Don't bc, surprised if you hear talk about a new ) U RD. It will be a typical example
of the usc of misinformation by those who benefit from the status quo those who
feel that their immediate intere. sts are threatened
And don't be surprised if you hear us accused of making people conform to a boring
bureaucratic standard.
Nothing of course is further from our minds.
What we want to do is to put a bit of poetry into the souls of our town clerks-and shireengineers
to get our planners and architects to come up with ideas with a sense of
the miraculous, to focus on the wider questions of urban form rather than restricting
themselves to narrow interpretation of land use regulations.
Nor arc wc looking for a stultifying conformity of planning correctncss. As Elizabeth
points out in her book, for Glenn Murcutt there is no contradiction between
disparateness and harmony in his approach to designing houses " harmony is about
disparate sounds which when put together make a pleasing whole not monotony,
not sameness."
But there is a different point, not sameness or monotony but uniformity.
I have long held the view that grandeur of form most commonly or obviously
emerges from uniformity perhaps a variegated uniformity but a consistency.
It seems that these days this is the one thing we arc supposed to most forthrightly
eschew. Any sense of this other meaning of sameness, a sameness which involves
variations on a theme.
These days the inculcation is that individuality is everything that no whim or fancy
should be subjugated to a commnon purpose or even the greater glory of a greater
whole. The grandeur which emerges from a mountain view is-generally a commentary on its
uniformity or scale. As is say a coastal view with the juxtaposition of the sea with
its consistent mass meshing with the. uniformity of the beach or even a forest.
The same is true of architecture whether it is the massing on the canals of St
Petersburg, or the variegated uniformity of Bath or the disparate harmonies of the
pia7as of Venice, or the egg carton classicism of thc Greek Islands or even Paddo
and Carlton. 
In each case thc architect's whims and fancies have been played out lie the shadows
on a mountain rather than the re-definition of an excavation.
Architects too can profit spiritually in signing up to schemes greater than most are
individually capable of devising.
Working within an environment should be regarded as the done thing more often than
not-The Task Force, I am pleased to say. is composed of people with a bit of magic in
their makeup, and I thank them for donating their time to this task. Thecy are all busy
professionals in their varied fields. What brings them together is thcir common
interest in seeing uis do things better, and their conviction that we ought to be able to
do so through a process of education rather than by spending money.
I want in particailar to thank the Convenor or tihe Task Force, John Mant. who is
unstinting in his scrvice.
The Task Force should have a report ready for us early in the New Year, and-both
Brian H-owe, who has a crucial role in this matter, and I look rorward to recciving it.
in 1962, just after Glenn Murcutt graduated, one of the doyens of Australian
architccture, Robin Boyd, wrote that, in relation to architecture, the Australian public
appears ready to encourage new ideas for the first time In short, Australian
building may have grown up."
Since then, Glenn Murcutt has done Australia proud. His many awards both
domestically and internationally attest to his success. It is crucial that we learn from
him. That is why the book which is being launched today is so important.
Especially when it is written by a person who is such an eminent architectural
commentator, and an elected public official with such a strong commitment to the
betterment of our built environment.
Fspecially when it is written with such insight and clarity.
It gives me much pleasure to welcome the publication of Three Houses Glenn
Murcutt by Elizabeth Farrelly. I urge you all to read it.
Thank you..
' 80/ 80' d 8OO* ON 9V: TT 6* AON~ i: 131 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP AT THE
AUSTRALIAN FILM INSTITUTE AWARDS PRESENTATION, SYDNEY,
NOVEMBER 1993
1 am delighted to be here tonight with friends in film and television to
celebrate another year of spectacular achievement for the industry.
Another year of success and confidence.
As an Australian I'm very proud that we have a world class film and televlsion
Industry which produces world class material. And with It an event such as
the AFI awards to recognise it.
I know that over recent times, and particularly in the light of the nominations
for Best Film this year, we've had a bit of a debate about what an Australian
film looks like.
About whether you have to have a gum tree rather than a fir tree in it. Or
sun, sand and surf. And a little snow or in Vincent's case, a lot of snow.
About whether its got to be packed with people who are recognisably
Australian, and, If so, who is. About whether its still OK to do period pieces
I know that this is more than a matter of taste or fashion and I welcome the
debate. In fact, as you've probably noticed, I welcome most debates about our
cultural identity, and none more -so than in this industry which is so crucial to
our cultural development.
And that I think is the important point.
This Industry Is crucial to our cultural development.
We need it and we can't do without It. 
Other countries can, of course, produce films, indeed excellent films, for
Australians to see. And to learn from.
But that is a very different matter.
The simple fact is that no other country can produce Australian films. Or
Australian television programs.
Nor can they acquire the ability to do so. Its not something they can be
educated to or grow into. Its certainly not something they can buy or we can
sell. No-one else can give Australians ( or indeed the rest of the world) the
perspectives that our filmmakers do.
That is why we have to make sure that Australians don't lose creative control
over the things that help us and future generations to understand what it
means to be Australian.
Why we have to make sure that the revolution in communications technology
serves our cultural needs, rather than sit back and allow the globalisation of
the telecommunications market to set our cultural agenda for us.
Giobalisation can of course work in our favour too. It can create opportunities
for our fil-ms tobe seen more widely.
And as films such as Strictly Ballroom and the Heartbreak Kid, among others,
show, we can go on making, dare I say it, distinctly Australian films, which the
global market will pick up. Films which are not hung up on categorization or
ideological purity.
Australians must retain the capacity to show ourselves to the world and to tell
the world our stories the ones that Ae want to tell. The ones that we should
tell. But this does not preclude our filmmakers from exploring other parts of the
world. We don't have a monopoly on Insight into the human condition. There
are lots of things out there for us to learn. And to tell others about.
Nor should it preclude us from attracting other filmmakers to Australia to
make their films, or from pursuing new co-operative arrangements,
particularly within our region.
When I was in China earlier this year, I was fortunate to be able to visit the
Beijing Film Studio, and meet Chen Kalge. Filmmakers such as Chen are at
the front of liberal change in China. it would be good to see our industry
working cooperatively with them. 
We need such things to keep the industry flourishing. So we can provide
Australians and many others with what they clearly want to see.
While this Government will always be ready to assist in the process, It cannot
nor should not be responsible for maintaining the critical mass the industry
needs to survive.
But I can assure you that we will continue to be a strong supporter and keep
looking for new and better ways to help.
I congratulate the AFI and everyone Involved for the great show tonight. I
congratulate the ABC for televising it. Most of all, I congratulate the industry
for its successes over the last year and I look forward eagerly to the triumphs
that are sure to come.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRZSB BY THR PRIM MINSTIR, TER HON P J MATING NP
BUSNUSS ASIA CONVZTION, ADLAIDI, 8-9 NOVMWEDR 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address this
very well-timed Business Asia Conference.
It comes at the end of the Grand Prix, which has been an
opportunity for South Australia to demonrstrate its
capacity to successfully organise world class events and
its ability to provide world class products.
I am sure that no business visitor could be left with any
doubt that South Australia is a State which intends to
succeed. South Australia's commnitment to success in the export
market and particularly to markets in our regioh is
exemplified here today.
Today, half of South Australia's exports go to the Asia
Pacific region. I know the South Australian Government
is determined-to double its exports to Asia in the next
five years.
Of South Australia's ten most important export markets,
nine are in the Asia Pacific region.
The reasons for Australia's success in Asia go beyond the
simple fact that the Asian economies are growing.
Australia is uniquely positioned to benefit from economic
growth in Asia. And we have strong complementarities
with the dynamic Asian economies.
Australia's exports to East Asia now account for almost
per cent of our merchandise exports.
Last year, South East Asia was the fastest growing
regional market for our exports. Exports grew by 19 per
cent during the past year. And our manufactures exports
to South East Asia have grown annually at an average of
over 27 per cent in recent years. 290.9 
Over the lastA five years, Australian manuf actures exports
to the rapidly growing economnies of Singapore, Taiwan,
Hong Kong and Korea accounted for over 60 per cent of
Australia's growth in manufactured exports.
And demand will further increase as the economies of
Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia continue to grow and
diversify their imports.
The Asia Pacific region is forecast to continue to grow
by 7 per cent over the next two years.
As Asian economies are maturing their consumers are
growing in affluence. In Indonesia alone there is a
mniddle class of 15 million which represents a huge
potential market for Australia.
In 1990 there were 6 million people in South East Asia
with annual incomes above $ 5,000. In 2010 there will be
some 45 million.
So the opportunities are there and my Government has done
much to get the right macro-and micro-economic settings
for business in this country to capitalise on them.
There are now stronger signs of economic recovery and of
an improvement in business conditions and the" economic
outlook. There are also signs that improvements in business
conditions are being reflected in employment.
Economic growth was 3.3 per cent to the June quarter, the
seventh consecutive quarter of growth.
Last week's balance of payments numbers showed a
strengthening trend to higher exports.
Conditions are right for further strengthening in
business investment growth. Interest rates are at an
historically low level.,
The world economy is picking up and this will further
strengthen our own recovery.
Australian industry is beginning to turn the corner.
orders are picking up.
An important factor behind the recovery in manufacturing
productionl has been the growth in manufactured exports
over the past year.
I commnend the South Australian Government for actively
supporting its exporters with the establishment of the
Strategic Trade Development Scheme and the New Exporters
Challenge Scheme.
001 
3
To further assist South Australian companies in their
export endeavours my government this week announced an $ 8
million expansion to the Export Access program.
I am also pleased to note that Mike Rann, the South
Australian Minister for Business and Regional Development
is working with Shane Stone of the Northern Territory to
pursue business opportunities in ASEAN, and particularly
in Indonesia. As you know the Northern Territory has
important business connections with Eastern Indonesia.
This partnership sends an important signal that our
States are not always competing with each other in trade,
but can collaborate in the national interest. Any
assistance that States can offer to each other can only
assist the overall future development of Australia.
We all know of the strong manufacturing base in South
Australia. South Australian exports of manufactures products have
been a notable highlight in the South Australian economy
in recent years.
And for every million of extra manufactures exports,
it is estimated that around 10 to 12 new manufacturing
jobs are created and this does not include flow-on
benefits to jobs in other sectors.
The world's major car manufacturers have gained
confidence in Australia's ability to produce world class
and competitive vehicles and components.
In South Australia General Motors Holden's Automtive Ltd
invested some $ 150 million in the construction of a state
of the art paint facility over the last year. It is
expected that further investments of over $ 500 million
will be made over the next four years.
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd has also made significant
investments in recent years with $ 168 million being
invested in plant upgrade and a further $ 400 million
being invested in the development of new Magna/ Verada
cars due for release in 1997.
South Australia accounts for some 30 per cent of
Australia's automotive component exports.
There are some 20 automotive component manufacturing
companies in South Australia producing world class
products. Exports of automotive components totalled $ 150
million in 1992.
One example is Air international's South Australian
producti-on of automotive air conditioning systems, which
has gone from employing 20 people and annual sales of $ 1
million in 1991 to employing 160 people and sales in
excess of $ 100 million today. 2911 
4
But there is also an important agricultural base in South
Australia. South Australia has made a serious commiitment
to develop and exploit its reputation as a producer of
aclean foodo.
A major focus for the Conurnwealth and States is to
maintain the momentum of micro-economic reform. It is
these reforms which directly influence business costs and
the capacity of individual enterprises to compete
successfully.
We have already made a lot of progress. we have opened
up the economy, floated the exchange rate, implemented
reforms on the waterfront, in the rail, road transport,
aviation and telecoimmunications industries. we have
established an orderly program for reducing protection
for our industries, and improving the capacity of the
economy to respond to the challenges of the international
marketplace. There is much more to do and governments are currently
considering reforms to the structure of our electricity,
water and gas industries.
I am pleased to say that South Australia is one of two
states which has made definite moves toward this goal.
Because of the efforts of Premiers Arnold and Goss the
construction of a second Moomba-Sydney gas pipeline to
supply South Australian ethiie to the ICI petrochemical
plant at Botany, NSW, is likely to go -ahead.
One of Australia's great export success stories is wine.
It has been going on f or some years now, but none has
been more impressive than the past year. The record
export performance for the month of September of 16
million litres exceeded the level of exports for the
whole of 1985-86.
South Australian wine exporters, as the premium wine
producers in Australia, have been at the forefront of
that export drive. They have proved that with the right
product and the right marketing there's enormous
potential for Australian agriculture and horticulture.
Asia represents enormous potential for wine exports.
South Korea alone is now importing over a million litres
of Australian wine per annum.
This willingness to seek out overseas markets for quality
products, in many cases to markets in our own region, is
a model for all.
The submarine project is an example of government and
industry working together. When I spoke at the launching
ceremony of the Collins submarine in August I
congratulated the South Australian government for its
foresight in backing the project.
2912 
My Government recognises that it has a role to Play in
assisting Australian business change its approach and
move into the global marketplace.
Without that support and the support of South Australian
industry the project would never have achieved the
current high standards.
over 1000 new jobs have been created at the Australian
Submarine Corporation.
And several thousand other Australians have gained work
through sub-contracts. Here is an example of a
commi~ tment by a state government helping the growth not
only of their own state's industry, but also the growth
of Australia as a whole.
A project of the scope of the submarine project has
brought to Australia valuable technology transfer. In
addition, many Australian companies have refined
previously available technology.
The project is a catalyst for research and development,
design initiatives, improved production techniques, new
ways of testing and proving equipment, and so on.
The development of computer software to be used on board
the submnarine, the development of special tiles and the
successful reduction of noise in the pumps represent fine
examples of the development of previously available
technology. A number of those companies are South
Australian companies and represent potential exports for
Australia. On the broader front, my government's trade. policy
priorities are the successful conclusion to the Uruguay
Round and further development of APEC.
We strongly believe in maintaining and strengthening an
open, non-discriminatory multilateral trading system
based on the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade
-( GATT). This interest is shared by our Asian trading
partniers because they depend on access to international
markets. We are concerned that some countries : Are taking a
particularly parochial and defensive approach in the
negotiations on the Uruguay Round. X comprehensive,
balanced agreement covering all sectors would benefit not
only Australia, but all nations.
Such an agreement is the most important achievement that
nations can make to stimulate world . growth and
confidence. 2913 
My visit to Seattle to attend the APEC leaders meeting
next week will further underline the importance Australia
attaches to developments in our-region.
The Asia-Pacific region has emerged as the world's preeminent
economic region.
It has led the world in growth over the past two decades.
It now accounts for half the world's GDP and over half
the world's manufacturing production.
And the region's growth has been outward-looking. The
Asia-Pacific region is the fastest growing and most
integrated trading conriunity in the world.
The Asia-Pacific region accounts for some 40 per cent of
world trade. in 1992, 66 per cent of Asia-Pacific
exports stayed in the region. Trade within the region
now exceeds that of the European Commnunity.
And regional investment is growing even faster than
trade. In the period to 1997, 40 per cent of new global
investment demand will come from Asia.
The key challenge is to unlock the full economic
potential of the Asia-Pacific region. I believe Asia
Pacific Economic Co-operation APEC can play a
decisive role in meeting this challenge.
APEC shows great promise as a forum for promoting
reiional economic co-operation on a basis of open
regionalism. APEC is about removing impediments to doing
business in the Asia-Pacific region and increasing the
velocity of trade and investment for example by
harmonising standards.
I have made clear that the Government does not see APEC
as an alter-native to GATT but as a OGATT-plus' structure
which builds on GA!' outcomes. We do not have in mind
anything like the European Commiunity, which is a much
more formal, highly-structured and inward-looking
grouping. The informal Seattle meeting of APEC leaders in November
is a historic opportunity for the region. It will build
on the increasing economic integration of the APEC
economies and give expression to the growing sense of
commnunity in our region. And it will focus the world's
attention on the dynamism of Asia.
As I said recently in Jakarta, that meeting will be
supremely imporzant for the region. It will give APEC
leaders a chance to clear our collective minds about the
development of what is going to be a very significant
open regional grouping of countries.
2914 
The active participation of the private sectors of the
APEC economues including Australian business is
integral to the success of APEC's further development.
Governments can set in place structures such as APEC to
help create the right environment for trade and
investment. But ultimately it is for business to trade
and invest.
To assist me in preparing for the Seattle leaders meeting
: have established an APEC Business Consultative Panel.
wdhich met t3r the first timne last week. in the meeting I
heard first hand the views of a group of senior
Australian business people on their ideas for the way
ahead for APEC.
As I said to the panel members. there is no road-map for
APEC. Alt is imp~ ortant to get the business coummunity
involved. Through APEC Australia, as a well-regarded
member of the Asia-Pacific region, can help put in place
structures which encourage economic co-operation and
integration. APEC will have done its job if it achieves
this. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF NEW SBS PREMISES, SYDNEY
NOVEMBER 1993
It is a very great pleasure to be here this evening at the opening of the new
premises of the Special Broadcasting Service.
I'm delighted that SIBS has moved to Artarmon, alongside other networks. As
it should be, because for a long time it has been in the media mainstream.
In fact, for a long time it has been a groundbreaker a leader rather than a
follower. A service which has directed Australian eyes to looking both at this
country and its place in the world in a new way.
SBS has taught us truths about the Australian identity which not so long ago
we found it convenient to ignore truths which some people, whose names
probably spring easily to mind, still sadly seem unwilling or unable to come to
terms with.
It has also been an important weapon in the fight against the sporadic efforts
of a few to incite outbreaks of racism and cultural paranoia in this country, not
least by its ability to expose the absurdity and intellectual dishonesty of such
positions. This new building Is very appropriate for SBS. Not only does it provide a
home for the service which is consonant with its image elegant, economic
and efficient but it also provides a home for the complete service, bringing
radio and TV under the same roof for the first time.
That I think is important, because for some people, particularly those who
speak no language other than English, the glamour of SBS television makes
it easy to overlook the fact that radio is such a crucial part of the service. A
part which is in such demand that it will soon be going national.
In fact I understand that it will go national next year on Australia Day.
And that is most appropriate. 
It is fitting that it do so because SBSs strength is that it reaches into real
Australia. Multicultural Australia.
It does so by providing, principally through its radio service, an indispensable
source of information and advice to newly arrived migrants advice about
their rights, advice about their responsibilities. Information without which they
would have much less chance of participating fully as Australians in the
development of this country.
It also does so by giving Australians perspectives on issues which they
cannot get elsewhere. Not only through its news and documentary services,
which are second to none, but also through its commitment to valuing
creativity, to celebrating variety, to championing a view of Australia as a
country rich in human resources, and most of all, ideas.
How nice it is to see a media service which puts a premium on ideas and their
dissemination! Valuing ideas, I have to say, doesn't seem to be something which is
preoccupying a lot of other people in the media at the moment. Rather there
seems to be an obsession with the superficial and the trivial; with the cheap
headline rather than the in-depth analysis of issues which are of real concern
and importance.
We need the media to play its part in broadening our vision.
We need it to help educate Australia about issues which are vital to our
future, and which we need to resolve now. Issues which include
fundamentally our multicultural population about the competitive edge they
can give us in selling our products overseas, in opening up new markets in
the Asia Pacific region, where all the action is. Where Australia has to
perform. We need the media to promote Australia as a sophisticated and socially just
society. As a country with which other countries see the advantage of being
associated. As a country which takes itself seriously.
When did we last see a major newspaper story or TV feature from another
network which acknowledged that multicultural Australia was one of the great
success stories of this country's history? Or one which considered the
opportunities multiculturalism has opened up for us?
But if a critic on the most unsubstantial evidence attacks the principles and
working of multiculturalism it is front page news.
In truth, multiculturalism is a given a fact of our normal life. 
We need SBS, if only to remind us of this truth. And it is to the credit of the
people who have shaped SBS people like Nick Shehadie, like Brian Johns
and now Malcolm Long that they have been resolute in their commitment to
this principle.
Ladies and Gentlemen
This is a Government which is steadfastly committed to a multicultural
Australia. Human decency demands it. Economic efficiency and
commonsense requires it.
Our policies of cultural pluralism have been among the most innovative and
creative in the world. They have also been the hallmark of a decent and far
sighted society.
In a world often afflicted by ethnic and cultural tension, bitterness and
bloodshed, Australia stands among those few countries which have avoided
such conflicts.
And we have done so while celebrating rather than sacrificing our diversity.
While we need to guard against complacency, it is true to say that under the
umbrella of an overall commitment to the nation and its uniting values and
institutions, a society of great richness and variety and remarkable harmony
has evolved.
SIBS is both a symbol and a microcosm of that society.
It gives me great pleasure to formally open its new home. I congratulate all
associated with the design and building of these new premises and I wish all
associated with SBS a most successful future.
Thank you. 


11 November&nbsp;1993
We do not know this Australian's name and we never will. We do not know his rank or his battalion. We do not know where he was born, or precisely how and when he died.&nbsp;We do not know there in Australia he had made his home or when he left it for the battlefield of Europe. We do not know his age or his circumstances whether he was from the city or the bush; what occupation he left to become a soldier; what religion, if&nbsp;he had a religion; if he was married or single. We do not know who this Australian&nbsp;was.
Yet he has always been among those we have honoured. We know that he was one of&nbsp;the 45,000 Australians who died on the Western Front. One of the 416,000&nbsp;Australians who volunteered for service in the First World War. One of the 324,000&nbsp;Australians who served overseas in that war, and one of the 60,000 Australians who&nbsp;died on foreign soil. One of the 100,000 Australians who have died in wars this&nbsp;century.
He is all of them. And he is one of us.
This Australia and the Australia he knew are like foreign countries. The tide of events&nbsp;since he died has been so dramatic, so vast and all-consuming, a world has been&nbsp;created beyond the reach of his imagination.
He may have been one of those who believed the Great War would be an adventure&nbsp;too grand to miss. He may have felt that he would never live down the shame of not&nbsp;going. But the chances are that he went for no other reason than that he believed it&nbsp;was his duty the duty he owed his country and his King.
Because the Great War was a mad, brutal, awful struggle distinguished more often&nbsp;than not by military and political incompetence; because the waste of human life was&nbsp;so terrible that some said victory was scarcely discernible from defeat; and because the&nbsp;war which was supposed to end all wars in fact sowed the seeds of a second, even&nbsp;more terrible, war we might think that this Unknown Soldier died in vain.&nbsp;
But in honouring our war dead as we always have, we declare that this is not true.
For out of the war came a lesson which transcended the horror and tragedy and the&nbsp;inexcusable folly.
It was a lesson about ordinary people and the lesson was that they were not ordinary.
On all sides they were the heroes of that war: not the generals and the politicians, but&nbsp;the soldiers and sailors and nurses those who taught us to endure hardship, show&nbsp;courage, to be bold as well as resilient, to believe in ourselves, to stick together.
The Unknown Australian Soldier we inter today was one of those who by his deeds&nbsp;proved that real nobility and grandeur belongs not to empires and nations but to the&nbsp;people on whom they, in the last resort, always depend.
That is surely at the heart of the Anzac story, the Australian legend which emerged&nbsp;from the war. It is a legend not of sweeping military victories so much as triumphs&nbsp;against the odds, of courage and ingenuity in adversity. It is a legend of free and&nbsp;independent spirits whose discipline derived less from military formalities and&nbsp;customs than from the bonds of mateship and the demands of necessity.
It is a democratic tradition, the tradition in which Australians have gone to war ever&nbsp;since. The Unknown Australian is not interred here to glorify war over peace; or to assert a&nbsp;soldier's character above a civilian's; or one race or one nation or one religion above &nbsp;another; or men above women; or the war in which he fought and died above any&nbsp;other war; or of one generation above any that has or will come later.
The Unknown soldier honours the memory of all those men and women who laid&nbsp;down their lives for Australia.
His tomb is a reminder of what we have lost in war and what we have gained.
We have lost more than 100,000 lives, and with them all their love of this country and&nbsp;all their hope and energy.
We have gained a legend: a story of bravery and sacrifice and with it a deeper faith in&nbsp;ourselves and our democracy, and a deeper understanding of what it means to be&nbsp;Australian.
It is not too much to hope, therefore, that this Unknown Australian soldier might&nbsp;continue to serve his country he might enshrine a nation's love of peace and remind&nbsp;us that in the sacrifice of the men and women whose names are recorded here there is&nbsp;faith enough for all of us.



F PRIME MINISTER EMBARGOED UNTIL 7.3OPM EDST
ADDR36S BY TEX PRIME MXNISTZR, THE RON P J KEATINGQ, NP
MASO AN ADDRESS TO THE NlATIONf
When the High Court of Australia handed down the Mabo
judgement last year, it set our generation of Australians
a great challenge.
The Court's decision was unquestionably just.
It rejected a lie and acknowledged a truth.
The lie was terra nullius the convenient fiction that
Australia had been a land of no one.
The truth was native title the fact that the land had
once belonged to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians and that in some places a legal right to it
had survived the 200 years of European settlem~ ent.
So here was an issue the country could not ignore
either legally, or morally.
There was another form of title that had to become part
of the way we manage land in Australia.
-we owe it. to Aboriginal Australians, to all Australians,
we owe it to our fair and democratic traditions and to
future generations of Australians to recognise this
native title.
Tonight we are within reach of an enlightened, practical
response to Mabo. This week I will be proposing
legislationi to Parliament which meets both the spirit of
the H-igh Court's decision and Australia's
responsibilities and needs.
The Bill will necessarily be complex, but this evening
want to cut through the complexity to some of its simple
prin~ ciples.
tœ irst we need to get tile background straight.
over tens of thousands of years Aboriginal people had
developed a complex culture built on a profound
attachment to the land. 
The land nourished them spiritually a6 well as
materially. In the landscape and the life upon it they
saw evidence of the epoch of creation. Down through the
generations they passed on laws, customs, traditions and
ceremonies reflecting an obligation to care for the land
which went to the heart of their society.
Yet this most remarkable fact about Australia this
oldest continuous civilisation on earth has until now
been denied by Australian law.
The first European settlers declared that the land had
belonged to no-one and the indigenous Australians were
shunted aside, often with appalling brutality.
Much of the despair and degradation, conflict and
disease, and many of the problems which Aboriginal
Australians face today are a consequence of this
dispossess ion.
we have no need nor any use for guilt. This
generation cannot be held responsible for the cruelty ofprevious
generations.
But to ignore Mabo would be the final cruelty, and we
wg~ J4 be held responsible -by the world and by future
generations of Australians.
And they would be rih to hold us responsible.
There is much in Australian history of which we can be
tremendously proud for here in Australia we have
created a modern, tolerant, free, prosperous and
democratic society.
But we must understand that Australia's success has had a
price and surely the highest price has been paid by
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. They
often paid with their lives; with their rights, their
dignity and happiness; with their Land.
When the connection to the Jafld was broken their societ~ y
and economy was devastated.
But the connection was not broken everywhere and it is
a testament to the tenacity and resilience of Aboriginal
Australians that so much of the culture so much of the
Aboriginal story -has been passed on through generations
down to this day.
In 1982, Eddie Mabo and four others began action seeking
a legal declaratcion of their traditional land rights in
the Murray islands of the Torres Strait,
Tvn years later onL 3 June 1992, the High Court decided
that his people were entitled as against the whole of !: he 
world to possession and I emfphasise Opossessions
occupation, use and enjoyment of these lands.
Thus the High Court of Australia recognised native title
arnd Aboriginal custom and tradition as a source of
Australian common law.
The Court accepted that native title existed where two
fundamental conditions were met:
that their connection with the land had been
maintained, unbroken down through the years
and Lhat this title had not been overturned by any
action of a government to use the land or to give it
to somebody else.
It is probably only where there is so-called vacant Crown
Land, and in remote areas where traditional Aboriginal
life has not been disrupted, that native title exists.
Nevertheless, the high Court's decision posed manyquestions.
Who holds native title over the land, and where?
What rights does native title give to Aboriginal people
to control access to the land, and the use of it?
What rules should govern dealings in native title land,
and how can our vital land-based industries get on with
the business of developing our natural resources.
From the outset the Government recognised that these
uncertainties needed to be faced: the Court had made its
decision but there was not the body of administration and
law to give effect to it.
From late last year the Government has been developing a
framework for such a law and discussing the principles on
which it would be based the first of these principles
being justice for indigenous Australians.
What sort of country would we be how could we claim
respect for the law if, after the highest court in the
land has recognised native title, we denyi it?
How could we say that we stand for a fair go if we were
to wipe away a title to land which has lasted through
thousands of years of occupation of the continent and 200
years of European settlement-How could we explain it to
Aboriginal Australians? How could we explai. n it to the
wo rl1d?
To deny Lhe High Court decision, to deny native title in
Australian common law would deny justice: for it wo-ild
deny indigenous Australians rights to land enjoyed bry
other Australians. 
-M I
And the result could only be antagonism courtroom
battles and uncertainty in the commu'unity and in industry.
There is no decent or practical option but to recognise
the High Court decision and make it work.
Which brings me to the second of our objectives.
We must maintain a system of land management in Australia
which provides clear and predictable rules; security and
certainty for people who hold land; and a capacity for
dealings in land to proceed effectively.
So it must be an efficient system of land management, but
it must also be fair.
The legislation which we will introduce this week will
accomplish these objectives.
it will enable us to determine who has native title.
where, and the rights involved.
It will give Aboriginal people holding native title
the right to negotiate about actions affecting their
land a right, but not a veto.
it will permit governments to step in and decide, in
the final analysis, whether an important economic
project should proceed.
It will have the Conrnonwealth Goverrnent play its
proper role in setting clear rules and standards for
dealings which affect native title, but leave land
management to State and Territory governments if
they accept the national standards.
It will set up a system of courts and tribunals, in
effect as an umpire on matters of native title.
It will, to the extent practicable, preserve native
title from extinguishment, and where it is
extinguished, ensure just compensation, and...
It will provide security, so that no one who owns a
home, a farm, a mine, a tourist operation no one
need have concern about their tenure.
No one group will get all they want from this legislation
not Aboriginal people, not industry, not governments.
But the national interest will be served, and only the
Commonwealth legislation is capable of serving it.
As you know, Uit. e moment western Australia disagrees
with r-he Zomonwealth approach and is trying to ago it
alone." 
Going it alone is not the answer. Ultimately, the
Couunonwealth law will prevail over the Western Australian
legislation and in the meantime uncertainty will only
continue. There is only one way to provide certainty and that is
with a single, uniform, national approach, a fair and
predictable set of rules which everyone can work with.
This is not just my view, it is the view of seven out of
our eight States and Territories, all of whom believe
this legislation can work.
It is also the view of the head of the National Farmers,
Federation and, among other prominent Australians, senior
memnbers of the Opposition parties.
With the challenge of Mdbo effectively met -with native
title efficiently brought within our land management
system, we can move on.
We can move on to see Mabo as a tremendous opportunity -it
18.
An opportunity to right an historic wrong.
An opportunity to transcend the history of dispossession.
An opportunity to restore the age-old link between
Aboriginal land and culture.
An opportunity to heal a source of bitterness.
An opportunity to recognise Aboriginal culture as a
defining element of our nationhood and culture and to
make clear that this Australia, this modern, free and
tolerant Australia can be a secure and bountiful place
for all including the firs. t Australians.
CANSEP November 1993 



ADDRESS BY THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER
THE HON P J KEATING MP TO THE WORLD AFFAIRS COUNCIL ORANGE COUNTY,
CALIFORNIA, 17 NOVEMBER 1993
" PRESENT AT THE CREATION OF TE
ASIA-PACIFIC ECONOMIC COMMUNITY"
I am in Orange County taking advantage of your kind invitation to
me to speak because I am on my way to Seattle to attend a meeting
about which I can tell you little.
Mostly, when political leaders meet, our officials and diplomats
f rom the best of motives are anxious that the soil is well tilled
and the crop planted and fertilised and the political leaders are
allowed near only when the harvest is ripe for picking.
This time, President Clinton has organised a break-out.
Leaders of the APEC economies will be left in a room for a day,
without of ficial s, to discuss with each other visions for their own
countries and for the region into the 21st century.
I'm sure you are by now beginning to become familiar with the
acronym APEC, the organisation just four year. old, which brings
together the nations of North America and the Western Pacific.
It includes all six ASEAN countries in South East Asia, Australia
and New Zealand, China, Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the United
States and Canada. Mexico and Papua New Guinea are now expected to
join.
This leaders, meeting in Seattle is a remarkable event you will
forgive me if I use the word " unprecedented" once or twice today.
The people gathered, representing the most dynamic region in the
world, have never met as a group before. Indeed, until a couple of
years ago the idea of such a meeting would have been inconceivable.
It has all happened with extraordinary speed. Yet not before time.
One hundred years ago a US Secretary of State was proclaiming " the
Mediterranean is the ocean of the past; the Atlantic is the ocean
of the present and the Pacific is the ocean of the future."
At the turn of the 21st century, I think we can surely say that the
Pacific's time has arrived. For it is beyond question that the
Asia-Pacific economy is, as a recent analysis. concludes, " the
dominating fact of modern economic geography, the most striking
event in the economic history of the 21st century".
So when President Clinton proposed an informal APEC leaders meeting
to be held in Seattle, I was delighted.
3216~ 
It was a sign of the freshness of approach and willingness to
embrace a now vision which has characterised President Clinton's
agenda. it was a sign which Australia and other countries in the western
Pacific welcomed, of a new commitment to engage with the region
with which the United States does more than half its trade, and
where it will always have vital security interests.
So while it is very difficult to predict what will emerge from the
Seattle meeting, I am confident that we will look back on it as one
of the defining moments in the remarkable history of the
Asia-Pacific.
Ladies and Gentlemen
I have called this speech " Present at the Creation of the
Asia-Pacific Economic Community", but the title begs the question
of what a commuunity is.
Are we talking about an uppercase " C"-style Community, like the
familiar European one, complete with an uppercase " E"-style
Eurobureaucracy, and aggressive protectionism against the rest of
the world?
Let me make it quite clear that I, for one, an not.
But I am talking about something more than a random collection of
countries which trade with one another to their mutual benefit.
A community and I am now using a lowercase HC" is marked by the
comprehension of common, and enduring, interests.
Among the most important of those interests is the maintenance and
improvement of the economic conditions which lead to shared
prosperity. A community is marked not necessarily by a monoculture, as
Australians and Americans accustomed to diversity readily
understand, but by a sympathetic understanding of cultural
differences. And, I might say, by an awareness that in cultural
diversity there is immense dynamism.
A community is marked by a shared history and a history in which
points of contact and common endeavour are of greater interest than
the threads of isolated achievement.
And above all, perhaps, a community is distinguished by a shared
sense of possibility, shared goals, a shared sense of. the future.
That is what APEC can help do. It can develop something like this
in the diverse Asia-Pacific region.
And, in fact, in the economic area at least an Asia-Pacific 3217 
I3-
community has already emerged -unplanned, unstructured and
unheralded. In Seattle we will meet in a context which for the first time
obliges us to think about common problem and opportunities, and
how we may work together to underpin the extraordinary success of
the Asia-Pacific economic community.
This economic community is not something governments have brought
about by a process of formal agreement like the EEC, NAFTA or our
own agreement with our neighbour, New Zealand, the CER.
It is already happening spontaneously, based on a market which for
a decade has grown more rapidly than any other in the world, and
which is likely to continue to grow at twice the rats of Europe.
The two sides of the Pacific now form an integrated market of two
billion people, accounting for half the world's production and
nearly half the world's trade.
The economies of North America and the Western Pacific are actually
more closely integrated, without a regional trade agreement, than
are the economies of Europe or North America, with a regional trade
agreement.
That is, the APEC economies as a group have a higher proportion of
trade with each other than do the members of the EC or the members
of NAFTA.
Overall, the share of total exports of the APEC group to other
members of the group is 66 per cent.
In the EC, the comparable share is 61 per cent. In NAMT it is 42
per cent.
The European Community was created as a means of integrating the
economies of Europe, lowering tariffs and increasing trade.
By contrast the Asia-Pacific economic community is already highly
integrated, already successful, and already benefiting from four
decades of worldwide reductions in tariff protection.
Yet as the recent report of the APEC Eminent Persons Group pointed
out, 20 of the 24 members of the OECD increased their trade
protection during the 1980s. And after seven years of difficult
and often disheartening negotiations, the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round is less than a month away and there is still no assurance
whatever that we will get a worthwhile result. For the
increasingly open economies of our region, there is no higher
economic priority than an open and expanding world trading system.
Our weekend meeting is an occasion to ponder the significance and
the implications of what has already begun and what we can imagine
it to be.
3218 
I have no doubt that there are many things we can do as a group to
increase trade and prosperity and to help private business make the
most of the region'sa opportunities.
And I am sure that Americans arm thinking along these lines too.
As the Clinton administration says, if the US is to go about
expanding its trade, increasing its competitiveness, renewing its
global economic force, the Asia-Pacific region is the logical place
to look.
Californians are already well aware of the importance 0ñ f the
western Pacific it is the market for a little under half of your
state's exports.
Since the mid eighties the trend rate of growth of US exports to
the Western Pacific has been three times the rate of growth of
Western Pacific exports to the United States.
In less than a decade the portion of US exports which go to East
Asia has risen towards one third.
Not only is the Western Pacific market growing faster than others
for you it is also buying a higher proportion of the most
sophisticated US exports.
Today US exports of elaborately transformed manufactures to the
Western Pacific total over $ 230 billion, and they continue to grow
rapidly. Ladies and Gentlemen
This process of growth in the Western Pacific market has some very
interesting characteristics.
We see, for example, great changes in the structure of production
in the region; labour intensive manufacturing industries which
first went to Japan, moved to Korea and Taiwan, then to Hong Kong
and Singapore, and are now moving to Malaysia and Indonesia and
Thailand and the Philippines and on to the awakening industrial
giant of China.
As those industries leave countries with rising labour costs,
others move in capital intensive high tech industries or
knowledge intensive industries as we see now in Japan, and in Hong
Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and Korea, as well as in the United States,
Canada and Australia.
The result is rapidly rising living standards through the whole
region, which in turn changes the structure of demand and of
consumption. Incomes and wages in Japan may now be as high as they are in the
United States, and higher than in Australia. 3219 
Income per head in Hong Kong and Singapore is higher than it in in
Ireland, and as high in Taiwan as in Greece and Portugal. Wage
rates in manufacturing are higher in Taiwan and Korea than they are
In Portugal, and higher in Hong Kong than in Mexico. Indonesia now
has a middle class larger than the entire populations of some small
wealthy countries.
None of this has involved sacrificing the openness and
international isation of the regional economies, or the trend to
more and more liberalised markets.
China's most rapidly growing businesses, for example, are almost
always in the private economy.
Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand have all been growing rapidly in
recent years because they have liberalised investment rules, and
begun to deregulate their economies.
We are familiar with similar stories in Korea and Hong Kong and
Japan. By any standard this growth is impressive. And we are still in the
early stages of the region's development.
China is still only at the beginning of a transition that could
well make it the world's second biggest economy sometime early in
the new century.
Indonesia, with its 190 million people, vast resources, stable
government and enlightened economic policies has enormous
potential. And the countries already achieving middle incomes, like Korea and
Singapore, will within a very few years be joining the rich
countries. Ladies and Gentlemen
As I have indicated, the region presents great challenges and great
possibilities. A reasonable estimate of what Western Pacific economies will need
to spend over the next decade in ports, roads, bridges and
utilities to support their continuing development is at least one
trillion US dollars.
McKinsey and Company tell us that the additional power capacity
required in Asia by the year 2000 is more than 350 gigawatts, with
a capital cost for generation alone exceeding $ U3400 billion. And
there are similar requirements in hydrocarbons.
Development on this scale will have a dramatic impact on the
regional environment. So we will have to use the advances of
technology and science to minimise the adverse environmental
3220 
consequences of rising material living standards.
If these are the challenges, the opportunities are there to build
the roads and ports and pipelines; to devise and implement the
technologies for a cleaner environment; to seize the opportunities
for trade and investment.
And while many of the responses will be local or national, they
will be much more effective if we aiso have a well-designed
regional organisation able to help governments remove impediments.
APEC can be that organisation.
Ladies and Gentlemen
As I said earlier, the growth that has taken place in the APEc
community has been spontaneous growth.
It has had no regional safety net of understandings and agreed
processes spread beneath it, no mechanism for encouraging
agreement, or for facilitating trade growth by removing
impediments.
The more sceptical business people among you may say that, given
the growth that has taken place, we obviously don't need a
framework for the region. But I am convinced that as time goes by
this will be less and less true.
It is already the case that the trade problems between North
America and the Western Pacific could sometimes benefit from a
discussions among all the parties, * rather than bilateral
discussions between the United States and the individual countries
of East Asia.
We can benefit, too, from the adoption of common or compatible
product and occupational standards, simpler and more uniform
customs procedures.
Earlier this year I proposed an agenda of discussions along these
lines.
Agreement on rules like these would facilitate trade and economic
integration. Some of these discussions are already taking place among APEC
officials, and part of the purpose of the Leaders, Meeting is to
give them more political weight.
Most of the work being undertaken in APEC is not being successfully
done in other international institutions like the GATT. And while
it doesn't discriminate against countries outside our group, the
benefit will be mostly within. They are what I call " GATT-plus"
initiatives. The area of product and industry standards Is particularly 3221. 
important. A feaw weeks ago I convened a meeting of business people in our
cabinet room to discuss APEC and what business hoped could be
achieved within it. And one of the things we talked about was the
impediments to exports caused by different product requirements and
standards in the f if teen nations of APEC.
In many product areas where large sellers and buyers have long-term
relationships, standards and product descriptions are not a
problem. But in other areas especially in manufactured food exports, in
pharmaceuticals and in telecommunications conflicting standards
and requirements are a significant difficulty.
One manufacturer told us that the standards requirements in
different markets added 5 to 10 per cent to the initial costs of
entering an export market.
The whole-problem is made worse because even where we have similar
standards, one country's standards authority often doesn't accept
the testing results of another's, and the same test has to be
replicated right through the region. There is not much sense in
that. Standards are also relevant in the finance industry, which I
believe will be one of the great growth markets in the region as
increasing wealth creates the demand for sophisticated funds
management. Here the problem is not so much too many standards, as
not enough.
We need to have clearer legal and administrative structures so that
funds can be reliably and prudently managed. Australia is eager to
play a part, through our legal firms and particularly through the
expertise of our Securities commission.
Another area we could look at is standards and descriptions in the
increasingly internationalised education market. I am told for
example that we do not have reliable common descriptions of courses
and standards in vocational education in the region a shortcoming
we ought to be able to remedy.
These are issues on which we can engage and produce results. We
don't pretend that harmonisation of standards will be easy, or that
once achieved it will revolutionise regional trade and welfare.
But it will get us talking, and if we are successful it will make
a discernible difference.
Economic research commissioned recently by the Australian Trade
Minister, Peter Cook, suggests that the value of removing
impediments like conflicting standards in the Asia-Pacific region
may be just as great as in Western Europe.
3222 
f
The reforms summarised in Europe 92 were over time expected to
yield an increase in European GDP of around 3 per cent.
Our research suggests that a program of standards harmouisation in
APEC would yield at least MtJ400 billion boost to regional output
an increase bigger than the annual output of all but tour of the
fifteen APEC economies.
I am convinced that everything that APEC does wiil be done stronger
and more effectively it it draws regional business into its work
I think we should have business people on our standards committee.
for example, and energy committees and customs committees and so
on. The private sector has created the Asia-Pacific economic community,
and private business is best placed to know the impediments which
governments should remove.
There may veil be other things we can do in coming years.
There is little doubt, for example, that some of the energy needs
of the western Pacific could be most efficiently met through a
network of natural gas pipelines that, in the most ambitious form,
might extend from the north west of Australia to Japan. But no
such network could be imagined, let alone built, without a very
high degree of cooperation among governments in the region.
The same goes for connecting up the separate power generation and
transmission systems of the Western Pacific another logical and
efficient solution to energy problems, but one which would need a
degree of cooperation between governments which we are only likely
to develop through APEC.
At some point we may wish to talk about a regional steel agreement,
or a regional electronics agreement or a regional food agreement or
a regional services agreement.
But on these major trade issues the consensus within the group is
that we should await the outcome of the Uruguay Round of GATT and
then see what is left over which could be usefully advanced on a
regional basis.
If the Uruguay Round fails or the outcome is completely
unsatisfactory, perhaps we might think about some kind of regional
round which picks up the Geneva agenda and attempts to do for the
Asia-Pacific, for half of the world economy, what the GATT will
have failed to do for the whole world economy.
Some ideas on these issues were presented by the APEC Eminent
Persons Group report chaired by Washington economist Fred Bergstel.
In the longer term, the Eminent Persons Group report calls for free
trade in the region a goal to which Australia heartily
subscribes. But just how to get there and by what time is a 3223 
subject which in my view it is too early to determine.
What really matters now is that f or the f irst time the governments
of these rapidly integrating economies are talking about comisn
problems and about their relationship to each other.
Secretary Bentsen has proposed regular meetings of APEC Finance
Ministers. I think that is a good idea. Although our economies
are different in scale and historical experience, the problem we
are facing are increasingly similar. Each of us has much to learn
from each other.
Ladies and Gentlemen
As I said at the beginning, for Australia's part, we are already
committed to the Asia-Pacific region. During the last decade we
have internationalised our economy through financial deregulation
and tariff cuts.
Since we began the reforms we have seen our exports trebled, and
increase as a proportion of GNP from 13 per cent to 20 per cent.
We have seen manufacturing exports rapidly increase, so that they
are now consistently stronger than the rural exports for which we
are still better known.
And we have seen the proportion of our exports to East Asia
increase from under half of the total towards two third@.
Australia now sends more of its exports to Asia than does Japan.
For us, there is no turning back just as I believe that for the
United States there is now no turning back.
Ladies and Gentlemen
The impact APEC can have goes well beyond its economic potential.
AFEC's development will have a lasting -strategic impact on the
Asia-Pacific region.
I do not mean by this that APEC itself has or should develop a
political or security dimension. other forums exist to fill those
roles. But I have no doubt that APEC has the potential to change quite
wfuonrdlda meinnttaelrlayc tt hew iwthay eianc hw hiocthh ert hea ncdo unthter iedse gorfe et hitos pwarhtic ho f thtehye
understand each other's interests. And that, I am convinced, will
have consequences well beyond the economic field.
The process will be quicker and deeper if, as I hope, this first
meeting in Seattle leads to a regular pattern of informal leaders'
meetings, with all the opportunities that would open up for closer
personal contact and understanding among the leaders of the APEC
3224 
economies. By bringing the United States and Japan the world's two largest
economies and the emergi. ng giant of China into a framework of
multilateral economic cooperation, APEC will provide all the
countries of Asia and the Pacific with the reassurance-that during
a period of profound change in the world, this region will continue
to be characterised by interdependence and engagement.
Half a century ago a distinguished group of Americans around
President Truman were present at the creation of the post war order
an order based on superpower rivalry between the Soviet Union and
the United States, on the creation of a united Western Europe, and
the rebuilding of Japan and Germany as prosperous, free countries.
Today I believe we are present at the creation of quite another
configuration in world af fairs one which succeeds the cold war,
which is directed to increasing welfare through economic
prosperity, the Asia-Pacific economic community.
Thank you. 



EMBARGOED: Against Delivery, 8pm
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, HP
NATIONAL TR~ ADE AND INVESTMENT OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
MBLDOURNE, 24 NOVE10ER, 1993
Some of you here will have heard these opening remarks
before, many of you will know the truth of Lhem.
But I would like everyone to know and chat is enough
to warrant repeating them once more.
The imaege of Australia as an extended sheep run and
quarry is false.
The idea that Australians5 enjoy the comforts of
sophisticated contemporary life principally through the
proceeds of pastoralism and mining is false.
The idea that we cannot compete with the world in the
business of making things and selling them at the
sophisticated end of the international market is false.
We hear an echo of these ideas from time to time, but
they are curiosities not realities.
They linger because they were sufficiently true for lonig
enough to leave a residue.
Only a decade ago the suggestion that we Might-Lrade
competitively in manufactured goods and services, as well
as in minerals, energy and primary products that we
might be able to create and SuSLain a more diverse,
creative dnd sophisLicated economy was scarcely
entertained. This National Trade and Investment Outlook Conference is
one indication among many of how much that way of
thinking has changed.
And how much the reality has changed. 
Now we know that the only way we can maintain and improve
our standard of living, create employment and reduce
unemployment, and share in the wealth of a'rapidly
changing world, is by means of a diverse, flexible,
creative, operi and sophisticated economy.
The Australian Government knows this, most Australian
companies know this, most Australian workers know it.
indeed there are few countries perhaps none where the
process-of economic education has been so rapid and so
general as it has been in Australia in the past decade.
Not that this evening we shouldn't repeat some of the
injunctions once more; exports mean employment and
prosperity. Exports mean growth.
Exports mean a share of the excitement, a share of the
good jobs and the good life in the years ahead.
Exports are what it is all about.
We know how far the frontiers of trade have widened. We
are very much aware that we live in the fastest growing
region in the worl. d the Asia-Pacific region which now
accounts for about 80 per cent of our exports.
We know how rich is the potential.
How demanding the challenges.
We also know how deep our resources run, and that what we
need principally is the resolve and ingenuity and that,
I presume, is the business of this conference.
Those of you who have heard me say these things before
and, it's true, I have been saying them for a decade
will quite possibly have also heard some of these figures
I am about to quote.
I confess to this as well in the-past twelve ionths or
so, as the pattern has emerged, I have not been backward
in describing it.
And I see no reason to make tonight an exception.
Because I wani. to demonstrate that more than our thinking
has changed the reality has changed too.
Australian exporis as a percentage of GDP have grown from
13 percent a decade ago to 20 percent today.
Today exporLs of manufactures now exceed exports of rural
products aiid minerals and fuiels.
As I said, what. remains of the old image of Australia as
a farm or a mine may now be jettisoned for good. 
A decade ago, in 1982, exports accounted for 14 per cent
of sales by Aust. ralia's manufacturing sector.
Today the figure is 24 per cent.
in other words, almost one quarter of sales earnings by
Australian ianufacLurers came from overseas.
Manufactured exports increased by an average of 12.5
percent a year between 1982 and 1992 more than four
times faster than growth in agricultural exports and
slightly faster than growth in mining exports.
in the fastest growing component of world trade
services our exports have grown threefold since 1983
and now account for almost a quarter of our total
exports. This conference, then, takes place within a context of
dramatic change in the structure-and direction of the
Australian economy and a parallel change in Australian
consciousness. A change in the outlook of Australian business and
industry, Australian workers and Australian governments.
All of them now take it as given that we can and mus
export and I don't know anyone who has credibly pointed
to the limits of our potential to do so.
Of course, the outstanding fact in any consideration of
Australia's trade and investment potential is our
location in the Asia-Pacific.
We live in the mosL dynamic region in the world and that
gives us* the greatest opporLuflity we have ever had.
There is no doubt we have the resources to succeed, and
not only in the ' traditional areas of minerals and energy
and agriculture.
There is no question about our capacity for technological
invention and innovation.
This country develops and produces world class products
at the forefront of medicine, science and technology in
the field of microsurgery, IVF, the cardiac pacemaker,
plant genetic*.
Australian-made h ' igh-speed ferries ply their way through
European waters; Australiani-made engines and automotive
components are found in European cars; Australian
software manages some of the most advanced airports in
the world and the Swiss Stock Exchange.
We have a highly educated and skilled workforce. The
Goverrnent has made education and training an absolute
policy priority. N 
We have raised the number of young Australians
completing secondary school from 3 in 10 to 8 in
A higher proportion of Australians leaving school
now enter university than in Germany, Japan or the
United Kingdom.
In AuStralia today over 40 different languages are
taught in our schools the Federal Goverrnment
spends about $ 22 million a year on Asian language
education and studies.
We are making training more responsive to industry,
increasing capacity in our training institutions, and
promoting the relevance and quality of that training.
We have the human and material resources. We have the
awareness and motivation.
The task is to clear the way for business to exert its
genius and muscle.
I think it can be safely said that in the past 10 years
no Government has done more to both raise awareness of
the economic imperatives arid to make the practical
changes necessary to meet them.
We have opened up the economy, floated the exchange rate,
reformed the waterfront, rail and road transportation,
aviation and telecommunications.
We have established an orderly and manifestly effective
program for reducing tariff protection, and improving the
capacity of the economy to respond to the challenges of
the international marketplace.
We have introduced industrial relations reforms which
will increase labour market flexibility and productivity
growth by widening the spread of enterprise bargaining.
The fruits of these reforms should now combine with other
favourable conditions to-attract investment and growth.
Interest rates are now at historically low levels.
Inflation is low and under control.
We are seeing solid productivity-growth.
In addition, the recent business tax initiatives have
ensured that the competitiveness of our system is on a
par with comparable OECD countries; and the reduction in
Australia's corporate tax rate to 33 per cent makes it
competitive with most of our tLading partners. 
Partly through Government encouragement, growth in
research and development has been the second highest in
the OECD, and Australia now employs more research and
development Personnel than most counLrie5 in our region.
we have introduced a development allowance, a general
investrnenL allowance, a substantial acceleration of
depreciation provisions and concessionally taxed pooled
development funds.
The Australian economy is now around 27 per cent more
internationally competitive than 10 years ago.
it is a more diverse, more flexible and much stronger
economyr. Despite subdued world trading conditions, Australian
export earnings have reached record levels.
An export culture which we have developed in the last few
years is now growing new small to medium sized businesses
whose entire reason for being is export.
It is high value-added products they export, and more
oftLen than not it is to the ASia-Pacific they go. Indeed
these companies have been instrumental in achieving
average annual growth of 15 per cent in our exports of
sophist icated mariufacLures.
Australia's advantages have been recognised by a growing
number of multinational companies who have selected
Australia as a base for activities in the Asia-Pacific
region. Lexmark, Cathay Pacific and Tandem Computers incorporated
to name a few.
We encourage the establishment of regional headquarters
in Australia.
My Government is willing to be responsive in addressing
issues impacting on companies' location decisions.
The Australian government takes the view that that its
principal role is to create an environment in which
business can be flourish in which established
businesses can grew and new ones be born.
But. we remain a governxnent -which also believes in working
W11 industry: to open doors and build new relduionships.
We are assisting exporLers. In the telecommunications
area, for example, the Government has established a joint
body to ensure closer collaboration between the industry
and Government in their export efforts. 
Earlier this year, the Government launched a processed
food export drive, one of the largest and mostcomprehensive
single campaigns of its kind aimed at
tapping the quality of Australia's food industries.
Australia is an extremely efficient agricultural
producer, but there is enormous scope to develop the
industry further and exploit the rapidly expanding market
for high quality clean food.
My Government has also recognised that enormous
opportunities can be created by tapping into the
potential lying in the skills and abilities of those many
Australians who have come from oLher countries and retain
personal and cultural ties with their homelands.
The continued growth and stability of the APEC region arid
its continuing integration is crucial. to Australia's
expansion and prosperity.
This is particularly true given the disappointing failure
of the US and the EC in their most recent meetings to
produce a breakthrough on the market access issues
necessary to move the Uruguay Round to conclusion in the
middle of next month.
Over the nexL two years increased exporcs to APEC mernberb
will create more than 70,000 new jobs in AuStralia. good
skilled jobs with good wages and a good future.
Over the next two years increased exports to APEC members
will account for around a third of our total increase in
AusLvalian production.
At the end of those two years Australian exports Lo APEC
will account for around 15 per cent of our total output
of all we do, all we make, all we sell.
Sixty six billion dollars worth of exports to Lhe most
dynamic and the most rapidly growing region of the world.
It is already the case that APEC has a higher degree of
trade integration than the EC.
just on two thirds of our exports by APEC economies are
to other APEC economies.
I have just returned from Seattle where leaders from the
Asia-Pacific region met to discu. ss ways of working more
closely to assist the free flow of goods and services.
I went to Seattle not knowing, as I to~ d an audience in
California, what exactly would happen when fourteen Asia-
Pacific leaders, with no staff and no formal agenda, got
together on Bl~ ake Island in Puget Sound. 
It was the first meeting of its kind and it no easy thing
to predict the interaction of such different people, from
such different countries.
But the result was I thought very powerful evidence that
the leaders of the, Asia-Pacific economic community are
developing a stronger and stronger sense of the
importance of things which we can do together to advance
the prosperity of the region.
We came away from that meeting with some substantive
understandings. we agreed to ask our officials to get to work on an
investment code for the region, which would allow us to
define some common approaches to the vast movements of
funds, technology, and techniques which are proceeding in
every direction in the region, and which ar'e doing so
much to transform it in ways we are only beginning to
comprehend
We agreed to greatly increase the importance of businessin
the APEC process by creating a council composed of two
business leaders from each country.
Its job will be to suggest ways APEC can help business in
trade and investment, to become engaged in the work
program of officials, and to urge us on to do whatever
governments can do in concert to enhance regional
prosperity. We also agreed that harmonising product standards was a
worthwhile goal for APEC, and endorsed the work of our
ministers in agreeing to a trade and investment framework
document which formalises the APEC structure.
We also agreed that harmonising product standards was a
worthwhile goal for APEC, and endorsed the work of our
ministers in agreeing to a trade and investment framework
document which formalises the APEC structure.
We agreed that finance ministers would meet early next
year to commence an exchange of information-and views
about the regional economy, and the lessons we can share
in tAcroeconomic policy making.
The most important of our agreements was to meet again
next year in Indonesia.
This means that the whole work agenda of APEC officials,
the whole series of meetings on customs, standards
harinonisation, investment rules and on the regional
economy suddenly takes on a new significance, a new
weight. 
For the first time the results of all this work will
ultirnaLely come under the scrutiny of leaders, and roLr
that reason it will have a little more urgency, a little
imore consequence.
So the formal outcomes of the Seattle meeting were
important, but I think the informal outcome was much more
importanlt. This outcome was simply the chemistry of the meeting
the excellence of the personal rapport which was present
in this first ever meeting of Asia-Pacific leaders.
it is a remarkable thing that in this age of faxes and
telephone calls, of instant electronic communication,
face Lo face mectings still matter.
But in my experience they do they matter tremendously.
We didn't create a new community in SeaLLle.
Instead, wc begjan to think of ourselves as the community_
we have already become. 



PRIME MINISTER
* PLEASE CUCK AGAINST DELIVZRY
SPEECH By THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
THU 1993 EXPORT AWARDS, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
NOVEMBER 1993
The growth in Australian exports constitutes one of the
more remarkable chapters in our history.
Laconic, sceptical self-effacing nation that we are, we
tend to play it all down as it it is something that is
happening to us, rather than something we are making
happen. in due course, no doubt Australians will recognise that
this was a remarkable generation a generation of
exporters who might reasonably be numbered among the
pioneers of modern Australia.
But Irn inclined not to wait that long.
I think that our efforts will be helped by building a
contentpor-ary understanding of the importance of what we
are doing the need for it, and the success we are
having. That is why these awards are so important, and why the
organisers deserve great credit for staging them.
These awards acknowledge some of the outstanding
achievers in Australia's export drive and this is only
proper because their efforts are a major contribution to
the nation.
It's particularly significant to me that the cultural
industry features prominently at these awards tonight.
I've alway* strongly held the view that our commercial
development has to go hand in hand with our cultural
d6eve1opniiut that a society which values creativity and
innovation, a society which is confident in its cultural
identity is a society which produces better quality
products for its markets. 
In this sense having an interest in art and design is not
an elitist abstraction it is fundamental to our broader
trade push.
The 30 finalists here tonight have contributed no less
than $ 1.6 billion to the nation's economy, and in doing
that they have contributed jobs opportunities for other
industries, improved living standards, a more prominent
and creative role for Australia in the world, a more
active place in the Asia -' Pacific region, a more secure
future for generations of Australians to come.
This is not to overclaim.
These are basic facts about contemporary Australia as
basic as the figures which describe Australia's export
achievements in the past few years.
In the last decade, exports have doubled.
They have grown from 13 per cent of GDP to 20 per cent.
Exports of manufactures have trebled and now exceed those
for rural products and minerals and fuels.
In the past six years exports of EThs have grown at an
average rate of 19 per cent per annum and nearly trebled
in value.
Exports of services have grown at 7 per cent a year and
now account for 20 per cent of total exports.
And the proportion of exports going to North and South-'*-
East Asia continues to rise and now accounts for 60 per
cent of all Australian exports.
You see why I say this is a generation pioneering the new
Australia. It is not something that is being done to us it is
something we are doing for ourselves.
As a government we began a decade ago to create the
conditions in which Australia could become a modern
manufacturing nation able to compete with the best in the
world. we did it because we felt that to fail would cost nothing
less than Australia's future to fail would mean
Australia joining the ranks of those benighted conmmoditydependent
countries.
I won't take you through the steps, but what we did and
what we continue to do has helped create the environment
in which businesses of all sizes are now manufacturing
and exporting, and in which each year more companies are
born Qniy to manufacture and export or provide services
for export. 
This is not to claim all the credit for the government.
I must say that it gives me some satisfaction to see how
the challenge has been taken up, and how now we are
seeing the rewards for these decisions in the changing
shape of the Australian economy.
And I also must say that absolute necessity for the
changes we have made has never been so clear we need
only look at the trade figures and ask ourselves, with
commodity prices as they are, where would we now be
without the shift to manufactured and service exports?
Where would be had we not recognised the chance in Asia,
that thai was where our future lay?
Where would be had we not decided that Australia could
reinvent itself that Australians had enough genius and
enough faith in themselves to change?
In the end that is where the credit properly goes to
the people of Australia who were prepared to take on the
change and wear the hardships which change often
involves. It goes to the business people and trade unionists who
found cooperative ways of working.
It goes to the farmers and manufacturers and scientists
who found new products and new ways of producing them.
In the end the credit goes to those who saw in the
imperative to export a great challenge and a great
opportunity. The Australian Export Awards honour all these peopl * e who
did not wait for something to happen 12 them but went out
and made something happen = Q them.
That is why we can talk of a generation of exporters
they have it as their ambition and they are translating
that ambition into success, not only for themselves but
for their country.
of course, we all hope that these awards also encourage
others to enter the new world of exporting.
During the 1980s, 30 new companies a year joined the
ranks of emerging exporters.
it doesnt take much imagination to get an idea of the
benefits that would flow if this number were doubled.
Now I have no need to tell this audience what it takes to
be a succesuful exporter. 
Let me instead quote one example to illustrate that once
we know what is reqjuired and have no fear of the global
market place, there is really no limit to the potential.
We have always been considered uncompetitive in the area
of textiles, clothing and footwear, yet last year exports
in this area rose by $ 534 million, a 21 per cent increase
on the previous year and tonight we have among the
finalists a representative of the i1CF industry.
This is not an occasion for me to tell you all. the
reasons why the climate is right for building on these
successes. Let me say only that we have never been so
internationally competitive as we are now and we will be
more competitive in the future.
I think you know that the Government remains determined
to do all it can to make the local environment favourable
and open to suggestions about how to make it more so.
What I want to say in the remainder of the time at my
disposal concerns the internatipnal environment.
I imagine there is nobody here who fails to recognise the
absolute importance of a successful conclusion to the
Uruguay Round of the GATT.
But sometimes it helps to repeat yourself.
And sometimes it helps to spell it out in figures; a
successful outcome in a fortnight's time is likely to
boost Australian exports by $ 2.5 billion per annum by the
year 2002.
A successful conclusion will enable Australia to maximise
its commercial advantage and secure new trading
opportunities for Australian exporters.
Australia has done all it can to see that such a
conclusion is reached.
it now remains to hope that common sense and fairness and
vision prevail, and that the interests of a few are not
put before the interests of the world.
But there is no guarantee, and that is why the continued
development of APEC and the recent remarkable meeting of
APEC leaders in Seattle are so important for Australia.
In Seattle, I visited Boeing which is, of course, the
world's largest Aerospace company.
But I went to demonstrate my support for an Austraian
company Aerospace Technologies of Australia which had
just been awarded Boeing's ' Major Outside Production
Supplier of the Year" award. 
TEL
You will also be aware that before going to Seattle I set
up an APEC Business Consultative Panel to inform me of
what business thinks APEC can do for business.
In Seattle, I am pleased to say, we agreed to set up an
APEC Business Forum to identify issues APEC should
address to facilitate regional trade and investment and
encourage the further development of business networks
throughout the region.
Australia will be represented in that forum.
APEC is not an abstraction.
Real outcomes from the Seattle meeting include work by
APEC on deepening and broadening the outcome of the
Uruguay Round, strengthening trade and investment
liberalisation in the region, and facilitating regional
cooperation in areas such as standards.
We also agreed to draw up a common non-binding set of
investment principles that might lead to a formal
regional investment agreement.
All these steps will deliver, in time, real benefits to
Australian businesses.
All of them will make it that much easier for them to tap
into the potential of the Asia-Pacific and find their
niche in what is set to be the aPacific Centurym.
Ladies and gentlemen
Someone said this morning as if we did not know itthat
we are not Asian.
of course, we are not Asian.
But we share a future with the countries of our region.
And APEC is, to my way of thinking, the best the most
creative expression of that future.
As I said earlier, 60 per cent of our exports now go to
the Asian region.
And as I said at that very impressive National Trade and
Investment conference in Melbourne last week, over the
next two years exports to APEC countries will account for
about one third of the total increase in our production.
In two years' time Australian exports to APEC countries
will account fb5r around 15 per cent of all we do, all we
make and all we sell. T3E0L: . Nov. 93 18: 00 No. 008 P. 05/ 06 
TEL
And over the next two years, increased exports to APEC
mem~ bers will create more than 70,000 new jobs for
Australians good jobs, well paid jobs, jobs with a
future. Perhaps this is the most important thing to say about the
new export culture in Australia.
I said Australia's exporters were pioneers they are,
they are pioneering not just a new more dynamic shape to
the Australian economy, and not just a new prosperity for
Australia. They are guaranteeing that Australians of this, but more
particularly of fltZurp generations, will have a place in
the front rank of societies that they will have access
to the jobs and opportunities on the leading edge of
economic development.
That is the most rewarding place to be.
It is the Qnlg place to be if Australia is to remain one
of the really great places to live in the world, and one
of the great social democracies.
It remains for me to congratulate all the finalists here
tonight and the people who have put on these awards.
It is always a great occasion because it honours great
Australian imagination and enterprise.
And finally let me congratulate Austrade for its
achievements last year. I noticed a newspaper report
today which indicated that Austrade contributed to new
exports last financial year valued at $ 4.25 billion.
This is a fitting tribute to Bill Ferris, the outgoing
Chair of Austrade, and it set-s A high standard for Bob
Johnston -to emulate when he comes on board to replace
him. As the Financial Review said today, however, Bob brings a
lifetime's experience of trading in Japanese and Asian
markets to his new job, and so he will be well placed to
build on Austrade's already formidable record.
I look forward to presenting the winner's prize later in
the evening. T3EL0:. Nov. 93 18: 00 No. 008 P. 06/ 06 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE CONFERENCE ON WOMEN, POWER AND THE
21ST CENTURY
MELBOURNE, 3 DECEMBER 1993
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this very
important conference.
It is really a conference about the great anomaly of
Australian democracy the great flaw in Australian
democracy. This is a country which pioneered women's rights which
delivered to women the vote and thie right to stand for
parliament in 1902, yet whose national parliament in 1993
is overwhelmingly male.
This is a country which prides itself on its democratic
institutions yet in the most important of those
democratic institutions, the nation's parliaments, men
outnumber women 7 to 1, in the House of Representatives
more than 10 to one.
This is a country renowned for its pervasive democratic
spirit and the dictum of the fair go yet, when it comes
to women's parliamentary representation, the record and
the contemporary reality of the party which has always
believed itself the embodiment of these traditions, the
Australian Labor Party, is only marginally better than
the rest.
No doubt the aberration can be explained: but it can't be
justified. There are reasons but we shouldn't call them
excuses. The ruling body of the nation should be representative of
the people it serves. At present it is not.
Parliaments make laws for all the people and its
composition should as far as possible reflect that. At
present it does not.
In fact it is has been calculated, by Kay Setches I
think, that at the present rate of increase it would take 
another 60 years to achieve equal representation of men
and women in the Commonwealth Parliament.
In the meantime Australian democracy is the loser. This
is the fundamental point, I believe we all lose.
It is less that women have a right to be there than we
have a need for them to be there. It is less an argument
for women than an argument for the country.
Equal representation of women and men strengthens the
legitimacy of our decision making process. More than
that, it strengthens our capacity to make the right
decisions. At present we are losing a vast pool of talent and
wisdom. We are losing leadership.
We need look no further than Joan Kirner and
Carmen Lawrence for proof of that.
We need Joan Kirner and Carmen Lawrence and many more
like them in the national parliament. We need them in
the debates on economic and social policy, on
unemployment, the workplace, trade, foreign affairs,
arts, Mabo.
We need women involved in the debate about an Australian
republic. We need them in a leading role.
Australia is changing at a quite remarkable rate. It is
being re-fashioned to some extent by economic and
cultural forces beyond our control; but more
substantially, it is being re-shaped by our own efforts
and our own vision. The direction of policy and the
shape of our relationships are changing fundamentally and
very rapidly.
Our relationship with the region has changed dramatically
in the space of a couple of years and that in turn will
change Australia. It will create extraordinary new
opportunities. The implications go well beyond trade
they go to employment, business, education, culture.
There is a generational shift occurring. The experience
of multiculturalism, the fact of global communications,
new technologies, new economic and social imperatives,
and indeed the new status and increasingly prominent role
of women, is shaping a new national identity one, I
hope, which will continue our best traditions while
embracing the new reality of Australia.
Women must be there in all these momentous debates,
asking the questions and helping to find the answers. And
the more they work from the centre of the debate and the
less from the margins, the more their voices are heard in
the nation's parliaments, the more they will be heard in 
the wider society and, I have little doubt, the more
parliament will be heard as well.
Now of course if it were enough to just say these things
we could all go home now. It is necessary to say them,
but saying them will not get the barriers down.
Getting the barriers down requires political power and
political will and let mie hasten to say that they are
by no means the same thing. There have been plenty in
our history who have been attracted to power and plenty
have gained it but relatively few I believe have
exercised it as they might have.
Relatively few have actively pursued the necessary
reforms, or seized the opportunities which are presented
to each generation and so some of our old deficiencies
have been passed on.
Now I take some comfort and even some pride from the
fact that in the past ten years we have removed some of
the anomalies relating to women.
If it is true that choice is the prerequisite to the
exercise of power, and the prerequisite to choice is
economic independence, then this Labor Government can
take some pride in its record.
For we have taken not a few major steps in the direction
of economic independence.
Family payments paid directly to women caring for
children was one of them.
The extension of superannuation so that now most women
workers are entitled to coverage is another; and coverage
and benefits will increase substantially over this
decade. The past ten years has seen very significant improvements
in women's access to education.
The number of young women completing year 12 nearly
doubled to 80 per cent.
Enrolments of women in higher education grew by 77
per cent and women now make up more than 50 per cent
of higher education students.
Women are still under-represented in courses such as
engineering and in most apprenticeships and their
employment opportunities are accordingly restricted;
but the Government's reform of vocational education
and training will open up some of these pathways for
women. 
We have greatly expanded child-care. As of 1993 child
care in Australia is recognised as a mainstream economic
issue.
Child care is an integral part of the drive to become a
more competitive country.
It is now a commonplace that successful countries are
those with flexible and skilled workforces: it is
therefore common sense that women with skills and work
experience be kept in the workforce.
Our economic growth and our living standards will benefit
from women's participation.
For countless Australian women child care can make
participation possible it can make the choice between
participating and not participating a real one.
As part of its commitment to meet demand for work-related
child care by 2001, by 1996-97 the Government will fund
nearly 300,000 child care places.
From next July we will provide a 30 per cent cash rebate
on the cost of work-related child care, a long overdue
recognition of the costs involved for women earning an
income. These employment, education and child care programs are
all designed to increase life choices for Australian
women, and in doing that they open that much wider the
way to positions of power.
I might also say today that I have advised the Office for
the Status of Women to monitor the implementation of
election commitments of specific relevance to women, in
particular the new child care program.
For all the improvements in women's opportunity, status
and influence, for all the widening of equality and
freedom, there remains the fact of violence against women
violence which strips them of the most fundamental
freedom and denies them power over their lives.
Violence which degrades Australian society and mocks our
belief in democracy and justice.
-As.. a-government . we know that . we cannot expect women
denied freedom from fear to share our faith in this
society: or to believe us when we say we are serious in
our pursuit of social justice if we are not seriously
attempting to eliminate violence against women.
We have acknowledged this in a recent review of our
women's policy advising mechanisms which identified as
priorities women's economic security and the law, with a
particular emphasis on the elimination of violence. 
The same review identified as a priority the subject of
today's conference women and public life and their
involvement in decision-making.
This is an issue whose time has well and truly come. The
time has come for companies, businesses, unions, the
bureaucracy, churches, schools and universities, the
courts. And it has come for the Australian Labor Party.
It has come for the Labor Party for all the reasons I
have mentioned because the Labor Party is the party of
social justice, and the party with a vision of Australia
as a great social democracy, and we cannot have these
things unless women are receiving equal justice and
participating equally in the democracy.
In fact the time came long ago: as long ago as the turn
of the century when a campaigner for women's suffrage
wrote, " to sum up all reasons in one it is just."
The numbers speak for themselves. Of the 837 Members of
Parliament in Australia, only 118, or 14 per cent are
women. Of the total number of ALP Members of Parliament
17 per cent are women. In the House of Representatives
there are 13 women or 9 per cent. Of the ALP Members,
11 per cent are women.
The Labor Party should not claim that the underrepresentation
of women is someone else's problem.
Nor can anyone claim, of course, that it is a result of
chance or the merit principle in action.
There is no question that we have to tackle
discrimination both direct and indirect.
Indirect discrimination is likely to be the hardest to
shift because very often it is coming from entrenched
cultural habits and perspectives.
Cultural change is difficult but not impossible. it
seems to me that the starting point is recognition of
necessity. That is what, for instance, drove the change
in our industrial culture in the last decade.
In the ALP we now have to take on the business of equal
representation as a necessity. It has to become part of
Labor Party culture.
We have to take up the battle for hearts and minds on
this, and at the same time pursue the necessary
structural change.
The campaign in the Party under the heading " Half by
2000" is one way of doing this. And I support it.
I support increasing the number of women in all federal
and state caucuses. Whether we reach that goal of 50 per 
cent depends on many things, not least of which is our
continuing to win elections.
But the goal is important to indicate what we stand for
and to measure our progress.
If you will permit me to return to a theme of mine I
have always believed that when Labor stops reforming,
Labor will lose power.
It is the old bicycle principle if you lose the
strength or the will to pedal you'll fall over. If we
stop pursuing our social democratic ambitions and our
national ambitions we will stop being the government of
the Commonwealth.
In a speech to the NSW Labor Party earlier this year, I
said to keep up the momentum of reform we had to look at
ourselves. That we had to reform the Party.
The Organisation Review process of discussion and debate
on the future structure of the Party has begun.
And as part of this process, I have asked the National
Secretary, Gary Gray, to report to me before next year's
national conference with specific recommendations on what
changes are necessary to increase the number of women in
state and federal caucuses.
Early next year, I will also be meeting with the state
Labor leaders to pursue the issue.
This is a Government of reform, you can be sure of that.
We are determined to confront those changing realities of
contemporary life at home, in our region and in the
world and create a country which can share in the best
the future has to offer.
I mean more and better jobs, more opportunities for
Australians of this and future generations, more security
for all Australians.
At the same time, as we take up the challenge of
contemporary change we are determined to do all we can to
solve those problems which governments have neglected for
generations. We do these things because it is consistent with the
Labor Party's commitment to social justice. We also do
them because it makes sense.
It makes sense, for instance, to deliver justice to
indigenous Australians because this country will gain in
respect and self-esteem, and in time it will gain from
bringing into the mainstream people whose talents and
energy have until now been wasted on the margins. 
Equally, it makes sense to ensure that the half of the
population who are women are in no sense left on the
margins the margins of society, the margins of justice,
or the margins of our representative institutions.
Every time we expand Australian democracy, every time we
extend the limits of freedom and justice, every time we
include in all the reaches of our national life all the
people of Australia, we make it stronger.
When we talk about women sharing power in Australia it is
a sufficient argument to say that it is " just" but it
is an irrefutable argument to say that it is both just
and, because it is in the interests of Australia, also
very wise.
Thank you for having me here. It is now my pleasure and
privilege to declare this conference open. 



TEL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 01
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEAT1NG, MP
LAUNCH OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF THE FAMILY
BANKSTOWN, 6 DECEMBER 1993
I am delighted to be here today to launch the International Year of the Family in
Australia. For me, families matter.
Indeed, I am sure that we are all here because we think the same way on this.
Because of the importance of families to all of us as individuals.
Because of the importance of families to our communities.
Because we think families are a national resource vital to the future of this country.
And because we want everyone to be aware of it.
Wc want everyone to know the value of families.
And when we speak of the value of families, we speak of the value of all families.
We recognise that families have their own unique needs, and that the Government has
a special role to assist them.
We have implemented and will continue to put into place measures to help families.
But one thing is certain.
Families are endlessly diverse in shape and structure.
It is appropriate then, that Government programs continue to recognise this diversity
of family forms in Australia, and meet their different, but equally legitimate, needs. 
TEL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 02
2
As I have said before, when we talk about families today, we are talking about
families of all sorts and sizes.
Families with children where both parents are present.
Families with children headed by sole parents women or mcen.
Failies that include several generations living under the same roof.
Families Where one member cares for another who is frail aged, chronically ill, or
disabled. And any number of other combinations which complete the Australian national
family. Just now the biggest problem facing many familics is unemployment.
It is the dominant economic and social issue of our times.
We know only too well what the consequences of unemployment are particularly
long term unemployment on individuals, on children, on families, on communities,
on the social fabric.
That is why we have commissioned a Discussion Paper on Unemrploymnent, which we
will receive next week a major report on the dimensions of the problem and how to
deal with it.
Following our consideration of it, the Government will release a White Paper on
employment next year the first since the end of World War 11.
Among other considerations, our response to the report will recognise that, although
all families are vulnerable to unemployment, some are more vulnerable than others.
There is no gctting away from the fact that unemployment affects families in different
ways, and that for solutions to be effective they must take the differences into
account. Our policies must address the diverse nature of Australian families, and the diverse
nature or their employment and assistance needs.
A major issue to address in this context is how families balance the responsibilities of
work and family life.
Governments should, T believe, promotc policies which recognise and support choices
families are makting in combining paid work and family care.
We have to make these aspects of peoples' lives fit more harmoniously together.
We have to keep pressing for more " family-friendly" workplaces. 
TEL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 03
3
And child care.
This Government is very proud of it's record in the creation of childcare places.
It is proud of the system of fee relief it has introduced and its needs based planning.
The child care rebate, to be provided next year, is anothcr important plank in our
child carc policy.
It is a long overdue recognition of the cost of child care for families in earning an
income. We recognise that childcare needs are neither uniform or identical.
We recognise that women, throughout their lives, have a range of equally legitimate
choices about being in the workforce or being at home.
We appreciate the value of caring and nurturing provided by women who do choose
to stay at borne while their children are growing up, and the value of the unpaid work
they carry out both in the household and in the community.
That is why we have introduced the Home Care Child Allowance for supporting
parents caring for their children full time at home.
By paying the allowane directly to the caring parent, usually the mother, we have
provided many women at home with a source of independent income which otherwise
they would not have.
Perhaps I could summarise the Government's support for families by saying simply
that we are about recognising diversity and facilitating choice,
And this, I believe, siL% well with the objectives of the International Year of the
Family. Some people, I know, get a bit cynical about International Years, and about their
usefulness. I am not one of them.
I support the concept of International Years on the basis or their results.
Because of the benefits that conmc from them.
These benefits don't necessarily come overnight.
Some of themi don't conmc nearly quickly enough for everyone. 
TEL 4
But they do come, and they come, in part, because of the change in attitudes which
the International Years bring about.
Few would deny that there has been substantial progress in what women have
achieved since the International Year for Women in 1975.
And equally few would deny the impetus which the Year had on legislators, not least
here in Australia.
Similarly, the International Year of the Disabled marked a turning point in the way in
which socicty viewed people with disabilities.
There is now a much greater sensitivity towards their needs, and it's reflected in
evciything from building codes to co-ordinated hospital and community services.
This Year is the Year for the World's Indigenous People, a year we have marked
indelibly in Australia's history with landmark legislation which will put an end to an
historic lie and go some way to laying the basis of real justice for indigenous
Australians. Legislation which will go a long way towards extending the Australian family by
granting basic rights to peoplc who have long been denied them.
In addition to individual achievements, the cumulative aspect of International Years
has, I believe, also been very important.
We might well have been able to have an International Year or the Family without
any previous International Years.
But I strongly doubt whecther the Year would have the focus intended for it, would
explore the crucial range of issues that it plans to address, without the previous
International Years to which I have just referred.
They have brought about a fundamental shift in the way we think about families.
And now the National Council for the International Year of the family will be
building on these paist achievements.
The Council, which the Government has established, is chaired by Professor Bcttina
Cass and comprises a number of Australians who are eminent in their fields.
Before the International Year of the Family came along, the members of the Council
were already busy people in their own area of work.
I realise that the members are giving up scarce time to serve on this Council, and I am
pleased to place on record my appreciation for their important act of public service.
This year won't simply be about celebrating families, although there is much worthy
or celebration. T8EL.: D ec. 93 14: 52 NO. 011 P. 04 
TEL:
Rather, the International Year of the Family is an opportunity to take stock of the
types of support and services that Government and non-Governmnent organisations
provide r famfilies.
To see how we can do things better.
T'he Government, together with the Council, will be looking to strengthen the
partnerships between families, governments, education and community services,
business, unions, religious organisations and community groups.
Ultimately out of our work wc hope will come the basis for family policy for the
future an Australian Agenda for Families.
Ladics and Gentlemen
The International Year of the family affects us all.
While the style of familics has changed, one thing should not change and that is the
binding and the support that members of families should provide to one another.
Children particularly benefit from having the support of loving and interested
partents. Support and esteem which stays with them throughout their life.
We have, perhaps, become too blase as a society about the obligations of' parents to
their children about the need to consider them in our life choices.
We will succeed better as a society when parents have a strong and continuing
involvement with their childrens' lives and their emotional development.
Families are all important in determining how children develop into adults and form
their own families. They are crucial to our development as productive and fulfilled
members of a wider society.
Ultimately it is the family which provides any individual with his or her most
essential need the need to belong. This is at the heart of our responsibility to
support families, and at the heart of a family's responsibility to support its members.
Cherishing and supporting the family, all our families, is the most important
commitment we can make to future generations in a just, decent and humane society.
As the Christmas holiday season approaches, our thoughts of family come particularly
to the fore.
Let me conclude then with an illustration of the importance of family from Evonne
Goologong Cawlcy's recent autobiography. T8E. LD: ec. 93 14: 52 NO. 011 
ILL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 06
6
Shc relates how the family car broke down on Christmas Eve on a back road far from
anywhere. In her words, " Mum and Dad helped us tear paper into strips and we decorated a little
scrubby tree.
Then we sat around it on our tarpaulin and sang Christmas carols.
Silent Night was Mum's favourite, so we sang that twice.
I can't have been very old but I have a clear memory of drifting into sleep that night,
my head in my father's lap and catching a glimpse or both my parents in the
moonlight. They wcrc a good looking couple and they loved us.
We might have been stuck on a back road in Western New South Wales on Christmas
Eve, but wc were the luckiest kids in the world."
In these rew words, Evonnc has captured the enduring feelings of love, acceptance
and commitment values we all seek and cherish in our family lives.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the International Year of the Family.
TEL 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 06 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, lIP
THE INAUGURAL SIR EDWARD " WEARY" DUNLOP ASIALINK LECTURE
MELBOURNE, 8 DECEMBER 1993
It is a great privilege to be asked to deliver this
address I cannot imagine a greater privilege.
" Weary" Dunlop was an Australian of phenomenal
achievement. If his work as a surgeon and teacher were all that
distinguished his life, an annual lecture and much more
to preserve his memory, would be warranted.
If the sole criterion was his contribution as architect
and overseer of schemes for the betterment of his country
and the welfare of its people, he would rank among the
great Australians.
If he was known only as a pioneer of Australia's
friendship with the countries of Asia, we would be
justified in honouring his life's work this way.
Talking about his work in Asia in one of his last
interviews he remarked that he was " a bit ahead of
Keating." I unequivocally dips my lid. It is a galvanising thing
to know that we are, in some way, building on the work of
Weary Dunlop.
Would that we all shared his vision.
Would that we all might have half his courage, half his
reason, half his powers of leadership.
These among others were the qualities which lifted Weary
Dunlop into the ranks of the imnmortals.
In my days at school we read about the epic feats of
Sturt and Eyre and Stuart, the heroic philanthropy of
Caroline Chisholm, the remarkable feats of Mawson in
Antarctica, and the Anzacs at Gallipoli and we wondered
how men and women could be so brave, resourceful and
resilient. These were giants. 
We should have also been reading about Weary Dunlop
even so soon after the war we should have been reading
about him.
And our children should be reading about him now.
For to read about Weary Dunlop in World War II, to read
his diaries, to hear him interviewed in the last years of
his life is to hear a story every bit as awe-inspiring
as any in our past. It is perhaps the most inspiring
story in our history.
As many of you probably know, the story began in the
bush. Ernest Edward Dunlop was a son of the soil,
raised at a place called Sheepwash Creek in north-eastern
Victoria. He was educated at State schools in Stewarton
and Benalla, and I would hazard a guess that the heroes
of his basic education were the same as those of my
generation. Gallipoli loomed large. Four members of his family had
gone to the First World War.
The Australia of Dunlop's youth, of course, was very
different. A new nation, Australia looked at the world
through the prism of empire. Our economy, our foreign
relations, our defence were all dependent on Britain.
Our people were overwhelmingly of British and Irish
extraction. This Australia was an outpost of the British empire,
separated from the civilisation we held to be the highest
by what we saw as an amorphous and potentially hostile
mass of humanity to our near north but which we called
the Far East.
" White Australia" kept the potential threat at bay
" White Australia" and the might of the British Empire.
It stood to reason that Australians looked to Britain for
their cultural, if not their spiritual, values. Not
because they were less Australian, it seems to me, but
because to share in the British heritage was one of the
most agreeable things about being Australian.
It conferred considerable advantages on us among them
the chance for young men of promise to further their
education and careers in an agreeably ancient yet
familiar culture.
Weary Dunlop was in London doing post-graduate study when
the Second World War broke out. As he said himself, he
couldn't wait to get into the Army, and somehow he
contrived to this country's everlasting benefit to
get into the Australian Army. 
He served in the Australian Army Medical Corps with the
Second AIF in Palestine, Egypt, Greece and Crete.
By the time he sailed for the war in south-east Asia, he
had already experienced more than an average share of
hardship and danger; including service with the Sixth
Australian Division during the siege of Tobruk; and he
had already demonstrated his great physical strength and
his capacity to apply his wonderful skills under
conditions of extreme stress including his skills of
leadership. He arrived in Java in February 1942. Singapore the
bastion of Britain's Far East defences and Australia's
security had fallen to the Japanese. Three weeks
later, Weary Dunlop and his unit were captured at
Bandung. The prisoners very soon were made aware that they were in
the hands of a ruthless enemy. Almost as quickly they
became aware that in Weary Dunlop they had a leader of
equivalent bravery.
As the hospital in Bandung was being broken up and the
sick and wounded forced to march, Dunlop protested,
pointing to one man who, as he described him, was " blind
with a shattered face, amputated hands and a broken leg".
When the Japanese commander indicated to his guard that
the man was to be bayoneted, Weary Dunlop, to use his own
word, " interposed" his body.
In the next three years, Weary Dunlop ceaselessly
" interposed" his body between hope and despair, reason
and insanity, pride and humiliation life and death. He
was the principal reason for the survival of thousands of
men. Enduring the same hardships the illness, the
torture, the terror and squalor he was leader, doctor
and inspiration.
As one of his fellow prisoners wrote later:
When despair and death reached for us, he stood
fast, his only thought our well-being. Faced with
guards who had the power of life and death, ignoble
tyrants who hated us, he was a lighthouse of sanity
in a universe of madness and suffering.
Nothing I can say tonight could possibly describe the
horrors inflicted on Australian, British and allied
prisoners of war on the Burma-Thailand Railway or the
estimated 200,000 labourers from Thailand, Burma,
Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam who were press ganged
into service.
As one who went through it said the survivors often did
not talk about it simply because it was " indescribable". 
The best account by far, of course, was written by Weary
himself. The detailed diaries he kept were themselves an
amazing testament to his strength and devotion to duty.
And that it was forty years before he got around to
publishing them is equally a testament to his humility
and no doubt to his determination to get on with life.
Weary Dunlop's great qualities were universal physical
strength, intelligence and insight, courage, persistence
and, above all, boundless love for his fellow man.
Yet much in his character and the values he brought to
the appalling human trial on the Burma-Thailand railway
we recognise as unmistakably Australian. And he was
unmistakably Australian.
It was the military history of his own country which
inspired him, indeed the military history of his own
district and his own family. He went to war in London
dressed in the uniform of the First AIF, and it was as if
he was filled with the same spirit.
There is the same familiarity in his pragmatism and the
astounding capacity for improvisation he displayed in the
camps of Thailand from the saline drips he devised for
cholera victims to his tax on fellow officers to raise
revenue for food and medical supplies.
As his diaries reveal, he took to the struggle not just
stoic courage but, in the best Australian tradition, an
unfailing sense of humour and irony.
In terrible necessity he saw the need for discipline but
he also knew that authority should be earned.
He recognised that the key to survival in adversity was
willingness to share the hardship, that reliance on each
other was essential. He knew the value of mateship.
Strong as he was, he did not despise the weakness of
others. He knew that if not all were of equal capacity,
all were equal in suffering and all equally deserving
help.
We do not have to believe that these are uniquely
Australian insights into human nature, or uniquely
Australian qualities, to see in them a continuation of
the values associated with the Australian legend
including the legend of Anzac. We can see in Weary
Dunlop, and Australians' admiration of him, an
affirmation of our values, an embodiment of our best
traditions. But the legend did not stop him. He did not live the
remainder of his life in defence of the past, but in
doing all he could to ensure that Australia had a future. 
Although he had every reason to do so, he did not let the
evil he experienced destroy his faith in the capacity of
human beings for good.
The war did not close his mind to human possibility, it
opened it.
He did not live weighed down with hatred for Japan, nor
buoyed by satisfaction with his own heritage and culture.
Weary Dunlop was tortured, beaten, three times sentenced
to execution. He spent every day attempting to save the
victims of insane cruelty. He wrote in his diary on May
9 1943 that the sight of men " broken into emaciated,
pitiful wrecks, bloated with beriberi, terribly reduced
with pellagra, dysentery and malaria and covered with
disgusting sores" produced in him a " searing hatred" of
the Japanese.
Yet he overcame his hatred. He opened his heart and
his household to his old enemies, and widened his
perspective even so far, I understand, as to adopt
elements of their philosophy and culture.
He did not see his experience in Asia as confirmation of
Australia's old prejudice towards these countries, but as
proof of our necessity to understand and engage with them
not as colonisers but as colleagues.
The war convinced him that our future depended on
learning to live in Asia, and he never doubted that we
could do this and be enriched by it, and still carry on
those best traditions which he exemplified.
As one fellow POW, Tom Uren, said; " Weary Dunlop
continued to grow as a human being all his life".
That is one more reason why the story of Weary Dunlop
should be known to all Australians.
He embraced change, he encouraged it, he believed in the
possible for all his love of Australia ( and indeed of
Britain) he imagined a different Australia.
I cannot even begin to do justice to Weary Dunlop's
activity after the war. To read the startling entry in
Who's Who, rather like the Diaries, is to wonder if in
fact we are all made of the same clay.
He was pre-eminently a surgeon. The first Surgeon
appointed to the Royal Melbourne Hospital after the war,
Honorary Surgeon to the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear
Hospital, Consultant Surgeon to the Peter MacCallum
Clinic, special surgeon to the Repatriation Department,
the second Australian to become Vice President of the
International Society of Surgeons, and in 1969 leader of
the Australian surgical team in Vietnam. 
He pioneered surgery in the oesophagus, mouth and throat;
but as Les Tanner, whose larynx Weary Dunlop removed,
pointed out this year, he was among the last of the " allover"
surgeons meaning he could operate on your toe or
your head and everything in between.
And of course he was an " all-over" man; a patron,
vice-president, committeeman and member of countless
organisations in the public interest beyond the scope of
medicine not least among them the association of ex-
POWs and their relatives.
He was a pioneer, of course, of the Colombo Plan, an
adviser to Thailand, Sri Lanka and India. He lectured in
countries throughout the region. He was President of the
Australian-Asian Society.
Ladies and gentlemen
In a speech in Seattle a couple of weeks ago President
Clinton summed up the change in the countries of Asia
and in our perceptions of them by saying that the
" dominoes have become dynamos"
Weary Dunlop recognised the potential for this long ago.
In 1954 he said:
The people in these emerging nations are going
toward what they want. They have their star to win,
and they let nothing stand in their way. It uplifts
you to find that spirit.
In 1993, we in Australia are coming to terms with the
reality of their astounding success.
Not that Asia has dawned on us all of a sudden. It is
often forgotten that Australia's relations with the
region go back to the very beginning of post-colonial
Asia from our support for Indonesia's independence
movement through our participation in the defence of
Malaysia during confrontation, to our involvement in the
Colombo Plan.
Far-sighted people like Weary Dunlop and Richard Casey
and a handful of others knew where Australia's interests
lay and worked hard to build up the trading,
institutional and cultural links as the countries of Asia
grew. From soon after the end of the war with Japan, Australia
played a vital role in the economic reconstruction of its
former enemy by providing the necessary raw materials and
minerals. Thus the ground was laid for the enormously
beneficial trade relationship we now have with Japan. 
Some deep personal friendships and inistitutional and
commercial associations were forged which underpin the
close government relations and people-to-people contacts
we have today.
And I might say that we have to a very large degree
repeated this experience with the industrial miracle in
the Republic of Korea.
In the last decade, the growth of our trade and other
ties with Asia, including South-East Asia has
dramatically adcelerated.
A decade ago, 46 per cent of our exports went to Asia.
That figure has now reached 60 per cent. Over the same
decade our exports to South-East Asia have grown by 400
per cent.
We have seen a remarkable expansion in people-to-people
relationships. In 1980 just over 315,000 Australians
visited Asian countries. In 1992 the number had grown to
780, 000.
110,000 people from Asian countries visited Australia in
1979. In 1992-93 the figure was 1.2 million 650,000 of
them from Japan.
I've already made several references to " Asia" tonight.
It is a convenient term but, of course, it is also a
misleading one. It should not blind us to the great
cultural, social and other differences within the region.
It is a term we use in full knowledge of this diversity.
In this general regard, I think we can say that we have
seen substantial advances in the process of cultural
understanding. One measure of this, among many, is language learning.
In 1982, 15 per cent of Australian Year 12 students
learning languages other than English were learning Asian
languages. Today that figure has nearly doubled.
Another recent development is Australian Television
International which is now projecting images of Australia
to 15 countries of the region and fostering an
understanding of Australia that goes way beyond the old
stereotypes. I might say that this service also provides an
unparalleled opportunity for Australian business to reach
an increasingly sophisticated market through a quality
English language medium.
The sponsors of this lecture, Asialink, are another
example of the efftorts being made to heighten cultural
understanding. 
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Asialink for
the work they are doing and in particular tonight
commend them for the establishment of the Dunlop Asia
Awards Fund. I should also commend the Buckland
Foundation -for their initial contribution of $ 50,000.
And I take the opportunity to announce that the
Commonwealth Government will at least match it.
The Dunlop Fellowships will go some way towards creating
a generation of Australians who look to Asia for
stimulus, much as earlier generations looked to Britain
and Europe.
As I said, we are witnessing continuing development, a
steady progress, not a sudden revolution. Yet in the
past two years, there is no doubt that progress has been
suddenly more rapid, our activity suddenly more intense;
and, I believe, comprehension of the opportunities and
imperatives which the region represents has become
suddenly more general among Australians.
We have seen developments of considerable substance far
more developments and far more substance, I venture to
say, than we have ever achieved in such a short time
before. We have established a Ministerial Forum with
Indonesia, a structure which has enabled us to
increase co-operation across a whole range of
government business.
We have helped to create the ASEAN Regional Forum, a
new institution for the discussion of security
issues in an area formerly suspicious of
multilateral approaches to security.
We have seen the successful conclusion of the
Cambodian peace effort in which Indonesia and
Australia played such an important catalytic role.
Our relationship with Japan has developed new
dimensions and depth of co-operation. I have had
three separate meetings with the Japanese Prime
Minister in that period.
Most importantly, APEC has continued to develop, and
we saw last month in Seattle the remarkable meeting
without any officials present of a group of
leaders representing forty per cent of the world's
population and fifty per cent of its production to
discuss the challenges facing the region.
The role of leaders in these developments is vital,
because through their actions they inevitably set the
direction and symbolise national choices.
I have made it a priority to do what I can to set a
pattern of contact with the leaders of our region. 
I am pleased to say tonight that at the invitation of
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai I shall visit Thailand next
year. During that visit I will have the opportunity to
pay my respect to over 1300 of Weary Dunlop's Australian
comrades who are buried at Kanchanaburi Cemetry. I hope
also to be present at the opening of the Australian built
and funded Friendship Bridge over the Mekong River
between Thailand and Laos.
Forging a new presence in our region has not been plain
sailing, of course, nor will it ever be. Countries have
different interests to pursue and different ways of
pursuing them.
I want to say something very briefly about the current
difficulty we are experiencing in the relationship with
the Government of Malaysia.
The difficulty began because of the reply I gave to a
question from a journalist at a doorstop press conference
in Seattle.
That answer, as I have said, was not intended to cause
offence and I regret that offence has been taken.
For more than 30 years we have had a close and mutually
beneficial relationship with Malaysia. More than 100,000
Malaysian students have been educated here; we have a
very balanced trade relationship; 85,000 Australians were
born in Malaysia.
We have always been committed to the security and
development of Malaysia and the Five Power Defence
Arrangement is a demonstration of the fact that we are
committed in the most fundamental way.
The Australian Government wants to preserve the interests
we share and the friendship between our two countries and
our two peoples. We want to work in harmony with the
Malaysian Government.
But any relationship of substance and value requires
commitment from both sides. For our part we are
committed. We are willing to put in the effort necessary
to keep the channels of communication open.
We have been putting in that effort at Ministerial level
with the visits of Senators Cook and Ray to Malaysia
within the last two days and with the contact today
between our two foreign ministers.
Ladies and gentlemen
There is now, I am sure, widespread recognition not only
that our future lies in the Asia-Pacific, but that we can
play a dynamic and rewarding role in the regional
community. 
Eighteen months ago when I gave an address to the
Asia-Australia Institute in Sydney, there were still some
loud protests decrying our ambitions. We heard them
sporadically throughout the year. It was as if we were
advocating the abolition of Shakespeare and cricket.
Ladies and gentlemen
Soon after I took office as Prime Minister I made this
point in my first major speech on Australia's foreign
policy. I said and I think it bears repeating now that we go
to Asia " as we are"
Not with the ghost of empire about us. Not as a
vicar of Europe or as a US deputy. But
unambivalently. Sure of who we are and what we
stand for. If we are to be taken seriously,
believed, trusted, that is the only way to go.
Claims that the Government is attempting to turn
Australia into an " Asian country" are based on a
misunderstanding both of my own approach and the
direction of government policy.
This is something I want to be understood very clearly
because it is at the core of my view of Australia and of
the Government's approach to relations with our
neighbourhood. Put simply, Australia is not and can never be an " Asian
nation" any more than we can or want to be European
or North American or African.
We can only be Australian and can only relate to our
friends and neighbours as Australian.
This is not an expression of self-satisfaction. Nor is
it an assertion of our mores over those of any other
country. But we want to draw on all the distinctive strengths of
our history and our contemporary democratic, pluralist
culture the rich and ancient culture of indigenous
Australians, the energy, bravery and resilience of our
early European settlers and the institutions they
created, and all the creativity and drive which comes
from the people of 150 nations who now make their home in
Australia. And we want, in particular, to draw on the talents and
experience of those immigrants now almost half our
total intake who come here from Asia.
Ladies and gentlemen 
In perhaps the most profound change of our history, the
monocultural Australia of Weary Dunlop's youth has become
a multicultural Australia; and the multicultural mix
includes a large number of people from Asian countries
who just a generation ago were excluded as a matter of
policy. In a change hardly less profound, the Australian economy
has been transformed into one which is much more diverse,
much more competitive, much less regulated and much more
capable of succeeding in the modern world.
Accompanying this process, and essential to it, a new
business culture is emerging with the emphasis on
cleverness, comparative advantage, excellence and
exports. It is no accident that exports have risen from
14 per cent of GDP in 1982 to 20 per cent in 1992.
At the same time, we have seen an extraordinary
revolution in the culture of Australian workplaces, from
perennial and habitual conflict to co-operation and
creativity. In many ways, as a consequence of these changes, we are
now seeing the greatest change of all the integration
of Australia into its own region.
The past ten years have given me the greatest faith in
the willingness and capacity of Australians to respond to
the need for change. Properly managed, change should not
be a problem for us. Our values and institutions are
strong enough our people sufficiently resourceful.
Resourceful enough to make me think that, if anything, we
should set ourselves more challenges than we have been
prepared to in the past.
Far from representing a threat to Australia's democratic
and cultural traditions, I am convinced that our capacity
for change is enlarged by living up to them. In fact I
am convinced the only way to successfully manage change
is by pulling the threads of our common values and our
common interest together.
We will not, for instance, make ourselves more
competitive by leaving marginalised large sections of the
population whether they are Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders or the unemployed.
I might say inter alia that that is why the Government
took up the challenge of Mabo: difficult and temporarily
divisive as the issue has been, the long term interests
of Australia can only be served by delivering to
indigenous Australians recognition of the truth and the
basis for justice. 
Australia will be stronger f or tackling this 200 year old
problem. We will be stronger for knowing that we have
taken up the challenge; stronger for the unity it will
ultimately bring; stronger for the international respect
and, who knows, greater self-esteem it will bring.
The need to make us a stronger, more cohesive, more
inclusive nation not to say one which is more
productive and efficient is also why we have taken on
the task of regional development. And why we are
conducting the most intensive investigation in our
history of the causes of unemployment and the means of
creating jobs. Our standard of living, our decent
values, do not have to be lost in the course of
international or regional competitiveness.
Unemployment will not make us more competitive any more
thhan will: running down our health services, or cutting
away our social security net, or making access to
education less egalitarian, or undermining in any way the
policy manifestations of our tradition of the fair go.
If we want change we have to guarantee these things
above all, we have to find ways to solve the problem of
unemployment. Paradoxical as it may sound to the more simple-minded
economic rationalists, the cause of competitiveness is
best served by a spirit of co-operation. To learn the
lesson of cooperation and the value of pooling our
strength we need only go to Weary Dunlop's diaries. But
we should not have to go to them. That lesson has always
been the same we will be much stronger for having a
sense of common purpose, of shared national goals.
There can be no greater national goal than helping to
create a vibrant Asia-Pacific community, thriving on its
economic dynamism and its cultural and ethnic diversity.
A community whose members acknowledge and appreciate each
other's differences while sharing a sense of common
economic and security interests, and a common destiny. A
community with a small " I2cas I have always said. A
community with a shared sense of possibility, a shared
idea of the future.
Ladies and gentlemen
Until recently, the diversity of the Asia-Pacific was
overlaid by the fault-lines of the Cold War and by wars
which pitted neighbours against each other and cut across
common interests and complementarities.
Now the outlook is very different. Now it is reasonable
to imagine a great self-creating, self-defining regional
community of nations. Now it is possible as never before
to see the complementarities that exist in the region and
the opportunities for co-operation. 
That is what the leaders of the region saw in Seattle.
That is why APEC is so important. APEC is a framework
for a new Asia-Pacific era. It recognises the benefits
of diversity in the region. It gives expression to the
sense of community which has emerged unplanned by
governments. And it offers a way to maintain the
momentum of co-operation and to ensure that we make the
most of the opportunities now within our grasp.
For Australia, APEC is the expression of our greatest
challenge. We want to engage with the region: to learn
from it, react with it, give something to it.
APEC is no abstraction. It is not the preserve of
politics and business.
It is important to every Australian and to future
generations of Australians.
Because APEC will make it easier for Australian companies
to do business in the region, APEC can underpin growth in
the regional economy and in the Australian economy and
thus create employment worthwhile, fulfilling
employment. Our economic integration with the region, like our
integration with the global economy, is an essential
prerequisite of economic growth and our standard of
living. It is a guarantee that Australians of the next generation
the Australians of the Pacific Century will live in a
country at the leading edge, where the innovation and
opportunities are.
At the Seattle meeting it was agreed to develop a common
non-binding set of investment principles, as a first step
towards an eventual investment agreement.
The meeting agreed to work on improving regional cooperation
in areas such as standards which will reduce
the costs of business, remove obstacles to exports and
encourage trade flows.
Recognising that continuing prosperity in the region must
be driven by the private sector, the meeting agreed to
establish a Pacific Business Forum; and recognising also
that small and medium businesses are the source of much
of the region's dynamism, they agreed that such
businesses will be brought into APEC discussions.
The meeting agreed to establish an APEC education program
which will foster people-to-people and cultural links.
The program will develop regional co-operation and higher
education, promote study of key regional economic issues,
improve workers' skills, enhance labour mobility and
foster mutual understanding of regional diversity. 
All these initiatives widen the horizon for Australia.
Business, trade and employment opportunities present
themselves. A world of great cultural richness and
diversity is open to us a world in which Australia,
calling on its traditional and newly evolving strengths,
can play a creative and rewarding part and, in so doing,
deliver prosperity and security to the Australians of the
21st century.
Ladies and gentlemen
I said earlier in this address that I believe the life of
Weary Dunlop should be required reading for every young
Australian. In his story there is an irresistible greatness, an
irresistible lesson for our times.
The greatness stemmed from those universal qualities of
courage and resourcefulness and love for humanity which
he had in such astonishing abundance.
The lesson is that we should be open to change. The
lesson is that we can be true to ourselves and yet open
to others, that we can be bold and confident without
being parochial and intolerant. The lesson is that,
relying on each other, we can take on the most daunting
challenges and succeed. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF GEELONG WOOL COMBING LTD PLANT, CORIO
DECEMBER 1993
I am very pleased to be here today at the opening of this
wool combing facility in one of the great regional cities
of Australia.
This year marks the bicentenary of the invention of the
first mechanical wool comb, an event which was followed
by combers rioting in the streets of the English wool
towns. You can't help having sympathy for the old Luddites, but
historically speaking they won a few battles and
comprehensively lost the war.
It is very important that we Australians win the war: our
industry has to be at the leading edge of progress.
And this new plant is a perfect example: it will help the
industry and the region.
We are all well aware that the wool industry is going
through a major transitional period that has not been
easy for many growers. The collapse of the Reserve Price
Scheme, the accumulation of a large wool stockpile and a
massive debt, the effects of drought and a collapse of
wool prices have all posed very significant challenges.
Equally, we know that -Geelong has not had an easy time of
it recently.
But both the wool industry and the Geelong region are
resilient: the basis for recovery is there in the quality
of the product and the people.
Both the wool industry and the people of Geelong know
that our industries and our regions need to adapt to keep
pace with international developments. Increasingly they
know that unparalleled opportunity can come from a
readiness to embrace the necessary change.
And the Government is supporting them. 
It is one of the truisms of the past that Australia
rode on the sheep's back. And it is a truism of our
present that for all the greatness of our primary and
extractive industries we have to add value to the
product. We have to get from our great resources the maximum in
dollars and the maximum in jobs.
Wool is a marvellous product a marvellous fibre. We
count wool as a primary product but nature has already
added value and marketability. Wool begins with a
distinct comparative advantage. This plant builds on it.
It adds more value.
It can't be said often enough that the image of Australia
stuck in a time warp where it is content to be a supplier
of raw commodities for others to transform is false.
The " dig it up and ship it out" mentality hasn't applied
for a long time not to the Government, not to our
businesses, not to our workers.
That this has happened is a consequence of the energy of
business and industry and the willingness of employees
to confront necessity and embrace change.
You will forgive me for saying that it is also the result
of government policies which we began to apply a decade
ago. Let me briefly run through a few facts.
The Australian economy is now around 30 per cent more
internationally competitive than 10 years ago.
In the last decade, exports have doubled.
They have grown from 13 per cent of GDP to 20 per cent.
Exports of manufactures have trebled and now exceed those
for rural products and minerals and fuels.
In the past six years exports of Elaborately Transformed
Manufactures have grown at an average rate of 19 per cent
per annum and nearly trebled in value.
Today, profits are at record levels.
Inflation is low and under control.
Interest rates are at historically low levels.
Investment is beginning to grow, just as manufacturing
output is growing strongly.
A new culture of industrial relations has been
established one which increases labour market 
flexibility and productivity growth by widening the
spread of enterprise bargaining.
Our recent business tax initiatives have ensured that the
competitiveness of our system is on a par with comparable
OECD countries.
We have reduced our corporate tax rate to 33 per cent.
We have introduced a development allowance, a general
investment allowance, a substantial acceleration of
depreciation provisions and concessionally-taxed pooled
development funds.
And we have established an orderly and manifestly
effective program for reducing tariff protection.
There were those who doubted the wisdom of orderly tariff
reduction. What they failed to appreciate was that the existing
tariff regime was manifestly inefficient and unfair
unfair to our trading partners, unfair to employees in
other non-protected areas, unfair to consumers who had to
pay more for their goods.
We had no choice but to change the focus of those
industries, which survived only through border
protection. To bring them to an outlook which is more
conducive to wealth creation for this country an export
oriented outlook.
And we are being proved right.
Take one example. For years it has been axiomatic that
Australians could never be internationally competitive in
textile, clothing and footwear industries.
Well, last year, exports in the TCF area rose by $ 534
million, a 21 per cent increase on the previous year.
They rose because the TCF industries embraced the
necessity of a new industrial culture.
The opening of this plant, as with other recent
developments within the wool and wool processing
industry, is a welcome sign that the wool industry is
embracing this new culture too.
Embracing the need for increased value adding.
The importance of utilising new technology.
The crucial requirement to be market-oriented to be
closely attuned to the needs of its customers.
And to export, export, export particularly to the
rapidly growing markets in the Asia-Pacific region. 
It is not enough, as everyone realises, that Australia
continue to dominate the global supply of wool. We
account f or some 30 per cent of world production and
per cent of finer apparel wool but that wool, of
itself, will not re-establish the pre-eminence of the
wool industry in Australia.
The bulk of our wool is still exported in greasy-form,
with little or no value added. For example, Australia's
production of wool tops accounts for only 4 per cent of
global supply and even less in later stage processed
products.
Compare this with a country such as Uruguay which
produces 3 per cent of the world's wool, but is the
second largest exporter of wool tops.
While it is pleasing to note that over the last decade
Australia has doubled its exports of scoured and
carbonised wool, and increased wool top exports by 75 per
cent, there remains considerable scope for expansion in
this area.
It is clear that if we are to secure the Australian wool
industry's long term future as a world supplier of a high
quality wool and wool products, we need to strengthen
linkages between the various segments of the wool
production and marketing chain.
This view was endorsed by the Garnaut Committee, which
was established by the Government to review the wool
industry's institutional and operational arrangements.
The committee's recommendations for new institutional
structures and a new market-driven approach were in large
part taken up by both the Government and the industry,
and new legislative arrangements to give effect to them
have just been put into place.
There is a solid base for Australia to expand its wool
processing sector, particularly in early stage
processing. We have access to a high quality and diverse wool clip.
We have a close proximity to the growing markets of Asia.
Our energy costs are competitive.
For this industry, China will be a key. It alone has
been responsible fo~ r a 20 per cent increase in sales in
the region over the past decade.
In June this year, I discussed with the Chinese Vice
Premier the possibility of developing strategic long-term
linkages between our respective wool and wool textile
industries. 
Following a series of negotiations at official and
Ministerial level, agreement was reached whereby China
would reduce, from 1 January 1994, its tariff on wool
tops to 15% that is to the same level as applies to
greasy and scoured wool.
This agreement is an encouraging step forward. It is up
to the industry now to follow it up. We simply cannot
allow such opportunities to pass us by.
The well justified satisfaction we take in the success of
our new manufacturing industries should not lead us to
conclude that our old established industries are of
declining importance. The wool industry remains a great
industry. The point which this new plant makes is that
it can become a greater one.
The decision by Bremer Woll-Kammerei ( BWK) to establish
its first plant outside Germany, is tangible evidence
that major foreign investors believe that Australia is a
location where the wool industry can renew itself.
The benefits that will flow from the establishment of
this plant are significant, both locally and nationally.
Total investment in the project is expected to be
million, and it will create more than 150 new long
term jobs, in addition to those that have been created
during the construction phase.
As a recognised world leader in the production of high
quality wool tops, BWK will also bring state of the art
processing technology to Australia.
I understand that the additional capacity of this plant
will increase to 8 per cent the proportion of the total
Australian clip processed to tops stage by 1996 about
$ 34 million a year of value will be added to the raw wool
processed at the plant.
The Government is substantially supporting this plant
with a $ 5 million grant and a $ 15 million low interest
loan
This plant is the first to be supported under a
million Further Wool Processing Program.
In future, the projects funded will generate over
$ 200 million of new investment, resulting in additional
capacity of over 30 million kilograms of wool tops, a
doubling of current top making capacity, and the creation
of 445 new jobs. Most of this additional output is for
export. This is yet another example of the importance to
Australia of market access, and why the Government has
placed so much importance on securing a successful GATT
outcome. 
That outcome now looks like delivering dollar benefits
for Australia at a conservatively estimated
billion. The immediate benefits to Australia will be in
agriculture, but the result will also see the textiles
and clothing sector again coming fully under the GATT
through the phasing out of existing import restrictions
under the Multi-Fibre Agreement ( MFA), particularly in
the important US and European Union markets.
This will free up the world trade in textiles and
clothing, estimated to be worth more than $ 100 billion
annually.
Australia will directly benefit from the liberalisation
in this sector as a substantial supplier of textile raw
materials and a growing exporter of made-up articles.
It is also reasonable to conclude that increased demand
should also push up commodity prices.
We are now in an excellent position to seize the
initiative and capitalise on the opportunities opening in
the international market for wool. I am confident that
our wool and wool-processing industry can emerge as
leading players.
I am confident, too, that the Geelong region will play an
important part in Australia's future success in this and
other industries, just as it has in the past.
Regional development is a matter of primary importance to
the Government, and, as you may be aware, we will next
week receive the report of a Task Force on regional
development, chaired by Mr Bill Kelty.
The Task Force has been inquiring into impediments to
economic development in the regions of Australia, and
into the ways in which regions can use their comparative
advantages to build their future prosperity.
There is no doubt that the internationalisation of the
Australian economy has had differing impacts on different
regions. We believe that if Governments, industry and regional
communities get together, identify the opportunities and
develop the strengths that already exist in abundance in
our regions, it will have major consequences for the
future well-being of this country.
And for the regions themselves, it will ensure that new
jobs and opportunities for enterprise and our youth can
be offered, that the local knowledge and expertise
essential to a prosperous future will not be lost, and
that the regions, which give Australia not just strength 
7
but character, will be revitalised for the twenty first
century. In conclusion, let me say again what a pleasure it is to
be here today at the beginning of a new partnership
between a great Australian industry and a great city of
Australia. And now let me officially declare the Geelong Wool
Combing facility open. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF SPEECH AND INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING, M. P.
GEELONG WOOL COMBING PLANT OPENING, CORIO, VIC
FRIDAY 10 DECEMBER, 1993
( Opening Remarks Speech):
I am very delighted to be here on this occasion. I think this says a great deal
about the change which is taking place In Australia, Indeed, In just this last
couple of days you can see the threads of the potential of the nineties coming
together.... with a conclusion of the GATT Round drawing to a close the
benefits of which, as you know, Australia has put the Cairns group together and
fought within the GATT now for seven years. And this agreement looks likely to
be conservatively worth about two and a half billion to Australia, which will make
a tremendous amount of difference not just In agriculture but In the trade In
goods and services. We have seen, yesterday, news of -further employment
growth In the economy leading now to 100,000 new jobs In three months which
means the economy is ticking away We had confirmation just a week or two
ago of the economy growing at about three and quarter percent and a week
before that with Inflation around two percent.
These are good things and we are seeing plants like this being developed in the
wake of Australia's competitiveness which has now been with us for the better
part of about six or seven years. So, this is a very great change and one which,
I think, these various portents hold for the 1 990s and for Australia taking Its
place more fully as a trading entity In the world 
-2-
( Doorstop Interview):
J: Prime Minister, have you had any response from the United States about
your concerns about the Blair House agreement?
PM: Well, we will be pursuing the m arket access questions right up until the
last moment but I think we have to record that the seven years of
organlsation and lobbying which Australia has organised through the
Cairns Group has now paid substantial dividends for us because we have
kept the pressure on the system and we are going to get an agreement
under the GATT and that agreement will conservatively be worth two
and a half billion dollars to Australia. That's the bulk of It. And its a case
now of understanding that with the large part of the bulk of It In place
we're now chasing down the last of the market access questions and we'll
do that right up until the agreement Is concluded.
J: What was the detail of the letter?
PM: Well, just saying that we'll still be pressing for access on particular
commodities but recording, with the President, our pleasure with the
United States' position to maintain the thrust of the Blair House
agreement, the Blair House Accord between the Government of the
United States and the European Community. That's what we wanted
most preserved. And the substance of that has been preserved and so
we're encouraging the President to complete the round, or have pressure
on to complete the round, also saying that In terms of some of the market
access questions we'd like to pursue these so that Australia walks away
with the best possible deal we can get.
J: ( naudible).. angry that it's been watered down?
PM: The Australian media wants to be permanently angry. What about being
permanently happy for a change? And that Is to say that we've got an
outcome that we could not have envisaged seven years not even
have envisaged seven years ago. At least a two and a half billion dollar
benefit to Australia; most of that agricultural change that Is there Is
because of this government. This government has built the structure to
develop a real place In the negotiations of an International GATT Round.
And we're now starting to draw some of the success from that in the
closing days of the Uruguay Rou nd. So, for Australia it's going to be a tip
top outcome. And if you take a plant like this plant here this plant will
now feed its product into a world textile Industry which Is no longer
constrained by the multi-fibre agreement, it's a two hundred billion dollar 
-3-
Industry and Wts going to be opened up to us, These are the sort of
opportunities which the GATT can produce which Australia has gone for
from the first moment It started In 1986.
J: If GATT was to go ahead with the amended Blair House Agreement In
place would It still be a tip top agreement?
PM: Let me just make a more general point because I haven't got all day here
I think what the GATs going to do Is underwrite a real pick-up in
confidence In the world and In Austraia. And that's coming as we confirm
that the Australian economy Is growing at three and a half percent, as we
saw yesterday the creation of 100,000 jobs In three months, as we saw
two weeks ago Inflation at around two percent. Australia is really well
poised to ship products competitively into the world as It renews Its own
economic recovery. And so, we're now a better set-up than perhaps
we've been In the last 20 or 30 years probably since the war to
participate In world trade as a competitive, Innovative nation and doing it
in a way which also brings the. regions of Australia Into It, like Geelong
and other regional parts of the country.
J: ( inaudible)... on rice, what would you consider a good outcome?
PM: I'm not here to give you a blow by blow, commodity by commodity answer
to that... simply to say that I was at the 1986 OECD meeting where the
Europeans were resisting putting agriculture Into the OECD communique.
Australia got It into the communique, we got It onto the G7 Summit In
Tokyo which was presided over by President Reagan, and a
consequence of that Is that agriculture went Into the round. And not just
agriculture, all the other things Australia Is Interested In, trade In services
and International property rights. So, we will have set up in a background
In trade that which we have never had before, and a large part of that
structure has been put there by Australia. Anid that's why I think the
Australian community should understand that a very big thing Is
happening here, and, I think, a very great achievement and one that I
hope will stand our economy in good stead for the next half century.
J: Can I ask a question about South Australia? What chance for Labor?
PM: In ele ctions you have to wait and see, as we found In March 1993. 1
notice there Is very demure punting by the media these days once
bitten, twice shy and all I say Is, that's a good policy.
Ends. 



13 -Dec .93
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
ADDRESS AT INFORMAL LUNCH FOR THE -WORK FOR AUSTRALIA!
TASK FORCE, THE LODGE, SUNDAY, 12 DECEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Distinguished guests, first of all could I say that Annita and I are delighted to
have you here and thanks very much for coming. We wanted to record two
things; one, the fact that so much effort and so much goodwill was invested in
the jobs program coming through 1992 and 1993 from the jobs summit of last
year and to thank each of every one of you and those not here who were
involved in the success of making so many of these programs work.... and to
focus now on the questions of regional development and the Task Force
report which Bill Keity has chaired and which he will present next Thursday.
In the last year, of course, during 1992 when we held the jobs summit it was
probably at the depths of one's hopes and aspirations for the economy and
for the labour market, and particularly for young people, And, we've sought to
find ways to make that transition from school to work, for young people, via a
program of enhanced training. Not just higher retention rates in schools
and that itself, I think, is very important because it needs to be remembered
that just ten years ago just under three -kids in ten completed secondary
school and that's now just under nine in ten... and that's a revolution in
education. And we've now added the equivalent of about 15 universities to
the system since 1986 and we're streaming those kids 40% of the output of
our secondary education system goes through into the universitites and now,
in 1992 at the time of One Nation, we also focused upon the development of
the thing we've probably lacked most in Australian education and that was an
expanded and revamped technical and further education system; a
comprehensive system of national vocational education for those kids who
are not going to qualify themselves for a tertiary institution but who wish to
get vocational qualifications which stand and will stand them in good stead
and which will be recognised across Australia.
And, so, with those two things the higher participation rate, the streaming
through university and also for those who drop out earlier than the
TEL TEL: No3.0. D01e c. 9P3.0: 162/ 11 
TEL 1. e 9 : 2N. 0 .7
2
completion of secondary school to take them through a school-to-work
training transition. And for that, of course, we've had great support from not
just employers but from the ACTU and the constituent unions in trying to build
the institutional arrangements to let that happen. led like to pay tribute here to
Bill. Kelty for his work, but more than that, his great view of the country and his
commitment to working people and particularly young people, into the
bargain. And also to Lindsay Fox who joined with him in going around talking
to regional Australia and seeing if they could find the jobs which we know,
basically, are there, and where we could exploit the labour market programs
which the Commonwealth had set up in 1988-89 and in 1990 and in the One
Nation statement of 1992.
It's one thing having these programs, it's another thing having them used,
having them taken up so that people understand they're there and that
acutally, particularly for small business, we can do so much with them. It's
been a fact of this period of recession that we've been through a productivity
surge; and that's another way of saying we've got more output from fewer
people. And we've seen very large lay-offs in industrial companies and that
had, of course, a debilitating effect upon the labour market
As we are now starting to see the economy pick up, I think this is something
really to rejoice in because we do have growth now running at about 3.25 per
cent, we are growing as fast as any other OECD economy, we have 100,000
job growth in the last three months and we are starting to see some of the
hints of the kind of recovery we had in 1983-84 in the labour market. That is,
we are starting to see some of that stronger job growth coming through. And
as you know, those of you who have been involved in these programs, it
makes all the world of difference in being able to leaven up the labour market
with some really new employment there and despite the efforts of people like
yourselves who have put young people on and give them training and work
experience to make that transition to permanent work and already you have
told me, so many of you today, that a high proportion of those who have gone
into the programs have actually found permanent work, they have been good
employees. It makes it so much easier with labour markets that much
stronger. And so I think that is happening now and there is no substitute for
growth. In which ever way one looks at employment, there is no substitute for
growth. And the essence of the Accord which Bill Kelly and I had so much to do with
from ten years ago was in fact an implicit deal, wage restraint for employment
and the wage restraint of the ' 80$ was taken up in more employment so that
today even with the unemployment we've had Australia has 26 per cent
growth in the work force over 1983 which is still quite a spectacular figure.
So it means that more people in households are in work than would have
been without Government policy focussing explicitly on growth.
I know that people say that all governments are in favour of growth, well yes
they are, but they don't set up the policies for growth. Most of the European
economies have not been in favour of growth, they have been in favour of
13 Dec 937: 12 No. 001 P. 07/ 11 
TEL 1. e 9 : 2N. 0 .8
3
firstly of low inflation and growth has been secondary and employment has
come way behind and they have now got 17 million unemployed people in
Europe. Now, we never took this policy in Australia. We actually went for
growth until we couldn't procure it particularly with the recession and the
International recession which was built around it.
But, always we have been about growing the economy faster and we are now
starting to see the economy accelerate and as it accelerates the link between
growth and jobs which has always been there is reappearing again. But, that
Is not to say that that will deal with those who are lo ng-term unemployed,
those who have fallen to the bottom of the labour market or who have been
unemployed for twelve months or more, that have lost their self esteem, that
have lost their skills, they have lost their place and they are the people we
said in the election campaign we wouldn't forget and a day before Bill
presents his report we'll have the Employment Task Force report, the first
such major inquiry since the Second World War into the labour market which
we hope will focus some new directions on how we can bring the long-term
unemployed back up and back into the mainstream of Australian society.
Because we want to avoid things that happened In Europe and in countries
like Britain where there is 10 or 11 per cent unemployment, but wage rates
continue to rocket and you say; well, how can wage rates rocket when you
have got a pool of unemployment and the answer is because they are
sidelined they are out never to come back and the labour markets
requirements are then met with new entrants to the work force, from schools,
new people joining the labour market.
So, we don't want that to happen and we do want to focus on those long-term
unemployed and to bring them back into the main culture of Australian
society, the economy and the labour market and that Is why the jobs
programs are important, that's why the labour market programs are important,
they are not in themselves job creation programs as much as they are things
that find people who have been disadvantaged In the labour market or longterm
unemployed and give them a chance to get work experience, self
esteem and a permanent job.
Now, In the ones which Bill . and Lindsay ( Fox) and you are focussed on are
mainly for those who are young people those in that sort of 16 to 20 area
who have never had the joy of being in employment and having that kind of
independence. So, it was a problem of particular size and dimension and we
have attacked that and Bill gave you the figures a moment ago that there are
50,000 jobs there committed and 31,000 in place and that is a tremendous
effort and I think that we should, while there is a lot of corporate effort here in
the doing of that, just record the fact that Bill Kelty and Lindsay Fox were the
prime movers in this coming from that jobs summit last year and they are to
be congratulated for the hope and the joy they have given so many young
people. The future now is how do we get the labour market moving again? How do
we bring those who have been disadvantaged back into it? How do we build
13. Dec .937: 12 No-001 P. 08/ 11 
13 Dec 93
4
on the skills that we have? Because don't doubt for a moment that Australia
has been through an absolute revolution in the way this economy is set up in
the last ten years. We are more now outward looking, we are more confident,
we now recognise what our strengths are more than we have ever done and
as a consequence we are now building on those skills and those advantages
and whien often the advantages are right under our nose we can't see them.
But I think Australians now appreciate the particular advantages which we
have and that we are out there to build upon them and to make them work
and that is why we can see, I think, a greater future for regional areas in this
country and regional Australia is so well represented here today and it has to
be I think, to build on our comparative advantage; first of all to recognise it, to
understand it, to build on it and to see where the regions of this country can
find themselves in the national and international economy of the Asia-Pacific
In particular. This we are doing and we are doing it not as successfully as we
would like, but we have started I think, to understand that there are many
diverse advantages and skills in regional Australia and that that is something
to build upon.
I look forward to the receipt of Bill's report next week to give us a chance to
even up employment and business opportunities across Australia and to let
the regions of Australia know that they are also part of the great economic
change of the last ten years and the benefits will not simply be the preserve
of the cities, but also of the regional areas.
There is a new co-operative ethic In Australia, a productive and co-operative
ethic which has come out of this, There is a sea change in business, I mean
ten years ago what business wanted was more tariff protection, but when you
look at the business environment today it something that hardly anybody in
business ten years ago would have imagined. That was, we are 30 per cent
more competitive than ten years ago; we have got an inflation rate of 2 per
cent instead of 10 per cent; we have got a competitive exchange rate
mechanism in place; we have got a 33 per cent corporate tax rate instead of
46 per cent; we have got removal of the double tax on dividends so dividends
are taxed only once, where in the ' 70s and early ' 80s we had debt taxed once
and equity taxed twice now we have got debt taxed once and equity taxed
once so we are really set up a good depreciation schedule and a very high
profit share in the economy.
So, all these things are there basically now to power investment along in a
sustainable way and particularly now with the banking sector somewhat more
experienced and more mature coming from the early days of financial market
deregulation. We are going to see scarce national assets put in the right
places this time rather than simply chasing inflation in property and other
things and so when you look at the whole of that together, that tremendous
mix and the fact that we are also not just set up for growth and investment
and employment, but we are sitting in the area of the world that is growing
most rapidly in the Asia-Pacific. And in that the Government in the last ten
years has pursued the GATT Round which is now coming to a successful
conclusion; where there will be about a $ 2.5 billion advantage for Australian
TEL TEL: No3.. 0De0 .19 37P: 1.029 / 11 
TEL: 13. Dec. 93 7: 12 No
producers in world markets as a consequence of the GATT and then in the
things the GA77 can't do In our immediate area we are setting up APEC
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation into an economic community-which will
see Australia integrated for the first time in its commercial history truly
integrated outside of empire preference which was a thing that powered us
along in the late 19th Century and early 20th Century will be set up in the
Asia-Pacific as an integral part, as a country integrated into it as never
before. So, you took at the big market of the Asia-Pacific, our integration with it a
really good fine texture in the GATT rules for agriculture, intellectual property,
services and goods that gives us a good set of rules and dispute settling
mechanisms to really power trade along and then look at our own economy
per cent more competitive, low inflation, the lowest interest rates for
years, a good fiscal scene; all of these things I think mean that Australia
really can participate and the Australian economy can continue to change as
it has been changing.
This must spread through to the regions of this country and that this is an
Inclusive change which involves the whole of the community and that means
that nobody gets left out and that means particularly the young people, those
who are young and unemployed, the long-term mature aged unemployed and
the regions of Australia which have felt the pinch of the recession and
unemployment even more cruelly than other parts of the country.
So, we wanted to just record with you today, firstly our thanks for what you
have done in dedicating yourselves to the work and happiness of so many
young people who might not have otherwise found themselves in employment
and the esteem which comes with it, for focussing on the problems of regional
Australia and co-operating with Bill and Lindsay Fox in trying to articulate
what they are, in articulating to the task force the problems and being able to
communicate those to us so that as we focus on this coming Budget we can
look at the reception of the Employment Task Force and the Regional
Development Task Force reports, consider them in policy as a whole, as a
totality at a time when the economy has got some natural lift in it and where
the labour market is responding.
So these are, I think, cause for hope that we can really do much better across
the country, but particularly in regional terms next year and in the next couple
of years as the economy really gets a spurt on.
So could I again just thank you for coming. Annita and I are pleased to see
you here at The Lodge to share this day with us and as I say to record our
thanks for your commitment to young people, for the effort you made and to
awaken employers who didn't know about the labour market programs, that
they do exist and there Is real complement to them in terms of labour that Is
available under these Commonwealth labour market programs. And, can I
say again finally to Bill Kelty thank you Bill for your very unselfish efforts
over the last 18 months on the road so many days in each week and so many .001 P. 10/ 11 
TEL: 13. Dec. 93 7: 12 No. 001 P. 11/ 11
6
nights into regional Australia and with Lindsay who is not here at the moment,
but may arrive later there are some great people on Australian business and
they have stuck their neck out and they have made a great effort and I want
to thank them too. But to those of you who are representing regional
councils, regional institutions, companies, the CES, radio, television and
other important areas of the regional economy, thank you ever so much for
coming, we hope you enjoy the day and you will give me an enhanced
opportunity to talk to you because while I get around the regions quite a bit,
you can never get so many regions crowded into one place at one time as
today and that is something I am looking forward to.
Thank you. We will now complete our official speeches and we can go and
have a lunch and have a pleasant talk together, thank you one and all. 



PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE1F PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P4. KEATIN( G, MP
OPENING OF ARTHUR BOYD RETROSPECTIVE
ART GALLERY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
TUESD) AY 14 DECEMBER 1993
1 am delighted to bc here this evening at the opening of a long overdue retrospective
exhibition of the work of one of Australia's, not to mention the world's, great living
painters. At the time of Arthur's last retrospective, the critical notice in the Adelaide Advertiser
was accompanied by a special offer of a washing machine for forty nine guineas, which
gives you an idea of how long it has been between drinks.
Thirty years in fact.
That is remarkable in itself. But what is even more remarkahlc is that, at the time or
thec Adelaide retrospective, Arthur had already been painting ror thirty years.
He started painting at a Lime, as one writer has said, when the air was heavy with the
arrogance and respectability of old men, old and tired in spirit and in the handling of
painlt. When some critics were happy to announce that Australian art pointed to the way in
which life should be lived in Australia, with the miaximum of flocks and the minimum
of factories.
A permanent Antipodean arcadia.
We owe Arthur Boyd a large debt for removing Australian art from this rcalm of
provincial complacvency.
With sonmc of the most compelling image., of any painter before or since, he showed us
those factories and the social deprivation which went with them, lie opened our eyes
to the horrors of war. To the plight of indigenous Australians and our callous
disregard for their future. To the threat to our environment. 
Like Nolan and Drysdale, whose work was also featured during the 1964 Adelaide
Festival, Arthur Boyd has provided us with new ways of seeing Australia and a new
sense of being Australian.
A warts and all way. A way that. is more complete, and thereby mome valid.
This is not to suggest that Arthur's work is a catechism of grim rectitude. Nothing
could be further from the truth.
As befits such a delightful character, his work is full of jollity, of gentlc mockery and
self deprecation. But at the appropriate time, as I have said, it is serious too.
Someone once said that Arthur Boyd as a painter of the Australian landscape was able
to successfully combine the golden vision of Streeton with the darkness conveyed by
earlier painters such as Buvclot and thereby to show us the hush it rcally was a
thing of menace as well as beauty.
In a more general sense too, he has enabled us to sec the darkness as well as the light
in Australian life. Just as Manning Clark did. Just as novelists like Rodney Hall and
David Malouf are doing.
For the last sixty years, despite the fashions of the moment, he has been there, taking
our spiritual temperature, and offering his prognosis for our national well-being in his
own unique way.
Not hecoring or harassing. Jus opening our cyes to things which wc might have been
otherwise inclined to overlook or sweep under the national carpet.
As he himself has said, he has been concerned with a certain grandeur in things, even
little things. And he has been second to none in helping us to comprehend the
dimensions of that grandeur.
People whose judgment is much morc expert than mine see in Arthur's work a wide
ranige of influences. At times it seems that of itself it is a mini-history of Western art.
But, as Barry Pearce points out in the exhibition catalogue, while he has takcen what he
has needed from European tradition, he has also given back something of his own
which is a sense of our essential difference.
He has brought to Australians, and to the world at large, a sense of the Australian
identity. In this way he has lived up to the credo of the Antipodean Manifesto " in the growth
and transformation of its myths a society achieves its own sense of idcntity. In this
process the artist may play a creative and liberating rol." Y
Other artists have played this role too, but it is hard to recall anyone who has played it
better. 
Arthur's own career has so far spanned sixty years.
But when one takes into account his remarkable forbears and talented relations, it is
fair to say that when we eecbrate Arthur's achievements we arc also paying tribute to
the Boyd family. The Boyds have been intimately connected with art and letters in
Australia for well over a century.
And in a country which has only known Lwo centuries of European settlement, such a
family contribution to our history is surely unique.
It is fair to say that, for ordinary Australians, the idea of being grateful for the
existence of partcular faimilies is somewhat a novel idea.
From the early days of the colony we have rejected the idea of a bunyip aristocracy, of
the idea of special status deriving from the inheritance of money, or property or other
privilcgc. But the Boyd family is nothing like that.
Their status derives from the spiritual rather than the material dimension from the
fertility of their imagination, and their ability to convert it by pen, paintbrush or pottcrs
wheel to a vision of ourselves which we otherwise mightn't have had.
Arthur, I'm sure, because he is such a modest and unassuming person, would be the
last person to claim any special status for his family indeed, he would probably reject
it with the same vehcmence that he rejects any ascription of special status for himself.
But he is a special Australian, as the work in this exhibition attests.
And an Australian of rare gencrosity.
Many people here tonight arc probably aware that some of the works in this exhibition
are part of the 1975 Boyd gift to the National Gallery. A gift which played no small
part in getting the Gallery going.
But not enough for the Boyds.
Early this year I met Arthur and Yvonne in the sadder circumstances of a memorial
service to their brother-in-law and great friend, Sir Sidney Nolan.
I was privileged to be able to speak about Si Nolan's legacy to Australia's cultural life,
just as I have been able to do in relation to Arthur today.
And I was able too to announce the Government's acceptance of the girt by Arthur and
Yvonne Boyd of their beloved Bundanon properties.
This was a gift to the nation of profound significance, and one which the
Commonwealth Government was proud to accept and to support. 
Subsequently the Bundanon ' Irust was established and we provided $ 5.43 million to
help it bring to reality Arthur Boyd's great vision for Bundanon.
As if that gift wasn't enough, I am plcased to be able to announce tonight that the
Bundanon Trust is to be the beneficiary equally with his children of the copyright in
all of Artur Boyds works.
Arthur's assignment of his copyright means that his support for the work of the Trust
will continue for many ycars to come.
The Bundanon gift is valued in money terms at more than $ 12 million.
I hope that Arthur and Yvonne Boyd's great generosity will be matched by thc rest of
Austalia when the Bundanon Trust commences its major gifts campaign early next
year with my strong support.
All Australians wil have the opportunity to assist Bundanon through the Trust's
Donations, Friends of Bundanon and Merchandising Programs, and I urge them to do
SO. It remains for me to congratulate the Art Gallery or New South Wales for the
tremendous achievement of putting this show together. Edmund Capon, Barry Pearce
and Patricia McDonald have assembled a collection which can more than hold its own
with any of the overseas blockbusters.
And that perhaps gives the truest indication of the achievement of Arthur Boyd.
To a painter who wanted to paint the Great Picture, or if not the great one, then some
very good ones, I can only say in sincere admiration, Arthur, that your wish has been
granted in abundance, and we arc all the better for it.
And now I have great pleasure in declaring the exhibition open. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ANNE SUMMERS' BOOK, " DAMNED WHORES AND GOD'S
POLICE", SYDNEY, 24 JANUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Anne, if I had of known you were this popular I would never have let you leave
my staff. You must accompany me more often with this guaranteed turn out of
media. Well, it is a great delight to be launching the book for an old friend, as Anne is,
and to be doing so where it is recognised that of all her great achievements, this
is perhaps one of her greatest, probably her greatest, because this book has
been continuously in print for nineteen years and it has sold more than 60, 000
copies. That must be a real feather in the cap for Anne, and for Penguin and
now as Bob says the book has been revised and Anne has written a couple of
new chapters at the beginning and at the end, and revised the work in its
substance. One of the things which I thought touched me in the book, she says it is logical
that the generation which launched the movement will have to see it through.
There is a certain weariness about that statement, which I well understand.
Anne is a baby boomer, and so am I, I was in the middle run of the baby
boomers born in 1944, when I turned 50 the other day I knew that all the Peter
Pan notions that we baby boomers have had, because we have resisted ageing
as no generation before us has resisted ageing, and that basically it is a losing
battle, a losing battle.
But we are still in there punching away, putting our views about, trying to reform
the place, moving the debate on. Anne is in that classic tradition of the activist
baby boomers of Australia. So here she is with her famous publication doing it
again, after having returned to Australia from a very exciting and interesting
period abroad and re-establishing herself here and doing things, further things,
for the Australian women's movement and for the status of women in this
country. Now, this notion of hers, she said it was logical that the generation which
launched the movement will have to see it through. And the other interesting
thing she said when saying that, she said that when she was editor of Ms 
magazine in the United States the staff came to see her about the management
of the magazine and some of its content. And the presumption was by Anne and
her partner, the staff would be pretty much wanting to see things the way she
had seen things, and to be committed to, if not just simply the same ideals, the
same vision, particularly for the status of women and women's issues. And they
said to her, we are here to say that we did not want to be and don't want to be
like the editors. In other words, the debate had moved on, and the success
which women had had, particularly feminists in the ' 60s and ' 70s, with women's
issues, changing the status of women, had been so profound that the next
generation of people to follow them were in fact living in a different epoch and
that their vision and vista and their objectives were not the objectives of those
who had been the pioneers of change and of the movement.
With some basking, I think, in the success which they had brought, Anne was
then, as you know, running and editing a magazine where the staff were looking
from a position for some plateau in the change of the status of women. In ways
which were different to Anne, which drew upon the strength of the changes
which people like her had made. And she said that we now have to, in making
that statement which I said has weary overtones, have to start thinking about
things like being frail and elderly, and the lack of economic independence. Well,
she is not frail and elderly yet, but there may be some baby boomers who are
frail and elderly. So in other words, the issues change, and we are going across
the life cycle of a generation of women who started this at university, started
these issues, being involved in these issues at university and have gone on to
see the changes through.
One of the things I thought was most telling, and she makes reference to it in the
book, was the survey which was conducted in 1992 amongst Australian women
about the attitudes of women to the changes which have taken place in society.
And Anne was on my staff at the time and we considered the survey results very
closely. Women were pleased with the changes in their lives, with the increased
opportunities, with the greater freedom, with the independence coming from
employment, the much higher participation rates in education in fact the
dominate participation rates in education. They valued the choices which the
changes of the ' 60s and ' 70s and the ' 80s had brought to them.
And so one of, I think, Anne's conclusions upon returning to Australia from the
United States was that women's lives have changed enormously in Australia
across the course of the ' 80s at least, if not the ' 70s. But the changes were not
only here to stay, but women were rejoicing in the changes and enjoying the
choices and opportunities and that one of the frequent subjects of discussion
was the role of men in coming to terms with the changes in their lives in their
new relationship with women, their wives and partners, and that being part and
parcel of the current debate.
Now, I think it is true that those changes have been profound and that they are
widely enjoyed by Australian women. Because there is no doubt, if I look at my
political life, over 24 years, the status and opportunities of Australian women
today are nothing like they were when I became a member of Parliament in
1969. And a large reason for that is because of the pioneering work which has 
been done by those interested in the status of women, the feminists, and by
people like Anne Summers.
Now these changes are very real, and I just mentioned a moment ago the
participation in schools and in university, now there are of course, more women
graduating from universities than men, in technical and further education this is
also true, we have got a higher participation rate in secondary school now
amongst women than men. And all of this has meant a dramatic change in the
opportunities for Australian women.
Now, we have had a lot of talk in this country in the last year or so about
reconciliation between Aboriginals and non-Aboriginal Australians. The word
reconciliation has been used a lot and used with all of the meaning that it
deserves to be used with. But one of the great reconciliations which is underway
now, is a reconciliation between men and women and the lives they now lead,
with the changed role of women, the changed opportunities of women and it will
be, I think, many a long year before that reconciliation is complete, if ever.
But the progress and opportunities underlying it I think are fairly profound. And I
think most men understand that and they are adjusting their view of life and
society and opportunity, in terms of the changes which have taken place, and
the reconciliation which is required of it. It's a major adjustment by men to the
new order of life which has come about because of the efforts of many women
like Anne.
One of the things she talks about is domestic violence, and she laments the
prevalence of it as we all do because there was a lot of violence against
women in the early days of this country, and it's more the pity that it's still a partand-
parcel of Australian life. It's something I think we all have to be conscious
of. It's something which I think we all have to try and remedy. As much as one
can make public policy remedy it, the Govt remains very interested in the subject
and determined to do something meaningful about it. But again, it's something
which only societal change and education and understanding can, I think, really
make the difference in terms of that issue.
One of the revelations in the book -Anne said of course she needs to bring it upto-
date, and in a sense she's sort of admitting she's brought herself up-to-date
by saying that she's now a fervent pragmatist. Now, these are words Anne
would never have uttered not so many years ago. I could have saved her a lot of
anguish if she'd asked me 19 years ago, but I'm not quite sure she would have
been taking that kind of advice from me then. If even now. I know a lot of
people think there is a great contradiction between pragmatism and ideals,
between pragmatism and vision and the words become one which is overworked
and, of course, misunderstood. But pragmatism is not cynicism. It is
about learning the lessons of things, and seeing how one can advance visions
and objectives. A lot of my public life in the years before were managed by
ideology. We had the largely competing polarities the ideology that
intervention by governments in society was the appropriate way society should
run and then the competing ideology that the more unfettered is life and society
from government intervention, the better. We've seen that pendulum swing over 
the period between the Calvin Coolidges in the US and the Richard Nixons and
the Ronald Reagans. Then on the other side, the planned economies of Eastern
Europe and less so the social democratic parties' interventions in policy over the
course of the century. These have been the competing ideological things. But
what's happened, is that ideology has faded as in fact communities demand
changes from governments and those people who are given a role in managing
society. And so one looks for if you like visions and then objectives within
those visions, and the going about of getting those objectives, and in the doing
of it materially advance the welfare of people, of men and women. I think
Anne's confession to being a fervent pragmatist, is that when she looks at the
women's agenda in this country from the late 60' s onwards and so much having
been accomplished when one compares Australia to other countries, not just in
Australian terms, but it in international terms, so much in terms of the change in
the status of women having been accomplished in this country she's seen
being put into place like building blocks. One block, on top of another block, on
top of another block the foundation, a structure and one moves on. In other
words, it can't all be done instantly. And while it's idealistic, if it's simply
ideological it probably won't happen or wouldn't have happened. The changes
needed to be engineered by interested people who knew what they were doing,
who set for themselves objectives at the time, and went and pursued those
objectives and brought them home.
Now, this is very much a commentary on life in general and certainly in
government and something which I've very much subscribed to myself. One
has a broad vision a big canvas as I've often called it -and then one sets up the
objectives and goes after them, one after the other, until there is a coherent
whole and when one reaches a plateau with a firm set of foundations, one
builds on further and goes on further.
Now, if that's called pragmatism, that's what's changed Australia from an insular,
frightened society one not prepared to get out and trade, and to deal with the
rest of the world in its own terms in the 60' s and 70' s to now a burgeoning,
outward-oriented and confident society and economy. It's been done by that
method. So too, have the changes in the status of women in this country been done in
that way. That is, those achievable things are understood to be achievable, and
those committed to their achievement go after it. It's sometimes called
pragmatism, but it's very effective and it's the effectiveness which I think Ann
recognises and nominates. Let me just give you an example. She came back to
Australia, to. join my staff, and then set about feminising me which she knew
was basically a hopeless task. But really what she set about was what she
always set about -and that was how next to try and improve the lot and status of
Australian women. With some other very committed people on my staff and in
the Prime Minister's Department, and in the Office of Status of Women and,
need I say, with an enlightened Cabinet we put together some changes which
have been very material just over the course of the year, in further improving the
status of Australian women. Child care, an issue which went to opportunity in
work, was advanced by the Government announcing and setting into policy, the
payment of a generalised child care rebate making this an area of availability in 
the normal course of the Government's disbursement system, an opportunity for
women to join the workforce. It's something which we'd never had before, even
though the Government extended child care opportunities with child care places
we'd never had a generalised rebate for child care. It's there now, and of
course we announced further extensions of child care. The other change which I
think, amongst many, which was notable, was the cashing out of the dependent
spouse rebate into a home child care allowance which evened up some of the
benefits and incentives of the tax-free threshold and income-splitting and
recognised the fact that the primary chair at home had the responsibility and that
there are payments to be made. Rather than simply a rebate for dependents,
they were paid as cash by the Government to the accounts of that person
mostly of course, the woman, the Mother, at home. That I think is going to
change forever, the way in which we regard support for dependents in the
Commonwealth, and the way in which we will support and make available to
women in the main those direct payments, and the capacity that change provides
to do other things in policy. It was a landmark change, and the women's
movement have been arguing for it for many years and Anne was there at the
key time to bring the enthusiasm about and to get support for and to drive it
home. She's a great networker, she's a great talker. She's tremendously energetic and
everyone who has known her, can only marvel at the depth of energy she's
always been able to bring to bear on any subject, and the enthusiasm that she
has. As well as that, she has that other glorious quality, and that is she has a
great sense of humour. There are enough bores in the world without us needing
to be burdened further all of us particularly in important areas of policy, by
people who've got the blinkers on and are so serious, that it just becomes such a
leaden issue that one can hardly deal with it. Anne's always had that lightness
about her, that sense of fun, of joy, and I think this has made her so much more
effective, and has given her a sense of balance on life which has been terrific
for her and everyone associated with her.
Now I know her Mum's here today, and Chip's here, and all the people who are
close to her are friends to rejoice in the fact that this celebrated work by this
very celebrated person, has been re-written for another generation of
Australians men and women. It's a standard text now in our tertiary institutions,
and as a consequence Penguin has a been on a winner for a long time, and it's
likely to stay on a winner. So, could I say to Penguin, congratulations again
first of all on supporting Anne in the first place and encouraging her through the
years, to update this seminal work as the status of Australian women has
changed. And congratulations to Anne, for putting, her mind again to this
important work, which has traced over time the evolution from 1788 to the
present, the threads of exclusion and oppression, the threads of
misunderstanding and misrepresentation, the threads of prejudice, of
victimisation, of the threads of violence. It's there, written tightly for all to read,
recording the changes as we've made them. Congratulations, Anne. It's a great
pleasure to be associated with you again on this happy occasion, and to launch
if it needs launching again your seminal work Damned Whores and God's
Police. Thank you. 



TEL: EMBARGOED AGAINST DELVIBRY
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON I' J KEATINGO Mp
AUSTRALIA DAY, ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY
26 JANUARY 1994
Ladies and Sentlemien
It is traditional to make personal resolutions on the first day of the year. On the 26th day
We Australians could do worse than to imake out natinnal resolu. tions our collective,
Corporate resolutions.
By thc-26th January, we have had our break from work most of us. Mercifully free from
work and politics, we have had time to reflect.
On the fthMs In the bush and the backyard we have communed a little with the couguy
and our countrymecn and women. We have travelled the highways, seen a bit more of thi
place, got the fedl of It again.
We have watched Australians fuiously competing on land and sea and, who knows, seen
in them some reflection of ourselves or something we would like to be.
If we have 1xccn aniung the countlless thousands who use thc holidays to go to galleries,
theatrcs, museums and festivals of all decciptions, the chances are we have ever so
slightly re-adjusted our conception of what Australia memn and what it mea= to be
Australian. And in general I suspect that, whatever we have done, the majority of us have returned to
work rcncwcd in the belief that, on balance, there is no better place to live than this. Yet
it is also true that many Australians will go back to work this year uncertain of the future.
Many Australians will return unconvinced that we have made the most of what we have,
or that we can shape our destiny.
Thc truth is too many have reason to be unconvinced. And too many have no work to
rcturn to.
Ladics anid gentlicuz
The vicw from here, across the harbour to the nation's birthplace, can only inspire
confidciice. We can stand here and admiire the beauty of it, and all the symbols of our energy and
griuwth, and justly say that Austraslians havc created a great, vigorous and rich society.
T2E6L:. Jan. 94 10: 34 No. 002 P. 01/ 04 
I CLL. zo. Jdl.~ 4 U;-4 Nf'UUZ4 t U2/ U4
2
But this view Is not available to all Australians. Thc view varies from suburb to suburb,
town to town, workplace to workplace, farm to tarm across the continent. Too often the
view takes in hardsh~ ip, discrimination, and waste.
Thc view depends on the limits of opportunity it depends on the extent to which
communities and individuals have weathered change and the recession, the degree to
which they have it within their power to adapt and renew themselves.
It depends on industry and investmecnt, on employment and educational opportunitice.
It depend-s, thcrcforc, on the extent to which we all of us are prepared to say that, vast
and varied as the continent is, this is one nation and all are part of it.
It depends on the degree to which we are dcteined to balance the principles of freedom
and individuality with the principles of fairnes, cure and responsibility. In that balanc, it
seems to me, lies the principle of nationhood.
This year the lesson has surely never been clearer.
A3 thc New Year unfolded and we enjoyed all the traiditional pleasures of an Austra~ ian
summer, not for the first time we were stopped short by the spectacle of our fellow
Australians desperately defending lives and property.
71oz bushfires in New South Wales, like the floods in Victoria a few months earlier, were
a reminder that we live in a land which is plentiful and benign yet also cruel and
unforgiving. B~ ut Australians have known that since the first months of scttlemient across there at
Sydney Cove.
Thc rcal lessons of the fires seem to me to lie in our response.
Seeing the landscape ravaged by fire reminded us of our love for it.
Seeing mcn and women fighting to save lives and homes and all the products of their
labour remindcd us of the ties that bind Australians wherever they live.
And seeing them triumph reminded us of what we can achieve when we are moved by
thes affections and work together.
In the end It was a triumph of expczience and commitment, of the things we know and the
things we feel ahout Australia.
Thc rcsponw, was magnificent. T'he hindrances to effot and cfficiency in the normal
cours Of OUr affairs appeared to vanish.
State rivalries were put aside.
The bureaucratic black holes and red tape were replaced by dedication and urgency.
Suddenly thcrc was nut a hint of cynicism in the media.
And when it wus over, even as we counted the losscs, we knew the remarkable thin&amp; was
how miuch had been saved.
It waIs a victory. And our faith in ourselves was stronger.
It scem~ s to mc that we can vcry usefully take the lessons into 1994 and beyond. 
I I.. L-: 3
We have been through a decude of change and through three yamS of economic recaion.
We now have in economic recovery a broad strons recovery and, because of our
effort,, before us liet an * era of immcnse opportunity.
We have on our hands whAt we haven't had for over a quarter of a cenaury a strong low
inflation recovery which gives us the potential to make the balance of the 19909 one of
thc best periods of opportunity this century.
But we should be in no doubt that this recovery was won by our own exertions.
We got here by virtue of out collcctive will, out collective faitht, our colloctive ability to
think and fight our way thiough it.
What we make of our opportunities in the nineties will equally be a product of out
collecive effort.
And I think there is another lesson we cannot fail to see.
As thim economic recovcry gathers strength we will beat sonie people begin to say in
fact we are already hearing them ever so faintly let's not worry about the unemnployed,
or the communities which are not doing so wel,.
Lat's not pause to take them with us or we might lose momentum.
We's leave them to take their chances in a reinvioratod market place.
Every time we hca this said, we should remember the bushfircs.
We can no more abandon the unemployed or strggling communities than we could have
abandoned those in the path of the fires.
Our sense of justice tells us that we cannot turn our backs on them, but so does common
sense, the sense which tells us that an Injury to one group ofT Australians Is an injury to all,
and that we are all strengthened when we act in concert.
This must not be a recovery for some and not o thczs.
It must not be a top-end-of-town recovery. It will not be for making paper fortunes at
the cxpense of productive investment which will deliver wealth and jobs in the long term.
The rccovery must reach into every community.
It must give hope and opportunity to all Australians.
It must give every Australian the chance to benefit and contribute.
On this Australia Day 1994, on the most sober understanding of the realities, we might
reasonably resolve to make this one of thc great ycars in our history.
Wc might rcasoiiably think that 1994 can be the year on which a future generation might
one day look back anid say tha~ t was thc year when the decision was taken: the year,
wvhen, without ceremony or fanfare, or any campaign to drive thcm, in government and
boardrooms, workplaces and communitics the people of Australia resolved not to waste
the chance which this economic rccovery offers us.-
It cain be the year, I'nm surc, when as a people and a nation we dcide that we will build on
the hard work of the last decade: zo. ian. IJ4 NO. UU 2 
zo. jafl. j IU:,) 4 NO. UUZe r. U"/ u' 4
4
that we will make surn the burden of change and the burden of recession which the
country has borne will not be for nothinS oc for a few
that we Will not squandcrT Our energy anld wealth in corporate greed, or secional
interest, or bureaucratic Inefficiency of provinzcial rivalry
that we will uot rztreat from the future, Or fear it. but take it on aW shape it in the
image of our traditions, beliefs and affections for Austalia and all its peopl.
It cAn be the year in which we recognisc as rarely before in our history, the common caus
among us and pitch in for the future of Australia.
Ladles and Sentlen
Ou Australia Day we honour an Australian who by personal inspiration and effort Wa
made an outstanding contribution to the life of the nation.
It seems to me that the Award Of Australian of the Yea and Young Australian of the yeau
illustatcl the point I have been malcing today,
Thesc awards aire for great Individual achievement, but more often than not they go to
men and womnen whose eforts have been directed towards helping and inspiring others
We honour them on Australia Day because by their eXample they deepen our faith in
Australia and Strengthen tbc ties betwtcn us.
llank you. 



TEL 27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 02/ 08
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KFATING, MP
TO THE UK/ AUSTRALIA TRADE AND INVESTMENT CONFERENCE
MELBOUIMN, 27 JANUARY 1994
Mr Premier and Mis Kennctt, Mr arnd Mrs Hescltine, Sir Derek Hornby, ministcrial
colleagues, Indies and gcntleinea.
I an prateful for the opportunity to open this very important conference.
And let me begi b~ cxtcnding to our guests from the Ulnited Kingdom a vcry wam
wecmet a-thank you for coming.
For those who Interpret the cumrnt debastc about our constitutional arrangements; a3
marking a decline in the rclationship betweeut our two coutres this coinferice offers a
timely corrective.
It is further proof that, far from declining, the relationship has reached a new level of
maturity. It should surprise no one that in 1994 we Australians are debating questions of identity
and sovcrclinry and, because it Is germanec to the debate, our rcmainWig constitutional
links with The United Kingdom.
And it should surprise no one that last night His Royal Highness also formally rcwoised
the truth of this it should not surprise us because few Englishmen have taken such a
close interest in Australia for such a ton&amp; time and few, I suspe~ ct, have such a sympathetic
understanding of the issues which concern us.
These debates reflect nothing more or less than recognition of a chartfing rcality. And the
pivotal change Is thc change in our trading and investment relationship.
That is why this conference comes at such a stratcgic moment it undcrlincs the
unarguable, but little appreciated. fact that the business relationship between our two
countries is stronger than it has bcn for many years and it has the potential to grow much
stronger. It underineis thc fact that our new more independent relationship is mutually rewarding.
It is, to quote Mir Major just a year a~ o, a " new relationship which is well suited to the late
twcntieth century and which holds pentzy of promise for the future".
A new relationship which builds on our common heritage, cultural and institutional
ajffinities and substantial commercial links, while acknowlcdging that the direction of
policy in each country has, of necessity, changed. 
To put It in the baldcst terms: as Europe has been to Britain in the last twenty five years
the Asia Pacific has been to Australia in the last decade namely, the place where our
principal interess lie, the placc whert out future lies, thc place where Australia simply
had to find a role.
As N&amp; r Ma jor said " it is perfectly natural for two nations on Opposite sides of the world to
dcvclop distinctive characters, to carvc out paillcular roles in t heir own regions, to pursue
policies which promote their own economic interest-.."
Therc is no doubt that this is much imore widely und erstood and ac~ ptcd than it was even
a year or two ago.
But much less understood, I am sure, is the degree to which the pursuit of our own
interests creates clmplemcmna interests~ and considerable new potential for both of us.
The tact is, the maturing and modernisation of our relationship has enlivened and
enlarged it.
And I might add I am in no doubt that maturing and modernising our constitutional
relationship would have a similar effect.
Lct me quote a few flgures to illustrate the strength of the economic relationship;
IlTe UK is Australia's fourth largest trading partner
our largest services trade partner
our eIl1ith largest export Miarkcet
our third largest source of imports
our fastest growing European export markct
ou thid l rgest souceof tourist
our sccond ;~ reintvfreisnto r
* out second largest destination for investment
our largest foreign investor in manufacturing
The exciting dimension to this profile is, of course, the change in the na= a of
investment.
No longer do British firms invest in Australia because they can get behind tariff wail in
order to scrvice the domestic market.
No longer does Austialia have such a tariff wall.
1instead, Australia has the confidence and ability to compete Internationally in
manufacturing and services, just as we have done for many years in agricultural an~ d
mining products.
The Australian domestic marqct continues to attract British investment becuse, with our
population steadily increasing, the market is expandig.
But today British firms along with firms fromn other countries also invest here because
they know they can compete internationally [ loin an Australian base. I
And, in particular, they know that Australia is an ideal beachhead for thc most dynamic
markets in the world the Asia-Pacific markvis.
Some of you will have sccn in today's Financial Review a summary of a report by Clayton
Utz called Doing Business ut Auvrrafia. The report details just how attractive the
Australian beachhead is. For Instance: 
27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 04/ 08
3
Operatjngf costs are 40 to 105 per cant cheaper than Singapore. 105 to 286 per cent
cheaper th~ an Hong Kong.
E DO phone costs arc 50 to 85 per cent cheaper than Singapore, up to S0 pcr cent
cheaper than Hong Kong.
Managerial costs are substantially lower.
We have a distinct skills base advantage.
Thet report concludes: " Looking ahead five to ten yemr and beyond, one camiot be other
than optimistic about Australia's future."
And that is the truth of the matter.
The simple fact is that we are a low cost, efficient location for business.
And a low tLx location last year the corporate rate was reduced to 20%, along with
provision6 -accelecrated dcprcciation, an investmnent allowance of up to 30 per cent, and a
150 per cent tax concession for research and developmnent expenditure.
Australia's real unit labour costs are almost ten per cent lower than a decade ago and our
labodumarktsa6re infinitely more flexible and responsive.
Today you may have read that the Australian company, Transficid, outbid all othtdw&gt;*
international competitors for the construction of a $ 80 million oil and gas platform In
Bass Strait.
And the pr'nIpa reason for their success was a benciuark enterprise agrceree which
cut costs by 16 per cent by increasing labour and equipmnt efficiency.
Australia has frec-financial markets operating in the Eas Asia time zone, sophisticated
cost efficient telecommunications and highly developed linkages into the countries of the
Asia Pacific.
For all these reason an ineroasing number of companies arc now making Australia their
springboard ito those Asia Pacific markets companies like Cathay Pacific, Data
General, Microsoft, Dow Corning and Kellogg wbich have located their regional
headquarters here.
Bniih companies arc doing the same. A recent Australian British Chamber of
Commerce study found that eighy per cent of the companies surveyed were using their
local subsidiaries to servicce oflier markets in the region.
Almost half use their subsidiaries as a springboard into South-East Asia. and more than
twenty per cent are using them as a basi. Tor operations In NJ6iihthEst Asia.
Behind these trends we can find individual comipanties positioning thcmsclves for the
futurc. For instance, British Airways' 25 per cent holding in Qantas will givc it improved access
to the Asia-Pacific region and provide Qantas with an opportunity to boost its presence in
world markets, including Europe.
To qjuote a few other examples: 
4
Cadbury Schwepps Is doubling its capacity with a view to supplying the Asia-
Pacific which happens to be the fastest growing chocolate market in the World
Vodafone has decided to establish its Asia-Pacific headquarters in Sydney.
British Telecom will locate its Asia-Pacific Centre for Nctwork Management and a
software enineering centre in Sydney.
Tate and Lyle, United Biscuits, B3Th, ICI, BP Oil, Bond Helicopters among othets
arc all using Australia as a base for their trade with the region, and
demonstrating beyond doubt that this is a competitive and cost effective country in
which to do business.
Meanwhile thc implementation of the single market in Europe and further economic
integration promotrd by Maastricht has created opportuinities for Australian companies to
expand their operations in Europe, using the United Kingdom as a base.
I imigine it would surprise a lot of Australians to know that Australia is the fourth largSt
investor int ( he UK a larger Investor in fact than Japan and that the increase between,
1984 and 1992 was fourteen fold.
Uf it is true to say that in recent years Australia has bcoeon a good place to do business, it
is equally true that ia' 1994 and the years to corn it is going to be an even better place.
Over bho twelve mnths to the September quartcr, Australian G3DP increased by abut
three and a half per cent. I
Some commentators think Qiat we will see growth rates reaching four per cent or more
before too ln&amp; and I believe they arc right. I believe we are now well placed to grow at
four par cent orniare for a number of years.
At the same timec the OE~ CD is looking at a rate fur this yea of two per cent-
We have had inflation of two per cent or less for the past two years, and TuLsday's figures
confzm our ability to keep it ainong the lowest in the OECD.
Where once we survived on the margins of the world's most dynamnic mnarkets, we are
now strategically placed alongside them and increasingly integrated 2aih thenm.
But as Max Walsh pointed out today in the qydrMami Anrlerald even Max has
acknowledged it now -the grwth we are achieving, like the new role we are carilng out
to the Asial-Pacifc,' did not bappen by accident.
We have been achieving out current growth rates despite a very weak world economy,
and with a business sector more concerned with clawing back debt than looking for new
investment opportunities.
The Frowth can be directly traced to the stimulus lower interest rates provided in the
housing market, the strength in exports flowing from the lower dollar, and the direct boost
to spending we provided through the Budget.
lntc-rcst rates are now at their lowest levels for 20 years.
We are now around 30 per cent more internationally competitive than a decade ago.
And, since the Oiic Nation statement of Febr-uar-y 1992, we have pTovidcd stimulus from
the Budget equivalcnt to more than two per cent of GDP. T2E7L:. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 05/ 08 
TEL: 27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 06/ 08
Out of respect for our British guJests I will Dot record here the unending criticism of these
pol icies we have rceived from the Opposition, some business groups and many in the
financial pres".
The figures speak for themselvcs.
But what also Should be spokeni for i the fact that Government policies havc provided
more than short term stimulus: by focussing on the skills of our people, on infratructure,
reschb and incentives for business investuient, they are providing long term benefits to
the operation of the economy and tho opurations of business.
Renlly, the time has come, I think Australian business ought to recoonse that the
present recovery andC the outstanding prospects for the futurc have been made possible by
these policies and policies implemented in the eighties.
Long experience tells mc it is pointless to expect the equivalent of a Faullan coaversion
among Australian business I can assure our British guests that political affctions die A'S
hard In the New World as they do in the Old.
Despite the logic of it. I don't expect to see a niass defection from our increasingly
Inchoate and rudderless political opponents.
But I do expect, and I think it is reasonable for the country to expect, that Austalioa
business will iucrtasingly go out and invest in those areas which will deliver long teTm
riewards to their companies and the pation.
I mean investment in plant, in technology and in people in trining and employment.
Thc capsary to do it is theire: In the past year profits have grown 20 per cent and are now
above t I9M peak. As a Share of GDP, profit share is now approaching rhc peak of the
Late 19WVs and that was an all-time record.
As volumes pick up in the recovery, profits will increase further.
Those who made the effort to export in recent times are today reaping very substantial
rewards.
Those who make the effort now will also reap them as the markets grow.
And the markets till grow'. They will grow in no small measure because of the
successful conclusion to the GAIT; and, in due course, because of the substantial work
now underway in AYEC to remove barriers and facilitate trade and investment in the
. re gion. 1
You are all awarce of the role the Australian Covenimerir played with the U~ rupuy Round
and thc creation-of APEC.
And I can assure you that implementing the GAIT outcome, achieving concrete results in
APEC, and removing bilateral barriers to trade Will continue as issues of the highest
priority for the Ccwcrnnient in the comning year.
Our major domcsiic priority this year might go under the simplc heading of " efficiency*.
We will bc working vcry hard on the microcconurmic reformu agenda; pullinS together the
rail, port, road interface; driving the enterprise bargaining prograili as hard as we and
y'ou can; and implementing the White Paper on employment.
We will be dcveloping and refining industry policy. 
27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 07/ 08
6
Our industry policies bcar no resemblance to those of earlicr decades.
N~ o longer are inefficient industies protected
Rather, policy is directed at helping industry grasp new opportunities at borne and in the
world trading envirowncut.
The transport pro*= az we undertook almost two year ago in One Nation particularly
the national rail highway has begun to rnatcrialisc, and you wilt see it materialise much
more rapidly in the next teve months.
Our industrial relations reforms demand your cooperation and that of the unions.
Cooperation demands recognition of realities.
Onc of those realities is known to every Australian business leader in this room.
It is that Australian workers have made a maslive contribution to the greater
comnpetitiveness of this country, and that the results wc at.. now seeinig, the opportunities
now presented, would have becti impossible without the trade unions' willingniess to
cooperate in necessary change indeed, oftcn to dK Uv the change.
Tht Accord between the Goveninent and organised labour, in place now for 11
Succ= Ssivc years, has beena instrumental in giving us sustained industrial peace, low
hnflation and the profit share which business is now enjoying.
The unions of course must continue to embrace change.
I noticed tho other day the ACTU President, Martin Ferguson, urging unions to move
more quickly towards enterprise bargains.
Today I urge Australian business to do thc same. 17hc new industrial relations legisation
ensures that minimum standards are maintained, but provides for great flexibility.
EAch and every business = a now tailor its arrangements to meet its business P. eeds and
each and every business this year should make the effort to do so.
Many will want to strike their deals with unions, but there is no imperative. As lone as a
mnajority of employees want to, management can negotiate directly with thcir employees
rather than with unions.
I said yesterday that this recovery is not for the top end of town. Our hard work has not
been for the benefit of speculators and fly-by-night developers.
It has been to create a competitive economy of depth andqu ulizy which will assure
Australia's prosperity in the next century. it has been to deliver opportunity to every
community and every Australian.
The responsibility is on businem. as well 4s government to see that this great opportunity
is not wasted.
Togcther wc also share responsibility for employment and training. There is surely no
greater inhibition to national efficiency than a large pool of unemployed men and women.
The White Paper to be delivered in April will form thie basis of a major strategic assault
on Australia's unctrployment. 
TEL: 27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 08/ 08
I 7
The emphasis will be on putting the long term unemployed back In touch with the labour
market. Education and training will be a priority.
In short, our approach to unemployment will be to give those presently uncmployed a
chance to share in the new prosperity and to contribute to it.
In doing so the whole nation's economic performance will be that much morc cfficient.
If this is to be what it should be a recovery for the whole nation the responsibility falls
on the whole nation to make it so.
For this reason above any otha I am pleased to be with you tonight. This conference ca
be anothcr step on the road to greater prosperity for the people of both our countries.
Today the relationship between the Unitcd Kingdom and Australia is built on both
continuity and change.
The continuity of 205 years of shared history, culture, investment and trade.
The chanse in which we are both engagcd, the change which offers us extraordinary new
opportunities at home and abroad and the change which will, without doubt, ensure that
our relationship is stron and enduring.
MELBOURNE 27 January 1994 
TEL OFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
Correction In UK Australia Trade and Investment Conference speech, paragraph 4 on
page 3 when delivered will read.
last year the corporate rate was reduced to 33 per cent, along with
provision for accelerated depreciation, an Investment allowance of up to
per cent
27 JANUARY 1994
MELBOURNE T2EL7:. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 01/ 08 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCHEON FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
THE RT HON PAIAS WINGTI
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
WEDNESDAY 9 FEBRUARY 1994
( EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY)
It is always a pleasure to welcome Papua New Guinea's Head of Government
to Australia.
But it is a particular pleasure to welcome you, Mr Prime Minister, because so
much of the tone of the modern relationship between our two countries has
been set by your efforts.
During your last period as Prime Minister, you helped to develop the Joint
Declaration of Principles, which sets out the basis for our relationship.
In that document, we each commit ourselves to conducting relations between
us on the basis of certain fundamental principles mutual respect for one
another's independence, sovereignty and equality.
In the discussions we have just had, and during our earlier meeting on Nauru
last year, it was clear that you and I have a very similar approach to this
relationship. It is a relationship which is important to each of us anchored by geography,
shaped by history, reinforced by mutual economic interests and by the
shared experiences of tens of thousands of citizens from both countries over
many years. 
We already have a substantial and mutually rewarding economic relationship.
Our two-way trade is worth $ 2.1 billion and Papua New Guinea now enjoys a
significant trade surplus with Australia. Thirty four per cent of Papua New
Guinea's exports come to Australia, while you, in turn, are a particularly
important market for Australian manufactures.
Australian investment in. Papua-New Guinea is around $ 1.6 billion, making
PNG the ninth-largest destination for Australian investment overseas.
Although this is a good record, you and I both believe that we can do more in
this area.
I know that one of your aims on this visit is to have discussions with the
Australian business community. In that regard it is good to be able to
welcome a number of business people with long-standing interests in Papua
New Guinea to this lunch today.
Visits like this help with the very important function of keeping open the
channels of communication between government and business.
Papua New Guinea's task in building a modern, prosperous and peaceful
nation is a huge enterprise. You have already faced many difficulties in your
efforts to develop your country, and no doubt more lie ahead of you.
But the remarkable thing is how much has been accomplished.
Australia is committed to continuing our help for Papua New Guinea's
development Our development assistance program, worth about $ 300 million a year, is
designed to help the people of Papua New Guinea develop effective and
long-lasting solutions to the challenges the country faces.
As we shift from budget support to jointly programmed aid by the year 2000,
Australian assistance will be targeted in areas that you identify as priorities.
These include education, health and, as we discussed today, law and order.
These form the bedrock on which national development can take place and I
am pleased that Australia will be continuing to work on them with you into the
next century.
But although our ' bilateral ties are important to us both, and will remain so,
there is no doubt that the relationship between us is evolving,
Mr Prime Minister. 
We are beginning to see each other as part of a broader region of enormous
promise and great economic dynamism. Your ' look north policy has been
one response to this. Our own deepening engagement with Asia is another.
So it is also a pleasure to welcome you here as a fellow member of APEC.
Both of us have committed our countries to APEC's goal of securing an open
regional economy in Asia and the Pacific, more integrated and open to trade
than ever before.
Another key regional institution in which we both participate is the South
Pacific Forum.
Papua New Guinea and Australia have been working with our colleagues to
make the South Pacific's pre-eminent organisation as effective as possible in
the post-Cold War environment. I look forward to the opportunity we will
have to carry this job forward when we meet in Brisbane in August.
Mr Prime Minister,
Old hands in both our countries sometimes claim that we are drifting apart.
It is true that the relationship between us will never again be as intimate as it
was when Australia was the administering power in PNG, a fact which neither
of us need regret, particularly when as you and I have discussed before
we reflect on some of the architectural legacy we bequeathed you.
And the efforts we have noted on both our parts to develop our links in the
wider Asia-Pacific region mean that, relatively speaking, we may each loom
less large for the other.
So I sympathise with those who think that we need to put more effort into
promoting contacts, particularly between young people from both countries.
We need to take care, on both sides, not to take the relationship for granted.
We need to talk to each other at all levels.
I am very conscious after our meeting today, and following our earlier
discussion on Nauru, just how productive and interesting such contact can
be, and how much of relevance we can learn from each other.
That is another good reason for welcoming you here today, Prime Minister.
I now call on the Leader of the Opposition, Dr Hewson, to join me in this task. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CHILDREN OF THE HOLOCAUST EXHIBITION
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
9 FEBRUARY 1994
I was deeply honoured to be asked to open this exhibition and a little daunted by the
requirement to speak. To be required to speak about the unspeakable.
One does not have to see these pictures to begin to feel overwhelmed it is enough to
know that one is &amp; Qoin to see them. To know that they exist.
To know that because they are children's pictures they will be like other children's
pictures, like all children's pictures like the pictures our own children might have
drawn.-To know that they might have been our own children.
That it might have happened to them. That the unspeakable might have happened to
us. Children's pictures are all the same in one sense. No one who looks at these can fail
to think of the pictures their own children have drawn, the pictures these days you see
stuck on kitchen walls and refrigerators.
But children's pictures are also remarkable because each one is different. We treasure
them, display them, find it hard to throw them out years after our children find them
an embarrassment because in them we see the first signs of individuality. The first
expressions of each child's personality.
-We see in them the evidence of their hearts and-minds &amp; eloping,. their innocence
and their potential. They contain their hope and ours.
Even in these drawings, done by children cut off from their parents and families,
hungry and afraid in the g hetto of Terezin, there is hope. And innocence,
imagination, love need.
This exhibition is a profound reminder of the appalling betrayal of the good in them,
and the good they inspire in us.
Few of us, I suspect, ever expected to see pictures drawn by children who were
murdered in the Holocaust. It comes somehow as a surprise that they exist.
Yet, had we thought about it, we might have known that they existed. 
We knew that there were children in the ghettoes of Europe and children who died in
the extermination camps.
We know all children draw pictures.
So we should have known that someone would have hoarded them away, as we hoard
away our own children's pictures.
We should have known . that-there-would be pictures which remind us that these
terrible events took place, in our century, in our civilisation, in our Europe.
In fact we probably did know. But we simply hadn't thought about it.
And that I believe is the point we have to think about it. That is the only way those
of us who did not experience it will remember the Holocaust.
This exhibition forces us to think forces us to remember.
It reminds us of how profoundly important it is to keep alive the memory and
forever reaffirm the reality of the Holocaust.
It reminds us that those people who keep it alive do so for all of us not just for the
Jewish people and the survivors and descendants of the others who were persecuted,
but for all of us.
Ladies and gentlemen
These children's drawings were not collected by the parents. They were not re-visited
by the kids who drew them.
Most of the parents were killed. And most of the children. Of the 17,000 children
under the age of 14 who were sent to Terezin, only 150 survived.
The drawings were collected by people who knew what they would mean to us. Who
knew, perhaps, that we might nee reminding.
Hidden in suitcases and forgotten about when Terezin was liberated, the drawings
were rediscovered and found their way to the State Jewish Museum in Prague.
I understand the Museum values them so highly that today only copies of the
drawings are placed on display, and the originals are secured in the Museum's
archives.
I also understand that visitors flock to see the display. The collection is
internationally famous.
It therefore says much for the generosity of the museum authorities in Prague that
they have allowed some of these drawings to come to Australia.
And I take this opportunity to thank the Director of the State Jewish Museum, Dr
Kybalova, for the cooperation extended to the Australian War Memorial.
I also want to thank the former Ambassador of the Czech Republic in Canberra, Dr
David-Moserova, for her assistance and the staff of the Embassy.
I am pleased to see that the Czech Embassy is represented here tonight and ask that
my gratitude be passed on to the authorities in Prague. 
And, of course, I must also thank Dr Michael McKernan, the Deputy Director of the
Australian War Memorial, for his efforts for having the wisdom to see the
importance of this exhibition to Australia and to the Memorial.
The Australian War Memorial is one of our great national institutions, and its
continuing. importance to our national life could not have been more amply
demonstrated than it was last year at the Ceremony for the Entombment of the
Unknown Australian Soldier.
The Memorial was founded by Charles Bean in the belief that we would only
understand the realities of war, and the evils of war, by knowing the stories of the
people affected by war.
Down the years the Memorial has done this superbly. So long as it is here, and in the
hands of wise and imaginative people like Dame B~ eryl, Brendan Kelson and Michael
McKernan, Australians will not forget the sacrifices made in war by their countrymen
and women.
But nor should we ever forget the sacrifices made by others, or fail to teach the stories
and the lessons of their experience.
This Memorial stands as a permanent reminder of the Australian experience of war.
It contains many of the clues to who we are, many of the icons of our identity.
But no conception of what it means to be Australian, or what our experience in war
means, can be complete or falthful to the truth and our ideals without an
understanding of what others have been through.
We cannot be indifferent to the experience of others we most certainly cannot be
indifferent to the experience of the Jewish people in the Holocaust.
After all, in the end, it was because they were indifferent, and knew this country
was not immune to evil and the suffering of others, that the men and women honoured
in this place sacrificed their lives.
In the end, it will only be because we are not indifferent, and do not think ourselves
immune, that new holocausts will be averted.
Today, as children die in Bosnia and terms like ethnic cleansing enter the vocabulary
of that part of the world, the words we see on this memorial " Lest We Forget"
surely embrace the children of the Holocaust.
I congratulate all-those associated with this exhibition. ILunder-stand. from here it
moves on to the Sydney Jewish Museum and I thank Mr John Saunders, the founder
of the Museum, who is with us tonight.
I should also like to thank John Glass for speaking to us about his experiences in
Terezin and the other Holocaust survivors who are here and who will, in the course
of the exhibition, give their time freely to speak to visitors.
Let me conclude by saying that I sincerely hope every Australian who has an
opportunity to see the Children of Holocaust does see it.
I now declare this exhibition open. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF WESTFIELD ENDOWMENT FOR ENSEMBLE
DEVELOPMENT, CANBERRA
FEBRUARY 1994 EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
I am very pleased to be here today at the launch of this significant development in
Australia's musical life.
My regard for music and those who make it is no secret. I believe music brings out the
best in people. It inspires them, it sustains them, it soothes and comforts them.
It's difficult to imagine life without music. Such a life, I'm sure, would be very bare
indeed. The thought of not being able to settle down with a CD after a day in this
place, for example, is pretty horrible to contemplate.
Musicians are among those creative artists who put a premium on the use of
imagination, whether as composers or performers. And in this they provide a lead for
all of us.
We need, as a nation, to put a premium on imagination. And creativity. And
innovation. Successful societies place a high value on these things. They are prepared to take the
trouble to develop them, and that means nurturing the talented individuals in whom
these qualities reside. Particularly the emerging talent.
As I've said before, this Government is more than prepared to play its part in the
process. We've demonstrated that with our support for the arts in the years we've been
in office, and particularly in last year's Budget.
Wt-are-detrin ed -to-forge-a new role-for the arts-in-Austr alia, and our forthcoming
cultural policy statement will articulate what we believe this role should be, and how
we intend to help bring it about.
In the meantime, however, we've put the Arts Ministry into Cabinet, where it belongs.
And we've combined it in a portfolio with Communications, in recognition of the fact
that cultural and communications development are inextricably linked together. 
But we can't and won't do it all alone.
We are also determined to see the level of private support for the arts in Australia
substantially raised.
The arts need more corporate support, more patronage. We need to get up to the level
of other countries in this area.
The smart people in our corporate world know this.
They know that the arts take a lead in projecting Australia to the world as an exciting,
dynamic country with which it pays to form partnerships..
They know that by helping Australian artists they are also, ultimately, helping all
Australians. Frank Lowy and the Westfield Group, with this award have confirmed ( as if it needed
to be-) not only their acumen and far sightedness as eminent members of our corporate
sector, but also their generosity as long time supporters of the arts in Australia.
In one sense, of course, they couldn't help it. Genuine lovers of the arts, I believe, feel
the frisson that a work of art conveys. They recognise the essential part the arts play
in their lives. Just as they recognise the inescapability of the debt to art that this
creates. Its a debt that can be repaid in many ways, but one of the most important is by direct
financial support of artists. We need to do more for our artists. All of us.
That is why this award is particularly well directed.
It is the first award in Australia specifically designed to support developing ensembles.
It means that young Australian musicians will have some financial security while they
work together to achieve professional excellence.
And the size of the endowment means that an annual award can be given in perpetuity.
It is with great pleasure, then, that I officially launch the Westfield Endowment for
ensemble development.
I am sure that you will join with me in applauding the generosity of Westfield in their
-extraordinary-gesture to honour Tony -Berg -in his professional capacity as a
businessman, and in his private commitment to Musica Viva and to music development
in Australia-
It is an honour richly deserved.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NORTHERN TERRITORY FOOTBALL LEAGUE
ABORIGINAL ALL-STARS v COLLINGWOOD BALL
As the football experts are prone to say there's a lot
hanging on this game tomorrow.
But it's not so much on who wins or loses. Both sides,
it seems to me, are already the winners simply for
playing the game.
It also seems to me that they are sides with something
very basic in common: I mean they both know what it is to
do it hard in the world.
Collingwood, the greatest sporting club in Australia,
grew up In a poor working class area of Melbourne. They
were social underdogs who became sporting top dogs.
Collingwood succeeded because it tapped the spirit of
people whose circumstances might easily have drained the
spirit from them.
The Collingwood Football Club gave them a collective
strength. It gave them the means by which they could know
success. The spirit was there it just needed a vehicle
for its expression.
The All Stars have much in common with this story. They
have been drawn from the ranks of those Australians who
have been denied a lot of the good things in Australian
life and subjected to a lot of the worst things.
They too might easily have given in to their
ci rcumstances.
But the All Stars like the teams in the Territory from
which many of their players are drawn are proof of
their willingness to overcome the odds. The team is an
expression of the spirit and the potential of Aboriginal
Australia. Like Collingwood, the spirit is there it only needs the
vehicle for its expression. 
I will come back to the football in a moment.
And before you murmur what would this character from
Bankstown and Canberra know about Australian Rules? I
have to remind you that in Miarch last year, aliost alone
among the tipsters, I said that the winner of the 1993
Browniow Medal would be Gavan Wanganeen.
And Kicky Winmar was my second tip.
Nicky Winmar's gesture of defiance at Collingwood is
destined to be legendary. In my view it was a great
gesture. Yet there were other gestures in last year's football
season which were, in a sense, just as significant
because they spoke of success.
There was Gavan Wanganeen with the Brownlow Medal in his
hand. There was Michael Long with the Norm Smith medaland
the Premiership Cup above his head.
And there was the gesture of Allan McAlister coming to
the Territory to meet the Aboriginal community, to talk,
to learn, to come to a new understanding.
Tomorrow's match builds on all those events.
And let me say now there will be other winners to come
out of this weekend's events.
Pre-eminent among them will be the City of Darwin.
Hundreds of thousands of Australians will be watching
this historic match. I am sure it will not fail to enter
the minds of most of them that Darwin was the place which
had the national vis4on and character to make it happen.
Darwin and its people.
Standing here in a dinner suit on a night like this I
realise that among the many attractions of Darwin must be
the climate.
It is a wonderful climate for politics. I mean the sort
of climate in which no politician would dare to make a
long speech.
Most of you will know, I hope, that I am a politician who
is inclined to take a national view. I tend to think of
Australia as one nation.
The details of what I mean by that would take too long to
describe at a ball in tropical heat but in short it
means that whatever the difference in geography and
experience, or colour, or creed whatever the degree of
our attachment to the place in which we live we are all 
Australians, and think of ourselves as Australians, and
do better in the world and by each other when we work
with a common national purpose.
That means, among other things, that while the place I
come from is very different to Darwin, Darwin's
experience is part of mine. When Darwin succeeds we all
share in that success. When Darwin's spirit rises so
does the spirit of Australia.
And Darwin's spirit is most definitely rising.
This has always been a frontier town but never more so
than now. It Is in the forefront of the great change
which is taking place in Australia.
It is our gateway to Asia, a place with a vital role to
play in 6ofeonomic development, and in our cultural and
social development. Darwin, after all, has always been
multicultural, it has always had multiracial sport it
has set the example for the rest 6f7AUitrala.
As I said, Australia is undergoing a profound change: in
the way we do things, in the direction of our thinking,
in the way we imagine ourselves and our role in the
world. They say you can't write history until you are far enough
away to see the shape of events. Up close, in the midst
of the fray, it's all a bit of a blur.
But in the last twelve months I reckon we've all felt it.
You could sense the change in the last year or so as if
the tide had imperceptibly turned and was now running
our way.
Just now we are starting to see evidence of it in the
figures. You can see it on the score-board.
it actually is a bit like a football match There is
that moment when you feel the game change.
And I truly believe the game has changed between black
and white Australia.
This game is evidence of it. In that sense the score is
already on the board.
It's hard to say precisely what the turning point was.
I know that Kevin Sheedy and the Essendon Football Club
played a role wffith theifr recruiting caiimpigns and their
regular pre-season games in Darwin and last year's
Premiership was proof that there was wisdom as well as
justice in the policy. 
I think they deserve enormous credit for their
initiative.
And of course there is one other person who deserves a
lot of credit NickyWinmar.
Think of what one gesture of defiance triggered a
national debate on racism in sport and a new recognition
of -th&amp; -role Aboriginals play -in Australian sport.
Not to mention a horrible succession of mysterious
Coll1ingwood defeats.
Along the way, things also went wrong for Nicky and St
Kilda; Allan McAlister came to the Northern Territory;
Essendon, with a sizeable crew of Aboriginal players, won
the premiership; Michael Long won the Norm Smith medal;
and my March selection, Gavan Wanganeen, won the
Brownlow. It has all ended up here with this historic match.
And it all happened in the International Year of the
World's Indigenous People and the year of Mabo.
So the game, as I said, has changed.
There is a change in mood and awareness.
And with the Mabo decision there is a change in law and
let me tell you that de-sjpite all the arguments, all the
understandable anxiety, all the negotiation which is
still to take place, the Mabo legislation puts right an
historic wrong and there is no going back on that.
I am very much aware of how far there is to go.
I am also aware that very often the sentiments expressed
by politicians seem out of touch with social and economic
reality out of touch with the complexities of life as
it is really lived in Australia.
It is our duty to get in touch with those realities and
fashion policies accordingly. Ultimately the trick is
always to put the right people and the right money in the
right places.
But it ig also necessary to state the principles: not
because one ever believes that they can be translated
into a perfect reality, but because they are necessary
values and ambitions for a nation to live by.
They are the nation's articles of faith, the code we live
by. In some countries they are write into
constitutions and bills of rights: here they are
unwritten, but they are just as powerful. 
eft-
1 am talking about ideas like a fair go for all, support
for the underdog, tolerance of difference, respect for
those who by their own efforts have succeeded against the
odds. Every one of those principles on which we pride ourselves
declares that racism is abhorrent everywhere, Including
football fields or tennis courts, or athletics tracks.
It is abhorrent to our best traditions and the best
traditions of sport.
I was at a function at the Australian War Memorial during
the week the opening of an exhibition of drawings done
by children in a Jewish ghetto in Poland during the war.
All but a handful of 17,000 children in the ghetto were
killed in the Auschwitz extermination camp.
I mention this only as a background to words which a
survivor of the ghetto used in a speech at the war
memorial to summarise, he said what an extraordinary
gift the tolerance and freedom and democracy of Australia
had been for refugees like himself.
He also said that democracy and tolerance were more
deeply embedded in the f-abric -of Aus-tralian life than
anywhere else in the world.
His words were very moving. They were a reminder that
those intangible things like tolerance and fairness are
real, especially to people who have been denied them.
It was a reminder of how vital to our national life and
character these values are how jealously we should
defend them.
I would like to think that tomorrow's contest is part of
that defence.
That's why I said at the beginning that, however close
the contest on the field and whoever wins, the teams are
both winners.
I hope and I think we all hope that in due course it
will be seen that they were both playing on the same
side. in fact I think all Australians can be winners from this
weekend's events. if we all want to be. If we all are
prepared to enter into the spirit of it. If we all see
it as a step along the way a highly symbolic step
towards reconciliation between black and white
Australians. I congratulate Tony Shaw and the NTFL, and Allan
McAlister and the Collingwood Football Club for all they
have done. 
6
I also want to pay tribute to Maurice Rioli, coach of the
All-Stars, former great player and for years now in the
Northern Territory and throughout Australia a hero and
role model for Aboriginal people.
And finally, let me wish the players the very best of
luck. DARWIN 11 February 1994 



I L L
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME ZIINISTERO THE HOW* P 3 KEATING MP, TO
TzZ LAUNCH OF THlE VICTOR CHANG CARDIAC RESEARCH INST ITUTZ
SYDNE~ Y, FEBRUARY 15, 1994
When senator Richardson suggested that I come along to the
launch of the victor Chang Cardiac Research institute, I
accepted without much resistance.
The Institute promises to do two things which are of
irresistible appeal.
First, it honours Victor Chang a great Australian, a great
surgeon and a great humanitarian.
Second, it provides for research into a form of disease
suffere4 by 130,000 Australians and which kills as many as
200 people every week.
In fact, I suspect most people My age live in a certain
degree of fear of heart disease, most of us have had friends
who have suffered froam-if or di-ed from it.
Perhaps I should add a third reason why I was keen to say a
few words here today and that is th~ at the Institute will
be attached to St Vincents which has an unsurpassed
reputation based in equal proportions on its excellence in
health care and medical research, and its core values of
compassion, human dignity and social justice.
St Vincents is a hospital with a philosophy and that is
something all great institutions need.
And no hospital could have a better philosophy tnan that
provided by the Sisters of Charity.
The Sisters of Charity bring to St Vincents a compassionate
web, a family culture which, far from being at odds with
modern management principles and strategies, strengthens
them puts humanity into the technocratic void, if you
like. The great thing about St Vincents and the great thing
about this new Victor Chang Cardiac Research institute is
that the nighest standards of medical excellence, and the
most advanced techniques and technology, are delivered to
all Australians regardless of their social and financial
clrcun~ tances. i D r c U L, 4 i i 10 u 
TEL 2
And f or this we have the mission of the Sisters of Charity
to thank.
It goes to show that a$ health care goes through rapid
changes because of advances in medical science arnd
technology, the importance of traditional values is
undiminished though it may be these days even more
essential to assert them.
This new Institute will have, as I understand it, three main
goals. First, to improve the lives and life expectancy of all
Australians. Second, to save millions of dollars each year in health
costs. And third, to make internationally recognised contributions
to our understanding of heart muscle disease.
It has been fashionable in recent years for all modern
corporations and institutions to have what Is called a
Mission Statement a document worked up in the company
defining common goals and corporate philosophies.
You couldn't have a better Mission Statement for a hospital
than the Mission of the Sisters of Charity.
And I daresay you couldn't have a better name to call
yourself by then Victor Chang.
I met Dr Chang but did rnot know him well, but I know people
who did and I read the testimonials after his tragic and
outrageous death, and I have heard people talking today.
There is no doubting his extraordinary quialities.
It has, perhaps, not been adequately acknowledged that among
his great contributions to Australia was the work he did in
fostering cooperation between Australian medicine and
medical research and medicine in the countries of South-East
Asia. I hope his work as an ambassador for Australia Is not
forgotten, and that advances made at this Institute which
bears his name will flow on to those countries In Asia in
which he took such an interest.
He was, as I said, a great man, an marvellous surgeon and,
perhaps most of all, a man with a genuine personal concern
and understanding for his patients.
it was Victor Chang's great dreasm to see here at St V1. nrents
H~ ealth Care Campus a team of world class researchers
pursuing the unique challenges of heart disease. iS FeD ' J4 iZ 6 iAO UU,: Uzi 
I C L 3
With tbe creation of this Research Institute, Viotor Chang's
dream can be realised.
So, it remains for me to say just two things:
First, i urge all AUstralians to give all they can to
this appeal, for in so doing It they will be not only
helping to carry on the work and the memory of victor
Chang, helping themselves and their fellow Australians.
And second, I congratulate and sincerely thank all those
who have given to the cause already both those who
have given money and those who have given their time
and their skill and effort.
I declare this Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute
officially launched.
SYDNEY February 1994 I r C ,1 1 * 4U ,. lQ r, V 



I.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF MANNING CLARK CENTRE, ANU, CANBERRA
22 FEBRUARY 1994
I count it as a great honour to be asked to open this
Centre tonight I count the late Manning Clark as a
great Australian.
And I may as well say at the beginning, I have absolutely
no doubt that his work and reputation will long out live
his recent detractors.
Generosity will always triumph over meanness. Creativity
over negativity.
I used to pay Manning Clark an occasional visit in
Tasmania Circle on my way home from work.
I was by no means a close friend and on the face we had
not much in common.
Manning was a man of great formal learning. I left
school at
Manning went to Melbourne Grammar, Melbourne University
and Oxford.
I went to De La Salle, Bankstown, Belmore Technical
College, the Federated Municipal and Shire Council
Employees Union, and the Australian Labor Party.
I am a politician. Manning was an historian.
Perhaps for these reasons we talked less about Australian
politics than Australian possibilities, less about
Australia's history than Australia's future.
In fact we found that we had a gnnd dpa in common. 41303 
2
I know Manning has developed a reputation as a pessimist,
but I never found him to be that. It is true that he had
deep awareness of opportunities lost opportunities for
building a more just society. A kinder and more creative
society. A society with a more independent view, a more
mature identity.
He was disappointed by what he believed had been promise
squandered by faint hearts and narrow minds.
That did not mean he had no regard for what Australians
had achieved, or love for the character and traditions of
the place. His affection for Australia was huge it
defined him.
And he had enormous regard for Australian achievements.
Surely, no one left more evidence of that regard than he
did in his six volume history, his countless other books
and articles on Australian history and in his immense
contribution as a teacher of Australian history.
This Centre will not only bear his name, but I hope carry
on his work.
Among such distinguished academic company and people who
knew Manning Clark very well over a long period, it would
not be appropriate for me to even attempt an appreciation
of Manning's work.
I can only say that from what I know of it and what I
knew of him, I drew a lot of inspiration.
He wanted to believe in Australia and, through all the
doubts he had, he did believe.
And I confess that there have been times in the last two
years when I have wished that he was alive to see some of
the things which are happening in Australia now.
I mean in part the initiatives we have taken on issues
broadly related to our national identity.
I also mean the stand we have taken and the legislation
we passed in response to the High Court decision on
native title and I must say I wish he had been in
Darwin the weekend before last to see a well appreciated
multicultural football match between Collingwood and the
Aboriginal All Stars.
But I also believe Manning Clark would have appreciated
what I think is a new confidence and optimism, a new
sense among Australians of their capacity to carve out a
good society and a creative role in the world.
In other words, I think he would be excited by the signs
that in the 1990s we might be about to truly live up to
both our best traditions and our unique potential.
4604 
As I said, I'm not an historian not in the sense that
Manning Clark was and many of the people here are. But
I've been in the Labor Party for 35 years and in the
Labor Party we are &amp; Ul historians.
We know how important having a story is it's just about
the most important thing there is.
Because Manning Clark, as a teacher and writer, did more
than anyone else to unravel and tell that story I know
how much Australia owes him.
Which is why I said at the beginning that I count it as a
great honour to formally open this Manning Clark Centre
and that is what I now formally do. 460.5 



T2EL3:. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 01/ 07
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEAING, MP
RESHAPING AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTIONS
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, 22 FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you, Phil lip ( Adams), Vice Chancellor, Dymphna Clark, members
of the Clark family, Professor, distinguished guests and ladies and
gentlemen. One has always got to be careful when one is sponsored to do a talk or a
lecture, universities generally appreciate the opportunities, media
organisations always hype it up. And Radio National has me tonight
announcing my vision for the future, and Phillip wants it all done in
minutes. Where, in fact, what they asked me to do was talk about reshaping Australia's
Institutions. I will do my best, Phillip, to get this in 20 minutes, but I think this
is going to be a splice job for you and your colleagues, because had I known
you wanted me to speak to a tight time table I would have probably had it
prepared. But the fact Is it is coming, I am afraid, as it comes.
Talk about reshaping Australia's institutions It might not have been possible
a decade ago to propose such a subject and expect a lecture or a talk whiich
went in substance to substantial changes in Australia's institution frame work
because In most of the quarter century before the early 1 980s there wasn't
much institutional change in Australia. It is not to say Australia didn't have
institutions of value, but there wasn't much institutional change.
So, I am tonight with some history and with some forethought, looking
forward, talking about what I think of some of the institutional changes that
have taken place, and which ones are currently moving and will take place in
this decade.
Perhaps the first one to start with is the appetite for change. Because there
was no appetite for change in the ' 60s and the 1 970s. Australia very much
was seeing change at the margins and the public, if you like, the public
clamour for change, the public pressure on the political system for change, on
TEL: 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 02/ 07
2
clamour for change, the public pressure on the political system for change, on
our institutions in general was not as evident as now. I think what has
happened is we have developed a tremendous appetite for change, so that
when this Government in the 1 980s brought forward substantial and far
reaching changes it did so at its considerable political risk.
Now if Governments say, look we think we have had enough change, and we
don't want to burden you the public with more of it', the public said ' well thank
you we will have somebody else". They want change. And there is now a
very great appetite for change.
So, much of what we do these days, as a nation, is we manage change. And
I think we are now, we have seen unprecedented institutional reform.
Australia Is now working differently, within different structures, they think
differently, they have learned the need for change, but I suppose more
important then anything else, they have come to believe in their capacity to
change. And if the last decade means nothing, it means that our capacity for
change is very substantial and very great.
So, managing change, and keeping up with change is now a key matter in
this country, and the appetite for change is one of the background thoughts,
In a sense, across the country In the whole community which one could call
Institutional change of the variety which changes the character of the country.
Now, I have been one of the people Involved In public life through this period
of managing change, and I thought I would run through some of these topics
which come under this heading; ' Reshaping Australia's Institutions'.
One of the first places to start with this, is of course, the Cabinet of the
Government, and in 1991 1 gave a lecture called the ' Challenge of Public
Policy in Australia', the first Chris Higgins memorial lecture. The lecture in
the memory of the former Secretary of the Treasury. And I talked about the
importance of Cabinet, Government and the role of Ministers, because
Ministers until this Government came to office had never run the policy. The
policy was in part operated by Ministers within some vague parameters, and
then moved along further by the public service, but because the public
service was always limited in the political authority you could bring to bear on
public decision making, the changes were, of course only at the margin.
So, much of the institutional change we have seen devolves to the role of
Ministers. And I said this I will just read this to you from that lecture it said:
' while many decry the role that politicians play, only politicians can
make major changes to the way a country conducts its business.
Change can not come from a bureaucracy no matter how well
motivated or gifted because the bureaucracy has no authority to rank
priorities or make decisions, Nor can' change come from the media
and the opinions of columnists, no mAtter how imminent. In the end
politicians have to have the foresight to see the need for change and 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 03/ 07
3
the courage and strength to carry It through. That's why a strong and
practical Cabinet Is absolutely essential for Australian at present and
will be for years to come".
And then I talked about the role of the public service and the compact which
has existed in this last decade, and still exists now, between the Cabinet, the
Ministry and the bureaucracy. And that's been a compact of cooperation and
change so that we have seen the very best technical capacities and instincts
of the civil service of this country brought to bear with a political authority
which Minsters could marshal around the Cabinet table, and as a
consequence Australia has advanced mightily, and we have seen Cabinet
Government in a new Institutional form, of a variety of which we've, perhaps,
certainly not seen in my lifetime. And because of the important need for
change, rebasing the basis of our wealth, and changing our society, this
came at an important time for us.
That still exists and the years have only strengthened it and we now look
forward in the 1 990s to the Cabinet Ministers, again deciding where the
envelope of change should be pushed out. Where we, with the history of now
much change behind us, where the direction should be and then having a
proper appropriate bureaucratic effort In there to make it work. Now, I think
that is developing the appetite for change and then being able to basically
spirit the change through, or many of the changes through, in the first
instance at the Government level and a wider economy I will come to later,
has been a very important and fundamental institutional change in this
country. Another has been managing growth and inflation. One of the other great
Institutional changes In Australia which we have had now for a decade and
which we are going to have In the future is a basic understanding between
the Government and the organised workforce. That is, the Government and
the workers of this country. It has come by way of the Accord between the
Government and the ACTU. But what started as simply a fairly simple
document of wage restraint In certain limited circumstances has become a
way of thinking, so that as a consequence a whole productivity culture has
grown up a low Inflation productivity culture, which could only be put together
by the cooperation between, and the common objectives between a
Government and the organised workforce of this country.
As a consequence today we are looking at an Inflation rate of under 2 per
cent. We saw Australia grow mightily over the last decade; bar for the
recession we are seeing that growth pick up again. Australia today has 26
per cent more people in work than 10 years ago, as a consequence of that
accord. And In the doing of it being able to focus on a whole range of other
things such as occupational superannuation, addition of national savings,
diminution, of course, of Industrial disputation, but more than anything else a
state of mind about productivity and being able to, at the same time, hold
workers Incomes up while reducing inflation, is something that didn't exist in
any institutional way before this time that exists now. 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15. No. 010 P. 04/ 07
4
The other element of that was, of course, developing a central bank, not just
as a branch office of the Treasury, but something which stood in its own right,
and with a great reform to the financial system of the ' 80s running a quantity
based system in the financial markets. So, now monetary policy is not set by
the bond selling program of the Treasury, it is set by a central bank which has
now, in an open quantity system, perogatives of its own which it operates in
tandem with the Government. And as a consequence, we have as a country
developed a new institution. It is still called the Reserve Bank, it still has the
same Reserve Bank Act as it had in 1959, devoted as it is to price stability
and full employment, but what we have is a new institution which we have
effectively used together in another institutional process of change between
the Government and the Board of the Central Bank to deal with growth and
inflation simultaneously. And as a consequence that is the other arm of the
anti Inflation machinery which institutionally we have set up between the
ACTU and the Government under the Accord, and with a cooperative process
of common objectives between the board of the Central Bank and the
Government. Now, I was going to quote here a couple of things from the Reserve Bank Act,
but for time I will shorten them. It says:
" The duty of the Board is to do in its opinion what best will contribute to
the stability of the currency and maintenance of full employment in
Australia, the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of
Australia. The Board shall from time to time inform the Government of
the monetary and banking policy of the bank, and in the event of a
difference the Treasurer and the Board shall endeavour to reach
agreement."
So, those very wise words drafted so long ago have been given new meaning
in an institution which Is effectively new, brought and given authority by this
Government in a new financial system which is helping us develop a low
inflationary culture. It is a very hard thing for any country to develop a central
bank of substance that can effectively deal with inflation and do it in the
context of a wage compact. So, these are significant and important
Institutional changes we have brought along with us.
The other, I think, enduring national institutional change is the change of the
Australian Labor Party. The Labor Party is now a party of economic reform; it
is a party of social democracy; it is a party of social progress; it is a party
which has developed an open competitive model for its society, and grafted
on to It a fair and equitable social wage and social system. As well as that it
is a party which understands the culture of the nation and it is a party which
feels that the identity of the nation, and issues of identity, are important to it.
Whatever people may think of the Labor Party it will never regress to being
what it was in the 1950s and the 1 960s or even the 1970s. So, in terms of
institutional change, if a major party of Government which is what the Labor 
I-' 05 7
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 050
Party is can in its, perhaps, most significant reformation, plot out for itself a
world ranking course in setting up a middle sized OECD economy in its image
as an open competitive economic society which also has tolerance and
fairness underpinning its social fabric, then I think, in institutional terms we
have done mightily to secure that change. It is one of the important ones.
But the changes in reshaping institutions have not been limited to just what
has happened in Australia, but what Is also happening and what we have
done for ourselves in the international market place. We have through our
foreign policy and our trade policies, built institutions outside of Australia and
let me just name a couple for you: The Cairns Group, which was influential in
the GATT Round, was largely managed by Australia, the United States and
France and the European community, APEC, Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation, which throws an economic, if you like, net across the Asia
Pacific, which actually builds an institution for Australia to participate in;
outside of Australia the Asean Regional Forum for security dialogue, when
ASEAN was an organisation which had very tentative discussions about
many things it is now actually discussing full-bloodedly its security position;
and of course things we have done in chemical weapons, Cambodia and
other things.
This is another institutional change, that is, rather than simply playing a
marginalsed role In the foreign policy fora of the world, Australia Is actually
out there creating Institutions and finding a place for this country. Now, with
that background, that is these very important, I think, institutional changes
developing an appetite for change, being confident about the countries
capacity to change, that is the country itself being confident about its capacity
to change.
The actual vehicle of change, developing the Cabinet process, the role of
Ministers as the spearhead of change and doing it in a compact with a
cooperative altruistic civil service, managing growth and inflation, keeping the
core elements of competitiveness In place, are key to any institutional shift in
any country and the whole culture of productivity which has come into the
bargain and in the doing of it reshaping one of our major parties.
Now, for the future there is much that still has to be done about institutional
change. Perhaps, one of the changes is going to come, let me say two areas.
One is identity, us being, importantly, being confident about ourselves and
about those things which symbollse ourselves and the other is keeping the
economic and social change moving through our society. And a lot of this
goes after the great macro-economic changes of the 1 980s. It goes to the
micro changes in industry, in business, in the States, in this decade. And
what, I think, we will see is an Institutional change where we will see a much
more cooperative relationship developing between the Commonwealth and
the States. But built around, what I think, was one of the central institutional
changes of Australia In this century and that was uniform taxation in 1942.
Uniform taxation is the glue that holds the federation together. It is the
reason we are one nation with one economy. But with that foundation there Is 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No.
6
now much to be done about the perogatives of the States and the
Commonwealth In managing this great country of ours and choosing to work
cooperatively together to deal with the great micro-economic areas of this
country, much that we have to do.
Let me Just say that this change must also manifest itself in business and not
simply with the States. I think we need a new partnership, a new sharing of
responsibility for change. We mightn' t get it, but now Is the time, I think, the
natural time to invite one. And with the election behind us, with all these
benefits of the past we can, I think, enter a new period where we can call
upon a new commitment to advance ourselves.
Over the coming decade I would like to see a new relationship with the States
evolve, based on four principals. The first of these is that we recognise that
the States have a vital role as units of Government in Australia, because
there is this debate, which you often see from time to time, about abolishing
States. As I said some time ago, if we didn't have States we would almost
need to Invent them for the great regional, management and disparities of this
country. The second principal should be that both the Commonwealth and the States
should independently assess the value of reforms and use them for their own
sake, not as part of a deal in which the Commonwealth is supposed to buy
the cooperation of the States. That is, change in the great micro-economic
areas of the States, in electricity, in water, in gas, in ports, in rail, in all these
things, should be seen by States as a change of advantage to them and their
citizens and not something where the Commonwealth has to buy that change
and that cooperation.
The third principal should be that we are willing to enter into a genuine
discussion between heads of Government and portfolio Ministers to look at
the present roles and responsibilities of the States and the Commonwealth, to
see that where we can develop and deliver better policy outcomes, but where
the Commonwealth Government will always have a role in setting priorities
and national objectives to social programs such as health and education, as
well as the environment and economic programs.
And the fourth principal is that while the. Commonwealth believes the States
should be adequately resourced it should be taken as understood that the
Commonwealth will not be party to any substantial transfer of Commonwealth
taxing powers to the States.
Now, within those four principals we have the opportunity to cooperatively
develop, I think, a new commitment, if you like, a new consensus, a new
understanding between the Commonwealth and the States about how to
make these important areas of the micro economy change. The
Commonwealth has largely done Its things in telecommunications, in
banking, in air transport what remains to be, done now is largely with the
States and it is also with business, because a Commonwealth Government .010 P. 06/ 07 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 07/ 07
7
can't change the productive culture of an Individual enterprise. That must be
done by business, and business should take up the challenge of enterprise
bargaining with the workforce to make that productive and institutional
change, certainly enterprise change, within those particular businesses.
So, we have got, I think, If you like, having come so far and now looking at the
areas where we need to see more sophisticated changes, put the polish on
the changes to find, If you like, another institutional shift. It is In a cooperative
venture between the Commonwealth and the States in these areas, and also
further cooperation between Labor and business under the aegis of
enterprise bargaining in search of higher productivity, higher incomes and
better profits. This is the institutional change we need for the 1990s.
Now, you have heard me say often I mentioned it earlier I don't think a
country can sell itself until it knows what it wants to sell of itself, how it wants
to present itself, how It wants to be viewed and be seen. And so, therefore, I
believe issues of identity, being clear about our identity, being clear about the
culture that we have become and that we wish to represent, its symbols are
an Important part of how we as a nation will behave and present ourselves in
the 1 990s. But we have seen much reshaping of Institutions in these last ten
years, my point Is we are going on doing it. And the changes we have see,
are changes I think forever, they are not changes which are going to be
turned back. But what we have to do now Is search out the new ones, so that
if we were giving a lecture on this topic In a decade hence, we would be able
to say that in these areas of productivity, of international engagement, of
change In the culture at the work place, change in the relationship between
the Commonwealth and the States, this was another great Institutional
change. I should hope In 10 or 15 years, we would have been able to reshape our
Institutions in a way that compensated for the quarter century or so that we
failed to do this. As a consequence Australia is stronger and better for it.
Thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRLIE MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, M. P.
SYLVIA SMITH'S ELECTORATE OFFICE LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA
SATURDAY 26 FEBRUARY, 1994
It is a great pleasure to be here with Sylvia ( Smith) to open this, her electorate office,
in the city of Launceston because it was on that night, just slightly less than a year ago,
that we saw Tasmania lead the return of a Labor government. And, when I saw the
numbers in the Tasmanian seats, given the fact that we had a substantial lead anyway, I
knew then we were always going to be unbeatable. As it turned out, that's as it turned
out to be. But, the truth is that we now want to earn that faith and trust which you put
in Sylvia and the government, through the course of this parliament, to see again the
great things that Labor can do for Australia, and to see return to the fold all of the
Tasmanian seats at the next election.
Tasmania, of course, is playing its part in the recovery which we are now seeing in the
Australian economy. We are now growing faster than any other comparable economy
and we'll be doing well growing around four percent into next year. And, I'm very
pleased to see Tasmania taking a part in this, sharing in this, in fact in some places,
leading it. And, today, just coming from Hobart, as I did, through Richmond and then
Ross, up to Evandale, seeing the tourist industry of Tasmania obviously playing a role
selling Tasmania's heritage as it does because the preservation of this wonderful city
and the places I mentioned is, I think, second to none in Australia. But, what also
pleased me this morning, I went through a fish export factory and, not so many months
ago, one at Ulverstone exporting potato chips. And, when you look at the amount of
industry and innovation which is taking place with Tasmanian companies picking up
the competitiveness which this government has now induced in Australia... we're
seeing Tasmania not just hanging behind the recovery but being ight in there with it.
And that will mean, as we're already seeing, employment start to pick up and we're
starting to see, I think, 145,000 job growth over the course of the last six months or
so, so we're well on the way to the half million jobs in three years having kept the
nearly two million of extra jobs which were created in the 1980s. So, we've had the
recession, we're out of it, we're on our way again and weve kept the great social
programs of the Labor party intact while we've been doing it. That is, Medicare and
thie ed ucation ' sy stem -and support for aged people and for young people and for
families we've been able to hold that together, now, as we contemplate the nineties.
And the nineties hold such bounty for Australia, now, as a low inflation country locked
into the. Asia-Pacific, -able to export our products and, in fhatjor the first time in our 
history being closer to fast growing world markets where, for most of our history, we
were a long way from the markets of Europe and North America. So, now we are
part of the fastest growing part of the world and we're right in there with it.
Now, of course, that couldn't be done, we couldn't realise the great ambitions we'ye
had through the eighties in setting Australia up as a modem society and economy,
without getting this period of office, this term of office, to give us a chance to ride the
growth cycle through the 1990s. And, you've helped give us this term of office by
sending Sylvia to Canberra as Member for Bass. Now, Sylvia said she is a woman of
the people. She gets around and she knows the electorate and she knows the
community. And this is what the Labor party always has, it has touch with the
community because it is from the community. And, that is why it has taken a Labor
government to give Australia a market economy, it's taken a Labor government to
enlarge the country and give it a greater future, it's taken a Labor government to see
the great opportunities in Asia and, at the same time, see our whole society grow
along... so that this recovery is not just for stockbrokers or people at the top end of
town, this recovery is a recovery for everybody and that includes the unemployed and
the long term unemployed and all Australians who ought to be able to participate in it.
Now, I said at the election, on election night, that we were not going to forget the
unemployed. That we were going to reach out our arms and bring them up with us so
we could go on to growth and prosperity in the 1990s. And, in this half year coming
up towards this Budget, I'll be introducing a statement dealing with the problems of
the long term unemployed and long term unemployment. And, let's, us, do something
new in the world7-fist in the world, again to say that in our society, in our
compassionate society, we will not leave three or four hundred thousand Australians
long term unemployed. That the rest of us won't move on and forget them, that we'll
go along as a society together. Because, only in that way will we keep this a nice
country which has got good values where we care about one another and where we
say, when we move along we all go along, not just those who are well off.
So, these are the great things we're fighting for, these are the great things we've been
elected for. And, we've now got a healthy, strong parliamentary majority and, for the
first time in a long time, the state of Tasmania playing a real role through the Labor
members in the Federal government of Australia. Now, it was 20 years ago when it
was thus, last like this. But, now Tasmania has rejoined the fold and as a consequence
Tasmania is getting the lift from the policies of the national government. And this has
got to help in general prosperity, in employment in this beautiful state. So, ladies and
gentlemen, Sylvia has already distinguished herself in the time she has been in the
parliamentary Labor party, she is a person of the people, she has that common touch,
she cares. And that input to the policies of the government, to the business of the
caucus of the party, is what makes all the difference in whether you've got a real
political party in office or just a business organisation which the Liberal Party is and
always has been a sort of semi-business organisation. Not a feeling, growing,
organic political organisation with touch to the community of this country.
So, I had a lot of pride on election night, none more so than seeing Tasmania return a
swag of Labor members. And, amongst them, Sylvia, whom I share this platform with
today with very great pride. So, could I thank each and every one of you for coming 
3
along, for supporting her, for believing in her, for having faith in the government and
faith in the great ideals of the Labor party. And let's hope, from the portals of this
office, that the great humanitarian policies of the party and its great sense of
enlargement can be accomplished here in Launceston. It gives me very great pleasure
to declare Sylvia's electorate office open.
Ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
THE UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME AUSTRALIA GRADUATION CEREMONY
PERTH TUESDAY, 8 MARCH 1.994
It is a great pleasure to be here tonight.
I suspect that until you see a graduation ceremony you
haven't fully appreciated what education means to people.
I mean you don't very often see the sort of general and
unmitigated happiness you see on people's faces here.
You don't see all that evidence of fulfilment and hope in
one room very O~ ften.
For me, being with you this evening is also a pleasure,*
because I missed my own graduation ceremony.
Not that I didn't have a classical education but it was in
the Australian Labor Party.
Apart from a few degrees in economics, it afforded me a Ph. D
in Varieties of Human Behaviour.
Tn fact, of all the Primp Ministers since the 1940s, with
the exception of John McEwen, who was in the job for just a
few days, I am the only one not to have had a university
education. My academic education ended at the age of seventeen.
I am quite sure that the great majority of people from my
background in those years would not have expected to set
foot in a university in their lifetimes.
It was beyond reach -or at least seemed to be.
It is true that with application and intelligence the sons
and daughters of working people aQ get there.
But not many of them. The majority simply couldn't afford
it. And there were not many universities.
However, the physical limits were not the only impediment,
nor perhaps the most important one. 
There was a psychological obstacle. A university education
was beyond the reach of our social expectatiohs.
It required young people to think beyond their
circumstances, beyond the patterns of life in their families
and communities. It meant very often leaving those families
and communities.
It required a leap of the imagination which most of us could
not make.
Most did not expect to go to university or even finish
secondary school indeed, just a decade ago only three in
ten Australians were finishing secondary school. That is in
1984.
And so long as jobs were available we were not very
concerned. In the 1950s and 1960s jobs were available: not particularly
interesting jobs but jobs. Jobs like the one I took, aged
fiftaon. AA nlrk in thp Svdnpv Cnntv Cominil.
DuL 1.1tiL JIL1IJ lAtLi IJLLV~ tLe2I. A I. M TILuiI. iiji. v, aJiL T iL
WnauP UZI&amp;* CA: 0 V; FL Qur nxaowy X0 M. L anum.
All over the world in modern economies like this one, the
old low-skill jobs are going. All over the world the story
is education and training.
Personal opportunities depend on it. The success of nations
depends on it.
Now, I suspect that it is customary for politicians making
these addresses to speak on one of two or three themes
themes from which some lesson can be learned to guide you
through your lives.
For instance, I could tell you that while your formal
education is a very good thing, your real education is about
to begin in life, in work, in the school of hard knocks.
I could tell you there is no substitute for experience.
Or I could tell you that we're delighted to see you all
graduating today at this lovely new university but, in
all modesty, you owe it to us, for really we made it all
possible. I intend to spare you a speech on these themes today, but
there is a little truth in both of them.
On the second one, I cannot refrain from saying that my
pleasure in seeing these young people graduate today is
appreciably greater because I know that, in the course of
the last decade, tens of thousands of young Australians have
been given an opportunity to study and earn degrees at new
universities and colleges. 
Since the 1980s, the equivalent of twenty major universities
have been added to the system by the Commonwealth Government
Commonwealth Labor Government.
This expansion of our tertiary education has not only
delivered new opportunities to countless individuals, but it
has made it possible for people to get higher education
without leaving their communities.
My pleasure is greater because the Government, and
particularly John Dawkins, played a part in it. If you
like, the milestone you reached today is something of a
milestone for us as well.
Where people from working class suburbs and poorer ru~ ral
areas not so long ago never imagined that their children
might go to university, it is now one of their life options.
The lesson is: look what can flow from engagement in public
life, look what this democracy can do, look how we have it
in our power to change.
Look how, like the graduates here today, we can imagine
something better and turn it to reality. We can do it as
individuals, as communities and as a nation.
As for the first of the familiar themes it is true that
the very best of formal education is still no substitute for
life lived. It is true that in this life one is constantly
learning. But no one today would stand here now and discount the need
for a formal education. The fact is young Australians need
one as never before more than one, because it is a
statistical certainty that the majority of people graduating
today will be re-trained at least once and probably twice in
their lives.
So what is the lesson? Be open to change. Believe in your
capacities to understand the contemporary world and
confront the challenges. Embrace the future, don't retreat
from it.
Which leads me to a third cliche of these addresses: it is
to say that in your hands the future of Australia lies.
I suspect this has most often been said by politicians who
didn't care to have the future in fheir hands.
It is a half-truth.
It is obviously true that the future depends on young
Australians, but I have to tell you my generation is not
quite ready to hand over responsibility.
It is my generation on whom the responsibility falls: we
hold the instruments of power in the national parliament,
in the states, in the community. 
And your generation should judge us all by the same
criteria: Are we prepared to confront the necessities which
face us? Are we prepared to make over those elements of our
national life which need making over?
Or are we prepared to let things drift?
The temptation in politics is alwys to let things drift.
It is very easy to decide to play safe and manage your way
through. It is much harder to imagine reforms, set them as goals and
go for them and trust that the momentum which comes from
the pursuit will carry you through.
It is also easy to become preoccupied with the day to day
business of politics warding of f aggressors, pursuing a
more potent media profile, handling the little crises which
dog all democratic governments.
Sometimes political life is a bit like being inside a
pinball machine: with balls whizzing around all over the
place, you can find yourself with your eyes closed and your
hands over your head adopting a crouch as a permanent
political position.
You can preoccupy yourself with every missile, with every
seeming necessity, with every process, with every ritual and
think you're playing the game, yet forget that the game is
ultimately about getting done what has to be done.
The lesson is: power is for using. It is not to be wasted
or feared or despised. It is to be used to deliver our
democratic ambitions in my case, our gnnial democratic
ambitions. Which brings me to MX theme for tonight.
You will have heard, I'm sure I sincerely hn~ you have
heard those terms which have become watchwords of the
Australian economy, and for that matter, Australian society.
I mean words like " competitive", " internationally
competitive" -" an internationally competitive economy"
You will have heard a lot of talk about " productivity".
These were the words which emerged to describe our economic
ambitions in the 1980s. In the 1990s, we can safely say,
they describe much more of the reality.
What you might have heard less frequently are the words
which describe our Anial ambitions.
Yet we pursued them with equal energy. We were determined
from the start to make the Australian economy
internationally competitive, yet no less determined to see 
that the principles of a competitive economy did rnot flow
over, as it has in some countries, into a creed of
selfishness, or a justification for abandoning our
traditions of social fairness.
Because if you abandon these, you abandon opportunity and
thereby abandon talent. And you abandon the social cohesion
on which national success depends.
In the nineties, I think it is essential that we maintain
the momentum of our economic reform while also maintaining
our determination to see Australia emerge as one of the
truly advanced social democracies of the world.
This was our reputation at the end of the last century. I
have absolutely no doubt that it can be our repaliit. y at the
end of this century.
We can do it through continuing to make our economy and our
federation more creative and efficient, and at each step in
that process ensuring that the benefits flow to the whole of
the country and all of the people: making the safety net of
social services more effective and sophisticated, extending
the reach of opportunity and assistance to communities and
regions which have been denied them.
I am talking about dealing everyone into national recovery
and national prosperity and making everyone feel part of
the national equation.
There is no intellectual copyright in political life only
the satisfaction which comes from having persuaded the other
side of politics to one's own view.
So it is deeply satisfying, not to say flattering, to hear
Dr Hewson talking about remaking Liberal Party policy into
something more socially " inclusive" in other words
something rather like L. AQnr Party policy.
For, in fact, it will be no bad thing if there emerges a
general consensus on the need to share in Australia's
future, because there are extraordinary opportunities for
Australia in the modern world most particularly in modern
Asia. " Asia" is another word you hear a lot of these days, and
often in the context of " competitiveness" and
" productivity".
For Asia does set us these same economic imperatives: and
meeting them successfully translates into words like
" opportunity" unrp( rPcented opportunity to build a rich,
creative, complex society and set up generations of
Australians in the twenty-first century.
The truth is we have never been in this situation before:
riot with a chance to make it on our own, in our own region,
by our own genius and endeavour. 
But it is essential that in doing this we make sure that
these opportunities the chance to benefit and the chance
to contribute are extended to Australians wherever they
come from and whatever their social and economic
circumstances may now be.
The economic and the social are not separate categories.
The major issue now facing us, long-term unemployment, falls
into both.
We have to tackle long-term unemployment for reasons of
social equity,-for reasons of compassion, for the reason
that we will never be able to say that we have succeeded as
a nation so long as we have several hundred thousand men and
women and their families unable to find work, and with it
dignity and hope.
But it also has to be understood that unemployment has
economic costs as well: we lose the productive output that
they would otherwise create, we lose their talent and
energy. And we lose again, because we need to support them
when they might be supporting themselves.
Now there are some people who will say that the way to make
Australia more competitive is to reduce wages. They believe
that a less equal society is a more efficient one because
the labour market is more competitive. For which read
more desperate, more " do or die".
This is the path that some countries chose in the 1980s.
It is emphatically the wrong one for Australia.
The human and social cost of privation and uncertainty is
too high. The cost of inequalities to efficiency and
cohesion is too high. The cost to Australian ambitions to
our Sense of what it means to be Australian is too high.
In my view it would betray not just our century-old
traditions of social justice, but all we have done in the
past decade to make Australia a country which can profitably
make its way in the world.
The acceptance of a low wage society would be to deny our
capacity to improve. It conveniently takes the pressure of f
our efforts to create a better country here a low wage
society for instance, has less need to provide educational
opportunity for all.
The alternative the only alternative is to improve
productivity: improve the quality of everything we do from
the workplace to the boardroom, our farms, our schools,
colleges and universities, in government, be it local. State
or Commonwealth. 
And this is where you come in the graduates here tonight
and their families.
This is where every Australian comes in.
Higher levels of productivity are only possible with high
quality human resources high quality people.
If we are going to be competitive, we need a skilled, highly
educated population.
The future belongs to societies that organise themselves for
learning. What we know and what we can do now holds the key
to our economic success, just as our command of natural
resources once did.
Because we are so rich in natural resources, it has often
been said that for much of our history we have tended to
believe that our country would always deliver us. Now there
is no question that we have to deliver our country.
Our mining and pastoral industries, like the great freedoms
which Australia's space and environment provides, will
continue to enrich us.
But only if we match it with human creativity, engagement
and ideas. Only if we do things and make things which in
one way or another wear the badge of Australian learning,
imagination, confidence and endeavour.
As I said, that is where you come in.
Where once the great majority of Australians left school to
do work that required few skills and little knowledge, and
had no reason to expect that they would ever need them;
where once it could be safely said that the best school was
the school of experience, now the acquisition of skills and
knowledge must be inseparable from that experience.
It therefore must be the duty of my generation, and
especially the duty of those of us in positions of power, to
deliver to the generation of people represented by those who
graduated here tonight educational systems which make
learning part of our national life part of the experience
of all Australians.
I said a moment ago that these remarks applied not just to
the new graduates, but to their families.
And of course it is true. The most fundamental learning
begins with them: it is where our attitudes are shaped, our
aspirations and expectations formed.
We get our approach to learning from our families. They can
teach the value of work and faith in the future. They can
teach us the value of ourselves and others.
They can also fail to do these things. 
8
But when they do them, they do for Australia everything good
governments strive to do. I mean they provide security
nets, education, health care, cohesion, certainty, identity,
ambition. And the truth is, they do it so much hZtt~ than
governments. It would be inappropriate to conclude this speech without
saying something abo~ ut Notre Daime Univel3ity. The le s I
can say is how impressed I am.
Impressed, yet not so terribly surprised. When we are
talking about extending educational opportunity to everyone,
we are talking about extending human dignity. I am very
well aware of just how powerful a motive this is in Catholic
education. And so long as I am in the Australian Labor
Party, it is quite impossible to forget it.
I began by talking about how opportunities for tertiary
education were largely denied to most Australians in the
days when I was growing up. The great change which has come
over our education system since then has been reflected in
virtually every element of Australia's life.
Those new educational opportunities for people of working
class backgrounds were vital in the transformation of the
union movement and the Labor movement in general. They were
vital to a generation of migrants and their children. They
were vital for women. They have been vital for business and
the public service.
The confidence and capacity to transform ourselves as an
economy and a society in this last decade has been
substantially derived from the transformation in our
education system.
It seems to me that in the 1980s, for the first time in our
history, Australians had the confidence to take on the
world. That has been the task of my generation. It will
also be yours.
In this, the education you have had here at Notre Dame will
serve you well but as an old De La Salle boy, and a Labor
Party man, let me tell you that while education is essential
to your lives, and always will be, there is no substitute
for faith.
That's my lesson: believe in yourselves, believe in your
generation, believe in your ideals, believe in your country.
Keep the faith. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LUNCHEON FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE SOLOMON ISLANDS,
THE HON FRANCIS HILLY, MP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
MONDAY, 14 MARCH 1994
It is my great pleasure to welcome to Australia the Head of Government of
the Solomon Islands.
I have been looking forward to seeing Mr Hilly in Australia later this year,
when the South Pacific Forum meets in Brisbane.
In fact I have already had the pleasure of seeing Mr Hilly at the forum in
Nauru last year, and at CHOGM in Cyprus.
However, those are not really occasions for bilateral discussions such as we
have enjoyed this morning.
Australia welcomes talks with the Solomon Islands of the warm and friendly
nature we had today. They enable us to, explore issues of concern to both
countries in some greater depth than a multilateral occasion.
At the forum, I have no doubt Mr Hilly and I will have the opportunity to
address regional matters which concern each of us.
That is the Pacific way.
But neighbours in the region must have opportunities to talk within the
framework of their own relationship in this case, a relationship of great
warmth which Australia values highly.
I particularly welcome the fact that on this visit, Prime Minister, you are
accompanied by a trade and investment delegation from the Solomon
Islands.
And that you and the delegation will be exploring ways to expand trade and
investment opportunities, with a special emphasis on tourism. 4961
I J 
In my first few months as Prime Minister I had the opportunity of visiting
Honiara to take part in the South Pacific Forum, which happily coincided with
the 15th anniversary of the independence of the Solomon Islands.
While my time was mostly confined to the capital itself, I saw enough of
Guadalcanal and the surrounding waters to recognise the value of your
attractive environment and the tremendous potential it offers in the long term
for tourism.
As I said at last year's forum in Nauru, the promotion of the private sector and
the development of export industries will be fundamental to the Pacific's
future economic prospects.
Your initiative, Prime Minister, in bringing this business delegation to
Australia is a concrete and helpful step in this context.
As you know, trade between us is heavily weighted in my country's favour.
That is not uncomfortable for Australia, but we are prepared to help in
encouraging Australian companies to trade with, and invest in, the Solomon
Islands. Your government's commitment to economic reform is, in this regard, most
welcome. The path to economic reform is not easy. I know that because the Australian
government has been following it for a decade.
But success in economic reform should also open up opportunities for
Australian business, to the benefit of both nations.
However trade links are only one facet of our bilateral relationship.
Australia is your neighbour in the South Pacific, and we consider the region
we share to be of vital importance in our foreign policy and security
objectives. My appointment of Gordon Bilney as Minister for Pacific Island Affairs reflects
the Australian Government's desire to give even closer attention to the
region. We will be providing some $ 11 million this financial year to help, in particular,
with education and training.
We also maintain strong links through the Defence Co-operation Program. I
enjoyed very much visiting the patrol boat base at Honiara in 1992, and
Australia is very pleased to have provided two Pacific patrol boats to help
your government protect its valuable fisheries.
4962 
We also enjoy excellent people to people contacts, and your invitation to the
business leaders who have accompanied you will help promote them.
I have been looking forward, as I said, to welcoming you to Australia again for
the 25th South Pacific Forum in Brisbane in August, which represents
another aspect of the relationship between our two countries.
I trust we can have a useful discussion there of the economic challenges
facing all of us in the region, looking in particular at how to make the best use
of our resources.
But I also trust that our bilateral talks this morning have been as useful to you
as they have been to me.
And I trust that your current visit to Australia is both useful and enjoyable. 4963 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA TODAY INDONES IA ' 94
OVERSEAS PASSENGER TERMINAL, SYDNEY
WEDNESDAY 16 MARCH 1994
I am very pleased to be able to launch the Australia
Today Indonesia ' 94 promotion. Prime Ministers are
always pleased to open things.
But, for both political and national reasons, I think I
am entitled to take an extra measure of pleasure today.
No country is more important to Australia than Indonesia
If we fail to get this relationship right, and nurture
and develop it, the whole web of our foreign relations is
incomplete.
When I became Prime Minister, I was determined that one
of my highest priorities would be to ensure that
Australia's relationship with Indonesia received the
attention I believed it deserved.
We live adjacent to the fourth most populous country in
the world.
Too few Australians understand the importance of this
neighbour of ours these 180 million neighbours of ours.
Too few understand the riches and variety of Indonesian
culture. And too few appreciate the pace of economic and social
change taking place in Indonesia, where the economy has
been growing in real terms at a rate of 6.7 percent a
year since 1965.
For too long we were inclined to see both Indonesia
itself, and our relationship with Indonesia, in almost
exclusively political terms.
The Australian fear of Indonesia as an expansionist
power, forged during the Sukarno era, persisted long
after President Sukarno and his-policies had gone. 
And Australian ignorance of Indonesia continued long
after we should have known better.
So I made a deliberate decision to make my first overseas
visit as Prime Minister to Jakarta.
And I decided to state publicly there what all
Australians need to understand: that the emergence of the
New Order government of President Soeharto, and the
stability and prosperity which his government has brought
to the sprawling archipelago to our north, was the single
most beneficial strategic development to have affected
Australia and its region in the past thirty years.
An Indonesia mired in poverty, split by ethnic or
regional tensions, and hostile to Australia, would have
had incalculable consequences for this country.
And not just for our security but for our economic
prosperity as well.
One of my aims during my visit in April 1992 was to
examine ways in which our relationship could be broadened
away from its concentration on political issues on
which we were sometimes at odds to a much broader
agenda of economic, social and cultural cooperation.
I was convinced then, as I still am, that as Indonesia
developed, so the complementarities between us would
grow. Indonesia's economy has grown five and a half times since
1966.
And every year since then the income of each Indonesian
has grown on average by four and a half percent.
The percentage of people living below the poverty line
fell from forty percent in 1976 to around seventeen
percent in 1987.
An economy heavily dependent on commodities, and
particularly on oil, has been transformed, reformed and
deregulated. The industrial sector now accounts for 23 percent of GDP,
more than agriculture.
There are parallels, of course, with Australia's
experience over the past eleven years.
Our economy, too, has been modernised and opened up to
the world through financial deregulation and tariff cuts.
Our exports have trebled and have grown as a percentage
of our GDP from 13 percent to 20 percent. 
Our manufacturing exports are growing rapidly and are now
consistently stronger than the rural exports for which we
are better known.
Services exports are also becoming an increasingly
important element in our trade, growing from $ 4.2 billion
in 1981-82 to $ 15 billion in 1992-93.
So, with these changes, we have become more efficient,
productive and competitive than ever before.
With these changes in Indonesia and Australia have come
new opportunities for cooperation.
And our two governments must foster this co-operation.
I have been very pleased to discover on my two visits to
Jakarta, and in meetings with Indonesian Ministers here,
that President Soeharto and his senior colleagues very
much share this approach.
In April 1992, President Soeharto and I agreed that the
establishment of an Australia-Indonesia Ministerial Forum
would be one useful way of broadening our relationship.
We wanted the Forum to include a range of economic
Ministers who until then had not had a great deal to do
with the bilateral relationship.
That Forum has begun its work well, establishing working
groups in a number of areas of practical importance to us
such as agriculture and food co-operation.
Its activities are designed to reflect and to accelerate
broader movements already underway in our relationship.
Here are some figures which bear this out.
At more than $ 3 billion, two-way trade is nearly three
times its level five years ago.
Australian approved investment in Indonesia over the past
five years amounts to nearly $ 700 million.
Sixty percent more Indonesians were enrolled in higher
education in Australia in 1993 than one year earlier.
The number of Indonesian visitors to Australia almost
doubled in two years to 1993.
So my simple proposition is this: no relationship
Australia has offers greater potential, on the social,
the cultural or the economic fronts, than this one with
Indonesia. I happen to think that this holds true for Indonesia as
well, although that is something Indonesia will have to
decide. 
But having said that, potential is just that
potential. Despite encouraging figures such as those I have given,
we should not fool ourselves that there is anything
inevitable about the trend at work here.
For example, our bilateral trade grew by only 1.5 percent
during 1993. This was the lowest increase in several
years. And although there are several particular reasons
for this, it is not a good enough result.
If the relationship is to live up to its potential,
effort will be required from the whole range of people in
our communities.
But, we can certainly do much more in the economic area.
To take just one example, we hope to sign shortly an
agreement with Indonesia which will facilitate increased
co-operation in science and technology.
And in the area of language, all Australian Governments
are putting their money where their mouths are with the
recent decision by the Council of Australian Governments
to endorse a new national strategy for Asian languages
and culture which will greatly increase the number of
Australian students learning four key Asian languages,
including Indonesian.
There are other areas worth our attention, too.
Changes in Australia and Indonesia and in the world
around us since the end of the Cold War should compel us
to take a fresh look at our strategic relationship.
I believe great potential exists for further defence cooperation
between Australia and Indonesia.
The Government's recent strategic review proposed the
concept of a strategic partnership with the countries of
our region.
If we are to turn into reality our policy of seeking
defence in and with Asia, instead of against Asia,
Indonesia is the most important place it will have to be
done. Already we share many strategic interests. We have no
conflicting interests in this part of the world, and
there is a great complementarity in our respective
defence postures.
And despite the differences in the structure and
functions of our defence forces, new areas of practical
co-operation are opening up to us. 
On the political front, we are working together very well
in regional organisations such as the ASEAN post-
Ministerial consultations and we will co-operate closely
in the new ASEAN Regional Forum.
We have also worked together effectively on particular
issues such as Cambodia and regional chemical weapons
arms control and, of course, in APEC.
President Soeharto and I have spoken on several
occasions about APEC. We both see the great potential
the organisation offers for keeping up the momentum of
growth across the whole Asia Pacific region.
And each of us is conscious of the opportunities APEC
offers to ASEAN and the developing countries of the
region, as well as the developed ones.
Indonesia is the Chair of APEC this year, in addition to
its chairmanship of the non-aligned movement. This is a
real tribute to Indonesia's standing in the world.
In my view the APEC Leaders' meeting in Jakarta in
November will be a decisive moment for APEC and the
region. I have offered President Soeharto any help that
Australia can usefully provide.
But despite the bright prospects in areas like these, it
would be foolish to claim that the road ahead will always
be smooth.
I do not doubt that Australia's relationship with
Indonesia will encounter problems from time to time.
We are different people with different cultures and
different views on issues which matter to us.
The management of those differences is part of the
challenge. We will always want to be able to talk
frankly and directly about them. But it is the way in
which we come to grips with them which can give the
relationship its particular value.
Some years ago people in both Australia and Indonesia
liked to refer to the idea that good fences make good
neighbours; that good relations were a matter of keeping
the palings in repair. In my view, the need for such
defensive thinking is well past. As both countries
change, we should and can approach our relationship with
much greater confidence.
I believe that Australia can establish with Indonesia a
partnership which can stand as a model for co-operation
between developed and developing countries, between
countries based on western structures and values and
those based on Asian models. 
The task will not be easy. It will require more energy
and commitment; warm hearts and, when required, cool
heads. If a relationship of the sort we want is to endure, we
have to look beyond mutual economic interests and to
establish a deeper understanding.
There is no doubt that work is required on both sides.
We need be in no doubt that Australians' lack of
knowledge about Indonesia is matched by misconceptions in
Indonesia about Australia.
A recent survey commissioned by the Australian Government
found that almost two-thirds of Indonesians believe that
the White Australia policy is still practised. Fewer than
one in five Indonesians see Australia as a modern society
or an advanced country. Australia is perceived to have
relatively low expertise in defence, shipping, aerospace,
mining and manufacturing.
There are other more positive aspects to the survey
findings. But it shows how far we have to go.
This is one reason why the Australian Government is
putting this effort into the Australia Today Indonesia
' 94 promotion.
Australia Today will be a showcase in Indonesia for
Australia's achievements in a whole range of areas from
trade and technology to the arts and tourism.
It will be the most comprehensive promotion that
Australia has ever undertaken abroad, and with the
highest level of participation. More than 500 Australian
organisation represented by at least 1500 individuals,
will take part.
When I visited President Soeharto last October, I was
pleased to receive his support for the promotion.
I am also delighted that the patron of the event will be
the Indonesian Co-ordinating Minister for Trade and
Industry, Mr Hartarto, who knows Australia and
Australians well.
I should particularly note the contribution of some of
the corporate sponsors of the promotion.
New Hope Corporation
Austindo Group
Krakatau Steel
BHP
. CRA 
* Coca Cola Amatil
* Price Waterhouse
* ANZ Banking Group
* Commonwealth Bank of Australia
* Blake Dawson Waldron
* Southcorp Wines
* Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
* TNT Express Worldwide ( Australia)
These are all far-sighted companies. They all have a bit
of vision about them. They understand the potential I
have talked about today.
Several of my Cabinet colleagues will attend Australia
Today events, and the Minister for Trade, Senator
McMullan, will lead a trade mission of business leaders.
The ' Visions for the Future' exhibition will provide a
showcase for Australian science and technology that will
last beyond this promotion and will help sell the message
of Australian achievements in other parts of the world as
well. All Australian states will be represented in this
promotion. In particular, the Queensland and the Western
Australian state governments will have programs in
Semarang and Surabaya respectively, to celebrate their
flourishing sister-state relationships with the
Indonesian provinces of East Java and Central Java.
The cultural program we are putting on will give
Indonesians a taste of the best we have to offer in the
arts, entertainment and sport everything from
exhibitions of art including Aboriginal art the West
Australian Ballet, the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra,
theatre and music.
Elite national teams in soccer, volley ball and badminton
will meet their Indonesian counterparts.
Several top Australian sports coaches will work with
Indonesian sports people a good beginning to the kind
of cooperation which might be possible in the lead-up to
the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney.
' Australia Today Indonesia' will go some way towards
letting Indonesians know about the achievements of the
continent to their south. At the same time it will
expose large numbers of Australians for the first time to
modern Indonesia. 
It should go a long way towards creating a better
cultural understanding and, thereby, a better culture
for business and trade.
When this promotion is over, the challenge will remain.
But it will be one we should welcome.
It is in every sense an historic challenge. The chance
to set up for the twenty first century a strong, dynamic
enduring relationship between Australia and
Indonesia. An immensely profitable and creative
relationship between ourselves and the 180 million people
to our north.
Without doubt, there is no more exciting and potentially
rewarding challenge facing us between now and the end of
this century.
That a prominent business group like the Institute of
Company Directors has associated itself with this event
is yet another welcome sign of the growing willingness of
the Australian business community to get engaged with
Asia. I congratulate them, and everyone else associated with
the project and now take great pleasure in launching
it. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY TU1E PRIME MINISTERj THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
WOMEN IN SPORT AWARDS
BRISBANE 17 MARCH, 1994
It is my great pleasure to be with you again tonight.
Last year, I enjoyed the occasion very much.
But it was in the middle of an election campaign. Elections are the political equivalent
of the Olympics but, the pity is, they occur more frequently
Elections have a way of making every living, breathing thing, including sport, political
and I know that is not to everybody's taste.
It is not to my taste, for a start.
Tonight I can speak to you unsullied by politics, and at the end of a year in which the
winds of' change really did blow very strong in Australia.
There is a new optimismn around; in the economy and in the nation at large, I think.
And in sport.
Some pcople say that if the Australian cricket team is winning, or Greg Norman, or we
pick up a gold medal or two somewhere in the world the whole nation lifts, even
when the other news, the cconomic news, is not so good.
But just now we've got them cycling together the Australian economy is flourishing
again and so is Australian sport.
So, if' the theory is true, in the nineties we should be able to lift enormously.
In the last twclve months there has been no bigger boost to this very welcome
phenomenon than the Olympics 2000 decision.
It was a great boost to national confidence. 
We are honoured to have with us tonight, Shirley de la Hunty, one of the few
Australians who knows what it was like to compete and win at the Olympics in front of
her own crowd.
We are six years away now from having the opportunity to see that again.
The night we won the Games in Monte Carlo will remain a highlight of my time as
Prime Minister and a great memory always.
But when all the work has been done, when the events are over and the crowds have
left Homebush and all the competitors have gone home, the success of Sydney 2000
will depend not on politicians or organisers or officials.
The glory will belong to the competitors.
What we remember about Melbourne 1956 is not the method by which the city won
the right to stage the Olympics, or the extraordinary efforts of the organising
committee to actually get the show on the road.
We remember names such as Cuthbert, Fraser, Rose and, of course, Strickland.
If you watched the National Athletics Championships on ABC television last weekend,
you would have seen among the familiar Anglo-Celtic names, new ones like Costian
and Poctschka and Capobianco and Van der Kuyp.
On the same weekend, if you watched the one-day cricket, you would have seen a
young man named Chee Quee scoring a century.
If you had watched the netball, you would have seen a young woman named Avellino
shooting goals.
Look at an Australian sporting team these days and increasingly you see a microcosm
of the contemporary society and in the energy and success they represent, I believe a
view of Australia's future.
The presence of people from vastly different backgrounds at the higher levels of
competition embodies the principle that all of you try to promote that sport is for
everybody. They should inspire Australian youngsters to realise that our Olympics 2000
competitors can come from any cultural background, any gender, or any school.
Their example, like that of the Cuthberts and Kilborns and Flemings and Frasers and de
la Huntys, teaches this generation the television generation, the multicultural
generation that sport is indeed for every Australian.
These elite sportsmen and women are a permanent reminder that this is a society open
to talent: open, in fact, to anyone who wants to participate. 
They serve as an inspiration to people who want to compete at any level.
I said at the beginning that some things are best left divorced fr-om politics. The truth
is that athlctcs can do things which politicians can only hope to do.
Politicians can talk until they are blue in the face about the need for the community to
accept people of different backgrounds, and they might if they are lucky in a lifetime
do as much for the cause of tolerance and reconciliation as Cathy Freeman does in 22
seconds. A politician can talk about the need for women to enjoy the same opportunities as men
and achievc less in a year than Betty Cuthbert achieved in less than two minutes as an
Olympian. Or what she achieves every time she appears in public today, every time we remember
her. It is not only because we bathe in her reflected glory: it is because she embodied then,
and still does now, the enormous effort that goes into such success in sport, and to see
it triumphant gives us inspiration and hope for our efforts in life.
All of us need this example.
As they make their way dceper into positions of opportunity and influence, and into
spheres of our national life from which they have been too long held out, women need
it. But men probably need it more.
Men need it to remember what other elements in our culture incline them to forget.
It will heclp men to remember the absolutely equal entitlements of women in the wider
society if they rememnber their absolutely equal perhaps even greater contribution to
sport. They have, after all, won I I of the 14 track and field Olympic gold medals in the postwar
era.
They do, after all, participate in broadly equal numbers.
We can hardly define ourselves by our feats in sport and ignore at least half the people
who have achieved them Australian women.
This gathering is a celebration of women in Australian sport. It is a celebration of the
great contribution that women make; of their central and equal role in sport at every
level-of the equal part thcy have played as models and inspirations for the nation at
large. 
4
As Prime Minister of a country for which the " fair go" is a by-word and tolerance a
basic part of what it means to be Australian, I not only congratulate all of you, I thank
you for the contribution you are making to Australia in ways that go beyond the
boundaries of sport. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ECONOISIT ROUNDTABLE
CANBERRA, 24 MARCH 1994
Let me begin by thanking the Economist and everyone
associated with this conference.
It is a very useful magazine, the Economist. These days
I particularly like reading the last couple of pages
the economic indicators.
I like reading them because today they show how well this
country is doing relative to the rest of the world.
There it was on March 12 Australia leading the world in
GDP growth, and leading the world as far as the
Enonomist's forecasters were concerned.
And along with the growth, low inflation.
I thought it might be interesting to compare these
figures with those of a decade ago.
In 1983 the Economist had just started running these two
useful pages of indicators. And here in Australia we had
just floated the dollar.
In the week we floated it, 17 December 1983, the
Rconomist's indicators revealed our GDP growth for the
year was the lowest in the world. Not the highest
the lowest. Minus 3.9.
And Australia's inflation rate was not among the lowest
in the world, it was among the highest. For the year the
CPI was 9.2% the third highest. The US was 2.9%,
Germany 2.6% ' r--oday Australia's inflation rate is lower
than both those countries.
So between those two sets of figures, separated by ten
years or so, there lies a tale.
And, whatever else this conference has done, I hope it
has told that tale. 
2
If your conference has stimulated thought, questioned a
few orthodoxies, opened people up to new information,
ideas and opinion it will prove useful in the short run.
It will be significant in the ing~ run if it re-shapes
thinking about Australia and its place in the world: I
think my own hope would be that the Conference has helped
perceptions of Australia catch up with the realities.
We tend to take for granted that people here and abroad
fully comprehend the massive structural and cultural
change which has occurred in Australia in the past
decade. The truth is a lot of Australians are not really aware of
what is taking place here. They are not fully aware of
what they themselves have achieved.
When you are driven by reforming zeal you tend to forgo
the luxury of reflecting on your work.
And in the 1980s as now Australia wag driven by the
need to break from the downward spiral of economic
fortune which a quarter century of conservative
government orthodoxy had got us into.
We are only now beginning to see what we have done. And
we are beginning to see it because the effects are
beginning to flow.
As that process continues, I think the dimensions of this
national transformation will increasingly become apparent
to Australians.
And I think that this awareness will itself be a fillip
to Australia's progress.
I believe there is a great story to be told about
contemporary Australia. And as Australians'
consciousness of it increases, so I believe will their
enthusiasm and sense of national purpose.
Now of course I hope to see the same consciousness about
modern Australia developing in other parts of the world.
What we have in Australia in the 1990s is the best
conjunction of growth and low inflation for 30 years.
We have a productivity culture to help us maintain that
happy circumstance.
We have an export culture that we didn't have before.
In Asia and the Pacific we have the export markets, and
increasingly the necessary structures to grow and service
them. 
We have exports now representing 20 per cent of GDP. An
export base which is much more diverse than it was a
decade ago, with exports of elaborately transformed
manufactures growing at 16 per cent per annum since the
mid eighties and exports of services also growing
rapidly. Above all, we have the confidence which can only come
with success itself.
There is nothing harder to move than an orthodoxy. No
amount of arguing with it will make much difference.
The orthodoxy about Australia used to be that we could
not be a manufacturing nation and an exporter of
commodities. The truth was we could be and we now are.
The orthodoxy used to be that we couldn't develop a
cooperative productivity-based industrial culture. The
truth is we could and we have.
The orthodoxy was that we couldn't do business in Asia.
The truth is, today that is where we do most of our
business. The orthodoxy was that we could never be a truly
competitive nation. The truth is we could and today we
are. The old orthodoxy obtained as much at home as it did
abroad. Today in Australia the new reality is
progressively dislodging the old way of thinking, and
there are promising indications that the same thing is
happening abroad.
And where this is not the case, it most certainly should
be. For in addition to those fundamentals we now have firmly
in place, we have the added advantages of a skilled
workforce, massive participation rates in schools, a
strong shift to private research and development, highly
developed infrastructure, and a society and a political
system as stable as any in the world.
Now, I have no doubt that in the course of the Conference
there will have been objections raised to perceived or
real disincentives to trade and investment in Australia.
In reply let me begin by saying that we do not believe
our job is over; or that the schemes we have in place are
perfect and not in need of tuning and reforming from time
to time.
In the broad, we are pleased with what we have done. 
But nothing suggests to us that we can for a moment rest
on our laurels. Everything in the modern global economy
suggests that no nation can.
So, where there are difficulties our mind is open. We
know you don't get to solve large problems by being
closed off to criticism we didn't make ourselves
competitive by closing ourselves off, we did it by
opening ourselves up.
Having said that, I should restate the Australian
Government's view that we are not about the economic
imperative transcending the social imperative.
We are not interested in Australia in creating a low-wage
low rent society.
We do not for a moment believe the nonsense put around by
some people in the 1980s and even by some people today
that our competitiveness depends on imitating the wage
regimes of developing countries.
Our objective is a high wage economy built on education
and productivity, coupled with an affordable but
sophisticated social net.
No doubt investors will see some advantages in the
developing countries, but Australia will more than match
them in skills, productivity, stability and certainty.
Similarly, if an overseas investor tells us that our
taxation system is too complicated that for example,
the fringe benefits tax or neraZin other provisions make
life difficult for them, we will look at the problem.
But we will not lose sight of the first principle, which
is that the tax system should be fair and effective.
And we might be inclined to say to such an investor:
whatever you may see yourself as losing on the little
roundabouts, you will more than make up for on the big
swing of economic and political stability, a massive
profit share, a first class universal health system,
schools, hospitals, social services which in general have
few peers in the world and with a revenue share in GDP
the lowest in the developed world.
A small public sector but an effective one.
In short, this is a good place in which to live and to
work. It should be plainly understood that Australia has
rejected the socially regressive forms of economic
rationalism in favour of structural reform allied to
inclusive social policies. 
The results of this mix gave Australia one of the highest
growth rates in the OECD over the last decade, the
highest rate of employment and one of the lowest rates of
inflation.-
The model here in the nineties is a modern socialdemocratic
one.
And I might say it seems to me that if you surveyed the
successful countries of the modern era even if only
through the Economist'sa economic indicators you will
find that this model has been the successful one
everywhere. " Model" in a sense is the wrong word. Because what
characterises the philosophy is flexibility, pragmatism,
responsiveness, an absence of ideological rigidity.
It is a " model" which balances the imperative to take
bold steps and often difficult ones with the
imperative to take the people along with you.
Manifestly, it is a model not just for social and
economic justice, but for social and economic cohesion
and strength.
That is why, incidentally, the Government is determined
to see that the benefits now flowing from the recovery,
and from the great changes made in the 1980s, flow right
through the country into services, into regional
development, into the unemployed.
From the Government's point of view this has to be a
recovery that is both deep and broad.
It can be a recovery, I believe, which will complete the
transformation of Australia and set us up in the front
rank of countries in the 21st century.
That will depend on the successful completion of a number
of other tasks. First among them is the problem of the
long term unemployed.
on 28 April we will bring down a White Paper on
Employment the first since the end of the Second World
War.
With its implementation, we expect to get the bulk of the
long term unemployed back in touch with the labour
market. In doing so we will not only alleviate what is a major
human problem now, but avoid a major social problem
later.
And at the same time we will exploit an otherwise wasted
human resource and substantially increase the skill level
of our workforce. 
That is a major challenge for us in the next few years
creating a more skilled and flexible workforce, and
thereby, industries which are more competitive and
responsive. So we will be investing heavily in education and
training.
We are also very much aware that this federation of
states is not always as efficient as it should be
indeed, for a long time, in many areas it has been
dreadfully inefficient.
In recent months we have taken some dramatic steps
towards creating a much more efficient and competitive
Commonwealth by creating a more cooperative one.
One more committed to common national goals.
In a real sense, what we are doing is applying to the
Commonwealth the same principles as the best companies
apply. And I would take the analogy further than the simple
mechanics of efficiency.
As companies need a sense of purpose about them, so do
countries. As companies need an unambiguous corporate
identity, so do countries.
That is why the Government has been concerned with issues
relating to our identity and nationhood.
The circumstances of our history have left us with a
residue of ambiguity and anachronism which in this decade
the Government would like to see swept away swept away
without cost to our best traditions, but with great gain
to our collective confidence and effort.
In a broadly similar vein we have set about at last
bringing in to the national mainstream the indigenous
people of Australia.
I gather one speaker at least has expressed concern about
the Mabo legislation the Government introduced last year.
This was perhaps the most complex and difficult
legislation in Australia's history, and also the most
overdue. We introduced it above all because justice
demanded that we do it.
We also did it in the knowledge that success will mean a
more cohesive country and a people with more confidence
and self-esteem.
We did it not to create uncertainty but certainty the
certainty which comes from a national system to determine
native title. 
We would be only too happy to explain how the legislation
does this to Mr Masuda and any potential investors in our
mining and pastoral industries.
I would only say now that this is good and necessary
legislation and investors must recognise it as fact of
our national life.
I say to them and to our own States that the legislation
has already brought certainty and with their cooperation
it can bring even more.
The dire consequences predicted in some quarters have not
eventuated, and show no sign of doing so.
I have no doubt that in the long run the Mabo legislation
will be seen as a force for a better investment climate,
as well as a better country.
Ladies and gentlemen
On all these matters there are sceptics out there I know
and cynics, and naysayers and obscurantists of all
kinds. But their ranks are thinning.
We are very confident. As I said at the beginning there
is nothing like seeing the story unfold and recognising
your part in it to lift the spirits and firm up the
faith. If nothing else, I hope that at this gathering the
faithful have multiplied and that they will now go
forth and tell the world.
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING REMARKS, PREMIERS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, FRIDAY, 25 MARCH 1994
1 would like to declare our meeting open and to welcome everybody to it. It is not that
long since we met at the Council of Australian Governments and we are all pleased to
be able to say at the conclusion of that discussion that it was a good co-operative
outcome and that we are able to advance a number of major things in the economy and
the country in a way that some of the sceptics thought we might not be able to do.
It is an innovation separating the financial Premiers Conference and the issues of
finance from other issues between the Commonwealth and the States in areas, say, of
the micro-economy; in the things which we have been doing in technical and further
education; or in water; or in gas; or in electricity because in years past while some of
these items came on the agenda of the Premiers Conference given that it often took us
time to get through the financial discussions there was not the opportunity to be able
to range over the things that we are doing together and need to do together of the
variety I just mentioned.
It seems that the Council of Australian Governments structure -and the division of
discussion between the financial meeting and the policy meeting, if you like, is working
for us and we are getting a much better co-operative understanding between us and we
are able to do things that we might not have been able to do individually or have been
able to do together.
So, we meet with at least a new structure now starting to gather in some maturity
about itself and we meet also at a time which is, I think, pretty obvious that we have a
fairly strongly improving economy, at a time when we can look forward to a pick up in
growth and activity and with concomitant low inflation. This is something we have not
been able to look forward to any of us during most of our political lives and this
happens to be true at the moment. There was quite a bit of comfort to be taken from
last quarter's National Accounts the December quarter National Accounts published
a week or so ago. Apart from the growth figure of 4 per cent and the acceleration in
growth over the course of the year, what I thought was most compelling about the
numbers was that on the broadest measure of inflation, the non-farm GDP deflator,
broader even than the CPI, we had inflation sitting at 1.4 or 1.5 per cent which was 
pretty encouraging. Now, a pick up in commodity prices which feeds into the nonfarm
deflator will lift that a bit, but with the CPI running at under 2 per cent and the
non-farm deflator running at 1.5 per cent it is fair to say that we have got a very solid
scene on inflation and that has given us a fairly solid scene on interest rates which is
important to all of us because we know the influence the interest rates have in the
economy.
There has been some talk about interest rates and movements in interests rates and the
Treasurer has made a couple of points that are probably worth remarking here about
the United States. It is true that the United States have lifted their bank rate or
discount rate by a quarter of a per cent and there is some speculation that there is a
further quarter or half per cent in the pipe line. But, it is worth recalling that their rate
is now down to three and one quarter per cent and they have lifted it to three and a half
per cent. So they are barely covering the inflation rate; their interest rates are barely
covering the inflation rate. It is almost like it was in the 1970s where you had negative
rates of interest, there were people able to borrow at less than the inflation rate. Well,
in the United States it is barely above the inflation rate and the other thing is the United
States has got unemployment now down to around 6.5 per cent and in the US full
employment is somewhere between, probably, 5 and 6 per cent. Some would say full
employment, structural employment in the US is 6 per cent, so the United States is in a
position where it is nearing fuill employment and there is not too much spare capacity
in plant and equipment. Because a large part of the weight of American public
economic policy is on monetary policy and not on fiscal policy despite the success of
President Clinton introducing a diminishing budget deficit, there is still a huge
financing task in the funding of the American deficits and the American Federal
Reserve Bank is still carrying a lot of the weight.
This is not true in Australia because of the good financial scene we have had in the
1980s, federally and with the states, and our fiscal scene is much, much better so the
balance between fiscal and monetary policy in this country is so much better than is the
case in the United States.
So, it is not therefore unlikely that the American Federal Reserve Bank and its
Governor would keep a weathered on eye on inflation and look at interest rates. That
does not mean that the parallels with Australia should immediately be drawn because
we are a long way from full employment in this country, with unemployment running
with a 10 in front of it 10 per cent something and with full employment at least
down where the Americans regard it as being, we have got a lot of spare resources in
people and we have got a lot of spare resources in terms of plant and equipment. Our
capacity utilisation levels are still relatively low. There was a lot of invested capacity
put in in the 1 980s, so we have got a lot of spare capacity in plant and equipment and
we have got a lot of spare capacity in the labour market. All that means to us, that if
we can keep the inflation rate down where we have it, we have a very good
opportunity of having attendant interest rates which will keep the recovery going.
So, therefore, fiscal policy will remain important in the 1990s as it was in the 1980s
and it is the reason why we are now talking about bringing the Budget deficit down to
around I per cent of GDP by 1996 because as the recovery picks up, as private
investment picks up, it has got to be funded from the national pool of savings 
somewhere and the best way to augment that pooi is to diminish the Government's call
on that savings pooi and hence our objective of trying to get that down.
The other significant thing worth mentioning in the Accounts was that exports grew
per cent over the year and imports grew by 3 per cent. So, what has happened in
the 1980s is as we opened the economy up, as we broke the tariff wall down, as we
made it capable of having a much more open product market there was a big pick up in
imports as the import penetration ratio rose, as it has done in every other country
where such openings occur but, once it gets to an optimum, in a sense then which
happened in the course of the 1980s, now it is a matter for judgement about where in a
recovery those imports will run.
Well, in a recovery today, exports as I say are growing 6.5 per cent over the year,
imports by 3 per cent, the other statistic worth remembering is that the debt service
ratio the thing that has occupied us perhaps most as Premiers and Treasurers in the
last half dozen years, that was the current account deficit and the attendant debt the
debt service component of our exports, that is the proportion of our exports which we
used to service the debt the nation has, has fallen from 21 per cent in 1986 to I11 per
cent today. So, there is a very large change in the debt service component of our
exports. Our exports are growing and they are growing in these areas of elaborately
transformed goods.
As well as that, the accounts also had 200,000 job growth across the year which means
we are well and truely on the way of getting a bit of growth moving.
Now, all of that means that we are in an upswing in the cycle, we do need to keep our
eye on inflation, fiscal policy has got a player role, monetary policy at the moment
certainly should basically encourage more investment in the economy and any outcome
of anything we decide here today and the Budget subsequently will help in that result.
Can I say that therefore the relationship we have and we have engendered together is
important to giving confidence in the community and particularly the business
community about where we are going and what we are doing. We are getting a lot of
things done, I mean, the National Training Authority which we put into place a couple
of years ago is now becoming very significant. It's very clear to all of us, I think, that
in terms of training and education in the community and the economy that TAFE,
formerly the Cinderella of Australian education, is going to play a much stronger role
and it's because we've been able to do these things. Or the National Rail Coporation,
for the first time we're going to have a national rail highway which we've not had
before, which is going to take pressure off the roads and put competition back into
transport. Or electricity or any of the other things we've been talking about gas and
water etc.
So, it is a time, I think, where we've all recognised that none of us can do these things
alone, that we've got to do them together. And that means that we have to have a total
relationship and I don't want to pull anyone's leg by trying to overblow it, by talking
about a new relationship here or new federalism or anything else. But, I think a good
cooperative is what we need. So, therefore, at this meeting the Commonwealth
government has taken some notice, substantial notice I might say, of the things you've 
said to us about certainty and assurity in Commonwealth payments to the states. And,
what we have proposed here to you, today, is a funding formula we've never had
before and that is that we offer the states a real terms per capita guarantee. That is,
that we offer the states a funding formula based on real ternms funding with a national
population factor in the pool. And that population factor will expand the pool and
therefore then the distribution of that pool will then devolve to population shifts within
Australia as measured by the Grants Commission under its formulae and the
distribution will depend upon relativities which the Grants Commission will
recommend from time to time. But the pool will be bigger by virtue of the fact that it
has a per capita guarantee.
Now, I know that some have argued, well look what we really need is a share of
Commonwealth income tax. Could I just say from our point of view, we don't think
that's been argued very hard. And the reason we don't think that's been argued very
hard is because we think most of you are pretty smart and you know what that means.
What it means is and what it would have meant in the last couple of years is that
the states would have lost two to three billion in revenue through the recession. And,
whatever any of us think of your budgets there is no way the states could wear a
funding hit of that proportion. Now, if we'd had it there, I think one wouldn't be
exaggerating by saying if we had a share of tax revenue sitting there and we had in any
offer document, as a consequence of that, very large reductions in payments to the
states not unreasonably premiers and treasurers would be saying to us, " Look, we can't
run our budgets with this sort of a loss. So, at least you're going to have to give us the
same nominal or the same real as last year." And we'd say, " Well, hang on you signed
up to a formula and the formula is running very much against the states," that we'd be
facing the practicality of the delivery of your services, as you would be and the
likelihood is that we'd come to some agreement about the within year problem.
All that leads us to believe that the Commonwealth would carry the down side but the
states would then carry away the upside revenue growth in the years of recovery, as
now. Except for this one point and that is that the Commonwealth is carrying the
natural stabilisers in the economy. This budget has shifted from a budget surplus of $ 8
billion to a budget deficit of $ 14 billion. It's a $ 22 billion dollar shift. And that $ 22
billion dollar shift has put a great cushioning into the economy and one of the reasons
we're growing faster now than most countries bar for a decimal point as fast as
any country in the world is because, I think, that the natural stabilisers and the stance
of fiscal policy has worked. Therefore, the Commonwealth has got to be in a position
to be able to meet the deficit accumulations in the good times, when the good times
come. Whereas the fluctuations in Commonwealth revenue are not mirrored in the
same amplitude in state budgets.
So, we think what the states need, not unreasonably, is a set of payments which have a
predictability about them and also have some growth about them. And, real terms and
population seems, to us, to get to that point and then the upsides which might come
and which all governments look forward to, will come in your revenue base which will
reflect the growing improvement in the economy across a whole range of state taxes
and charges. So, there will be a buoyancy in state revenues, as there will be this year
but the Commonwealth payments as part of those revenues should be reasonably
certain, at least maintained in real terms and at least covering the population growth in 
the country. This will cost us, over the course of this three years, more than a real
terms guarantee would have cost us if it's in for three the likelihood of it not being
then the permanent funding formula or at least the base into the future is, I think, is a
very diminished likelihood. That is, that the real terms per capita guarantee becomes
the norm.
Now, Ralph ( Willis) had a number he mentioned to me yesterday, over a period of ten
years it amounts to $ 9 billion additional fuinding in the financial assistance grants but
net of the capital it's $ 6 billion. So, therefore, we think it's got some value to it and we
hope you do as well. But, more than that we hope you think we've listened to what
you've had to say and tried to come to something reasonable about it. Can I just say in
terms of year three of the current formula year three adds about $ 220 million to our
forward estimates because of the formula. So, the result is total net payments to the
states excluding TAFE and special debt repayments increase by 2.1 percent
nominal this year. And, this is a year when your revenues are going to pick up fairly
strongly.
Part of the offer, and Ralph will probably come to this, is the capital works program,
rolling the capital works program into the financial assistance grants. Now, this does
affect people advantageously in some respects, disadvantageously in others. But, this
program came from the 1930s, it came from a time when some states were not able to
borrow at home or abroad and the Commonwealth borrowed for them and then sent
proceeds on to them. When I became Treasurer I11 years ago this program was worth
the better part of $ 1.5 to $ 2 billion dollars; it's now down to $ 333 million in a FAGS
pool of about $ 14 billion. So, it has no relevance today the historic shares of the
capital works program or the on budget loan program or the governmental program, it
has had different names over the years the historic shares today mean nought in
terms of the realities in terms of say, a Grants Commission recommendation. So we
think this is the time to basically roll it into FAGS because it has got to go at some
time and try and deal with the attendant effects. So, then at least we're only talking
about Financial Assistance Gra nts and we can apply then the real terms per capita
formula to that pool into the future. So, it's something that probably should have been
done in the past, better late than never and probably better now as we're going to go to
a longer term funding formula with population.
So, could I complete my remarks by, again, saying how much I appreciated the
atmospherics of our last meeting, the cooperative we've done particularly the work
on Elmer and look forward to the work that will come back to us in August for
that. I hope that, as a result of these arrangements we can go from here on to a
fuinding formula which is less about a discussion here annually about money because
you'll pretty well know what it is before you come. And, the discussion will then be
about, really, Grants Commission relativities. Now, there's a big influence on Grants
Commission reports now, I understand that. Part of that is the return of funds to the
larger states of NSW and Victoria. They claim, and they have claimed for years in
here, that they were, to use the colloquialism, dudded by the formula over the years.
There was a review of the formula and the methodology and as a consequence of that
there's been a shift back in that, as indeed, there are different population effects taking
place and different population movements. 
6
So, I guess that the Grants Commission matter will be on the table whenever a Grants
Commission report is presented, about the distribution of the pool. But, at least we
ought to get to a point where the pool itself is not under examination and discussion
every year that we know what the pool formula is going to be and that's, I think, the
certainty which the offer today brings to you probably for the first time certainly in the
last 11 years. So, could I conclude on those notes, welcome you again to the meeting,
each and every one of you. I think the Treasurer would like to add to my remarks and
then I would invite you all to respond. Thank you Ralph.
Ends. 



Embrao'! AUnil 7
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL LANDCARE AUSTRALIA AWARDS
29 MARCH 1994
Thank you all f or coming tonight.
The fact that some of you have come a very long way to be
a part of this event indicates how widely the Landcare
movement has spread in Australia.
This success is, on the one hand, proof of the need for
better land management in Australia; on the other, and
perhaps more importantly, it is proof of the care
Australians feel for their country.
An environmental consciousness is not new in Australia,
but what we have seen in recent years is an awareness of
the need to preserve the environment of Australia allied
to the knowledge that it is an economic, and indeed a
social imperative.
When we move to save a damaged or threatened environment,
like that of the Murray-Darling, for instance, we are
acting to save industries, families and communities.
If we move cleverly we can do more than save: we can
increase productivity, create new industries, restructure
local economies, revive regions, and give a lot of
Australians particularly young Australians new jobs
and opportunities.
In other words, when we recognise the problems of
salination or any other form of land degradation, or the
means by which an improvement to the environment can
translate into increased productivity, we recognise the
fundamental link between the environment and the quality
of our national life including that which underpins it,
our national economy.
That is precisely the new consciousness which Landcare
manifests. Everyone who joins a Landcare group has
recognised the link between self-interest and the
interest of the environment community interest, the
national interest and the interest of the environment. 
And I might say that if Landcare and these awards help to
show Australians that they are all linked by their
relationship to this unique continent if they help to
unite us on this basis they will have done Australia a
great service.
I think it also should be said that one of the great
things about Landcare is that individuals and communities
are driving it.
It has not been an easy couple of years on the land, with
falling commodity prices and extended drought in at least
two States.
But, far from discouraging Landcare projects, this
hardship appears to have made the network flourish.
Landcare is one of the great movements of our time
because the energy is coming from people with an
affection for the country coupled to a belief in its
future.
And the future is most certainly there. In the-food
industry, for example. There are strong signals abroad,
identified by the Agri-food Council, that demand is
likely to increase for clean, green food products that
is, food produced by the most environmentally friendly
methods. That means potential for exports and jobs. New hope and
opportunities for people on the land. Potential to
invigorate regional Australia.
The fact that one farming family in three is involved in
Landcare goes a long way towards putting Australia in a
position to realise this potential.
I said in the Government's Environment Statement in
December 1982: " The drive for environmentally friendly
industries and for protection of the environment is. . part
of the economic drive part of the international
competitive drive in which Australia is engaged."
The success of Landcare is testament to the speed with
which that message is spreading through Australia.
The fact is Landcare's achievements are bigger and better
than were ever envisaged. So successful has Landcare
been, demand is outstripping supply.
But that goes for every successful program and it
certainly does not mean what a press report today took it
to mean.
It does not mean there is a funding crisis, or that
Landcare is about to collapse. 
The Government is presently spending far more than it
committed for the decade of Landcare.
We are very much aware that our commitment to Landcare
needs to be maintained: that we need to make the
structure and administration of Landcare programs more
effective, but not weighed down with bureaucracy; that we
need to keep the long term funding up and, of course,
that we need to continue to spread the message of the
link between land conservation and improved production.
We need all Australians to understand the basic
principles of Landcare.
We-will get the best out of our country if we
understand it and care for it.
We will get the best out of ourselves if we live in
harmony with the land.
Ladies and gentlemen
Tonight you will meet the new Federal Minister for the
Environment, John Faulkner.
John Faulkner has proved himself a very capable and
popular minister for Veterans Affairs. Veterans are not
always easy to please.
But with that highly desirable mix of ideas, commitment
and wise and practical judgement John Faulkner has
pleased them.
Environmentalists also are not always easy to please.
Nor are their opponents. And it is not always easy to
bring together.
John, I am quite sure, has the qualities needed to get
the results we need not ones which will please
everybody, but ones which are good for the environment
and good for the country.
It is an irony that, because we have so many programs
already in place and so many achievements already under
our belt, the Government these days is not getting much
credit for environment policy.
In fact a great deal has been done and a great deal
continues to be done.
I know that John, like me, is very conscious of the
contribution made by the people who preceded him.
Graham Richardson's work needs no further commendation
from me. It is enough to say that he made the
environment a primary policy area for this Government. 
I don't think it will hurt any of us to recall what Ros
Kelly achieved.
Among other things, she implemented the Endangered
Species Legislation, established the Feral Pest Program,
made major advances in World Heritage listing and
protection of Australia's most special places, such as
Shark Bay, Fraser Island and Stage 3 of Kakadu, and
established Ocean Rescue 2000 the Commonwealth's first
marine conservation program.
She also recognised the natural progression to the socalled
" brown agenda" the hard, dirty issues facing
Australians every day but which Australian governments
had not tackled so seriously before.
While Ros Kelly was Minister, Government policy reflected
this.
We established the Commonwealth Environment Protection
Agency, developed the first National strategy on Waste
Minimisation and Recycling, took head-on the issue of
lead pollution, established national targets for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and undertook the massive task
of restoring the health of the Murray-Darling.
I hardly need to tell people like yourselves, who are
involved in environmental projects, that we cannot
announce new programs and new projects every day. You
know better than most that starting an environmental
project or program is one thing and seeing it through is
another. We are seeing them through.
So we have, after the contributions of these two
Ministers, measures for a great range of environmental
issues.
We have available an increasing range of assistance to
meet objectives similar to those of Landcare for
example, programs such as LEAP, which is being creatively
used to support a Greening Australia project in the
Northern Rivers district of New South Wales which I
visited recently.
Yet for all the Government's initiative, and all the
Government's financial commitment, for all the
Government's effort on scientific research and education,
we can never eliminate the legacy of environmental
problems without initiative, commitment and effort from
individuals, companies and communities like those
associated with Landcare.
Like most things in the life of a nation, there is much
that Governments can and should do, but so much more that
people can do better.
Ladies and gentlemen 
Tonight, f or the third time the achievers of Landcare
Australia are being honoured.
But I would like to say that in honouring these
Australians we are paying tribute to all those involved
in Landcare for, by the fact and the nature of their
involvement, they are all achievers.
Later, I will have the task of congratulating the winners
of this year's awards.
Right now, I should acknowledge the generous
contributions made by Landcare's major sponsor, Telecom,
along with Monsanto, Combined Rural Traders, Ford,
Ansett, BHP, Alcoa and the National Landcare Program
itself. I must also congratulate Bob Collinsi the Minister for
Primary Industries and Energy, on the leadership he has
shown in the National Landcare Program.
And Jim Kirk, whose departure from Landcare I understand
is imminent.
The success of the Landcare network is by definition a
tribute to the person at the helm.
Jim will leave Landcare with the outstanding reputation
for business and community leadership he already enjoys
substantially enhanced.
Ladies and gentlemen
Our economy is now growing faster than any in the western
industrialised world. The prospects for an era of
prosperity and national growth and development have few
parallels in our history.
The issue at the heart of Landcare is at the heart of
those prospects.
In the environment statement of 15 months ago I said
this: In the next decade the pioneering spirit will be
carried on by Australians who these days work on the
frontiers of technology and seek new ways to grow,
or make or mine things. Economic growth and the
jobs which accompany it will increasingly go hand in
hand with environmental protection and renewal. The
old war with the environment will be replaced by a
partnership in the national interest.
Nowhere is that partnership stronger than in Landcare.
I congratulate and thank you all. 



SPEECH BY THE-PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY AND INAUGURALEXHIBITION
" ABOUT FACE: ASPECTS-OF AUSTRALIAN
PORTRAITURE*, OLD PARLIAMENT HOUSE
MARCH 1994
I am very pleased to be here in this hall of memories
this place where I-used to sit and try to read-the mind's.
construction in the face. The Tory's-mind in the
Liberal's face. Or was it-vice versa?
This whole place is still full of faces for me.
It is where on every sitting day I saw a-national.
portrait gallery right in front of: me. A gallery of
Australian life or-about. half of-it.
From our side the view was principally Protestant,
pastoral and legal, mixed elements of rich and rustic;
blokes they were nearly all blokes -whose faces
betrayed a. life of relative ease, and blokes whose life
on the land had furrowed their brows, narrowed their: gazeand
reddened their cheeks.
There were men like John Gorton who wore the scars of
battle; there were slightly tormented looking characters;
people whose faces showed. the strain and those who hid
it, even under pressure.
There was the odd dandy, occasional obsessives, people
trying to hide the encroachment of age or baldness.
There were conservatives of a kind you rarely see these
days. They came from another Australia. The kind who,
just by looking at them, you knew-would speak with an
accent more English than Australian.
Most of them were decent. If-by our lights they were all
wrong-headed, in the end there were not many who were
wrong-hearted.
It was a galaxy of Australians, a sort of human zoo and
down the years we watched them look upon us in triumph
and disaster. We saw them change. 
And they saw us. You will have to ask one of-them what
they saw.
This is the place where Mick Young once called to Andrew
Peacock give us your angry face, Andrew.
It's . the perfect place for a ; Portrait Gallery.
It-can always be said, and often with irresistible logic
and passion, that we need one more gallery or museum
One more place to put our-heritage on show.
It-may have reached the ears of. some of you that I-have
sometimes resisted this-logic and this passion-
It-is true. I: have not-always been persuaded that-anotherhuge
and-hugely expensive building. on the: banks off Burley_
Griffin ranked high among-the things we need for a. betternational
life.
Iam well aware that the National Portrait Gallery in
London is world renowned and much loved by the British.
I: know that the Americans have their-National Portrait
Gallery in Washington.
Eknow that there are people who say that in portraits we
can see the nation's mind and I believe that issubstantially
true.
IEhave long known the reasons why a National Portrait
Gallery is desirable, but many things are desirable and
some things are essential and there is only so much-money
to go around.
And generally I have felt it-was better to spread it:
among those who are prntlycreating.
So I remained a less than passionate advocate.
I have nothing against portraits. Im all for them.
It's almost unAustralian not to be for portraits.
What other country has an. annual nationwide barney about
a. portrait contest?
Perhaps it has something to do with the perennial
question of identity in Australia the old " who are we?"
question. The question that should have been settled a
long while ago.
And I suppose that is how at: least-in-part I-came to
the conclusion that a portrait gallery was one more
gallery worth having. -Vf
7r 
I thought, maybe in the last decade of the century this
National Portrait Gallery can help give us a bit of
direction on the question which really should have been
settled a long while ago the identity question. The
" who are we?" question.
I have to say that it's not a question which has ever
caused me much concern.
But I know some people remain ambivalent about it-.
Perhaps it helps to have Irish ancestors..
The answer of course is dead simple and there were
plenty in this country who knew it a century and more ago
" we are Australian-.
And that means among other things, that we are all the
nuances of attitude, feature-and expression; all the
hopeful, despairing, brave, anxious, lofty and lowly,
males and females of any and every ethnic origin whose
portraits were ever rendered by any means on this
continent. If the Portrait Gallery makes these the boundaries of its
ambition, then it will be well on the way to being truly
national and truly worthwhile.
It will be better if it-is not dominated by governors and
other eminent Victorians in heavy gilt frames. Or a
gallery with an exclusive emphasis on the great
achievers. It will be better, I think, if it is a much broader
gallery of our national life -including contemporary
life. And I think Australians will like it much more.
And that is why this first exhibition is such a good one.
It's good to see Meryl Tankard in there with Nellie Melba
and Dorothy Hewett and Germaine Greer and all those
colonial women we have never seen before.
Bill and Dallas with Zelman Cowen, Bob Menzies and Henry
Parkes and George Reid. And me with Bob and Bob with
Hazel. Bungaree with Albert Namatjira and Lois O'Donoghue and
Gulpilil and Eddie Mabo along with the Lieutenant
Colonel Nunn who was responsible for the Waterloo Creek
massacre. Not to say Stella Bowen's airmen in their fur collars who
were dying in the war before she could finish painting
them, and Percy Grainger in the same period, and also in
fur. 
-If the exhibition gives us a sense of continuity, it also
offers up a measure of the extraordinary mosaic of
Australia now and in the past.
Not just in the variety of the subjects but in the way
they have been portrayed so that we get an idea of the
way the modern media paints its pictures, as well as
modern artists, or portrait artists of. other times, or
amateur-photographers.
There are all sorts of Australians here in all sorts of
contexts, and captured in all sorts of mediums.
The effect, it seems to me, is democratic in a totally
uncontrived way. Intrinsically and inescapably
democratic, like the country itself.
I think Annie Loxley has succeeded brilliantly in making
this an exhibition which is unimpeachably representative
and democratic and it has to be said, in places,
painfully nostalgic.
But she has also provided us with some great Australian
works of art.
To see this exhibition, then, is to begin to understand
what a National Portrait Gallery might do.
It might excite a wider interest in our history and
society. It might encourage us to learn the story of
Australia, and to better understand the stories of our
fellow Australians.
It might help us understand what it is to be Australian,
and what it was to be Australian. What it:. is-to be an
Aboriginal Australian. An Australian woman. An
Australian with your life hanging on a thread during the
Second World War. A child living in Australia in 1814.
Last, but not least by any means it-might induce us to
recognise the enormous contribution to Australia made by
our artists.
It might help us to remember that in the end the quality
of our national life depends upon and is measured by the
quality of our creative life.
It might lead us to the conclusion that life is what we
make of it nationally speaking, that was never so true
as it is now.
As ever much will depend upon the support and initiative
of government.
But not just government the arts and heritage of
Australia does need more private patronage than it has
been customary for them to receive. 
They should~ receive more and I'm sure they willwhen
their crucial role is understood.
Perhaps the National Portrait Gallery can help that
understanding. Perhaps some wandering sponsors will come
here and see their own lives reflected in these faces and
decide to put something back into the country through the
arts. I might say that the Arts Angels, launched so
successfully in Melbourne recently, seem to be a good
example of what can be done.
It is in this context that I should take the opportunity
to thank on behalf of everyone here, Gordon and Marilyn
Darling for their resolute support of this Gallery.
You see I have become a convert to the National Portrait
Gallery. The more so because it is not-going to be left sitting in-
Canberra locked up in yet another massive mausoleum.
The works on display here are all on loan from both
public and private collections.
Their quality, and variety and the degree to which they
represent the many faces of Australia, is a fair
indication of just how much of our heritage is kept out
of the sight of the people.
And a fair indication of the role the National Portrait
Gallery can play in levering this heritage of f walls all
over the country, so that the country can see it.
Even better, these exhibitions will not be confined to
Canberra. Under the Visions of Australia program which we announced
during the last election campaign, the National Portrait
Gallery will be able to offer this and future exhibitions
to other venues in metropolitan centres and through the
network of regional galleries and museums.
The same program of course is open to other cultural
bodies across the country.
It seems to me that in a country of our size and
demography, all our collecting institutions all our
cultural institutions should be exploiting modern
transport and technology to take our heritage out to the
people. So I hope that the National Portrait Gallery prospers and
prospers along the lines we see here tonight. 
' There are many people to congratulate. Warren Horton and
John Thompson and others from the National Library. Anne
Loxley, the curator, of course.
Marilyn and Gordon Darling I have already mentioned.
Those private collectors who donated their works so
willingly. The public collections who showed immense
good will towards the project and made their works
available at short notice.
My friend and former colleague, Doug McLelland, Chair of
the Old Parliament House Committee.
I am sure there are others. But they will forgive me for
passing them by, because it is now my duty and great
pleasure to officially open this exhibition and in
doing so wish every success to the Australian National
Portrait Gallery.
Thank you 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAOS STATE DINNER, 5 APRIL 1994
( CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY; EMBARGO 9PM AEST)
Thank you very much for your warm welcome.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to return the visit
of Prime Minister Khamtay to Australia last Decemubervery
pf~ eased to visit Vientiane and Laos.
In the last two years, as Prime-Minister, I have been to
many of the countries of the region. I have to say that,
apart from the quite phenomenal energy and growth to be
seen, nothing is quite so striking as the difference
between them.
Every country I have visited is a reminder of the fallacy
which still prevails among many people in the Western
nations, that Asia is essentially monolithic that the
countries of Asia are fundamentally alike.
Laos is another reminder of the untruth of that.
Not only is Laos a country with a unique history and
cultural heritage, within your borders live, I
understand, people from about 70 different ethnic
backgrounds. While I suspect that it is not widely known in the rest
of the world, including in Asia, the modern Australian
population is also a heterogeneous one deriving from
some 150 national backgrounds, including the nations of
As ia.
Despite this, I think it is safe to say that in Asia many
people think of Australia as a purely Europeanessentially
British country, with a purely European and
essentially British view of the world.
In fact, like Laos, these days our view of the world is
distinctly our own.
Like Laos, Australia has embarked on a new future. Like
Laos, we seek it primarily in new and deeper
relationships with the countries of Asia and the Pacific. 
2
And because we have undertaken some fundamental reforms
to open up our economy, we are succeeding.
Today the Asia Pacific is where we do most of our trade;
it is where we invest; it is where we work to develop the
necessary stucues for trade and investment, increase
mutual understanding and strengthen the security of the
region. We have long recognised the fact of our proximity to
Asia. We have long seen the necessity to engage with the
rg-ibn.
Our forty year old relationship with Laos is evidence of
thi s.
But we have never engaged as we engage now. Our
relationships with the countries of the region have never
been so rewarding or so complete. We have never been so
positive about our relationship with the region, nor so
confident about the creative role we can play.
To do this we have had to open up both our economy and
our minds.
We have recognised the rewards to be gained from
engagement with the most dynamic economies in the world;
and the benefits which flow from our participation in the
economic development of countries like Laos.
These are great rewards.
But Australia has also recognised that, whether it is in
our relationships with the developed or the developing
countries of the region, there is an added dimension to
the return on our investments.
There is a'sense in which contemporary Australia is
discovering itself through its increased involvement in
As ia.
We have discovered, among other things, that we can
compete with the Asian economies.
In learning to compete we have discovered new capacities
to work more efficiently and more cooperatively, to use
and develop our skills and technology, to develop
products and markets for them, to understand and do
business with countries very different from our own.
Countries like Laos.
We have also discovered that we can play a creative role
in the great issues confronting the region. We learned
that through the success of initiatives to bring peace to
Cambodia.-
We learned it through our initiatives with " APEC the
forum which promises to contribute so much to -trade and
investment in the Asia Pacific.
And we have discovered that, far from representing a
threat to our culture and institutions, our engagement is
increasing our confidence and re-shaping and renewing our
sense of national identity.
For similar reasons I believe Laos should feel confident
that its culture and traditions will readily survive the
new openness the Laotian government is encouraging.
Your government's far-sighted reforms will enable Laos to
deepen its relations with other countries in the region.
Reforms such as the new liberal forei-gn investment laws
are attracting investment and expertiise essential for
economic development.
Australian companies are keen to take advantage of them.
It is an example of the way in which, with the easing of
longstanding political antipathies, we are discovering
that we have many complementary interests.
Australian companies can offer expertise in transport,
building and construction, communications and energy
emerging from the experience of developing a vast and
immensely varied continent.
It is a matter of great pride and satisfaction to my
government and to the Australian people that we have put
these skills to use in the construction of the Friendship
Bridge. It is our great hope and belief that it will play an
important part in making the future for the people of
Laos more secure and more prosperous.
Australia hopes that theFr. Lendsbhip_. Bari4ge will be an
enduring symbol of our relationship with the region of
the expertise we can bring and the good will we bring
with it.
It is also a matter of pride that, like the Friendship
Bridge, the new border control facilities, which it will
be my privilege to open tomorrow, were funded by
Australian development assistance and engineered by
Australian companies.
Australia is now the third-largest foreign investor in
Laos.
An Australian company, T-ran~ s-4eld, is developing the Nam
Thewn 2 hydro-electric project the largest single
enterprise investment ever undertaken in your country. 
NormandyPoseidon, an Australian mining company, has
formed a joinfV venture to explore for minerals and
develop a 5,000 square kilometre area north-east of
Vientiane. During my stay I will have the pleasure of witnessing
with Prime Minister Khamtay the signing of a Memorandum
of Agreement between the government of Laos and the
Hydro-Electric Corporation of Tasmania to develop two
major projects in Southern Laos.
Prime Minister Khamtay and I will also witness the
signature of an investment promotion and protection
agreement setting up a framework for commercial relations
between us.
I also take this opportunity to say that the Australian
government is aware of the acute rice shortage Laos is
presently suffering and I am able to announce this
evening that Australia will contribute $ 1 million in
emergency relief funds through the World Food Program to
help meet this need.
Tonight I am pleased to announce the first Australian
multi-year commitment to Laos $ 47.5 million over the
four years to 1997.
This will allow pressing needs in a number of development
sectors in Laos to be addressed.
These include the construction of a number of
bridges on Route 13 and further road works in
association with the Friendship Bridge.
An innovative program of English language
instruction to be screened on Australian Television
International supported by audio visual and print
materials. A childrens health initiative including an increased
effort to eradicate polio and control malaria in the
region.
We are friends of 40 years standing. Yet only now are we
discovering the potential of our friendship.
While very different countries we are rapidly learning to
recognise similarities in outlook and interest we had
never seen before.
A common interest in trade and investment, in regional
security and prosperity; a common interest in protecting
our culture and identity while underpinning our future
prosperity. If Australia and Laos continue to look for the common
ground between us, while remaining open to the region and
the world, I have no doubt that our friendship and our
two countries will grow and prosper. 



PRIME MINISTER 1
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF BORDER CONTROL FACILITY, LAOS, 6 APRIL 1994
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia I am very pleased to hand over
this Border Control Facility to the Government and people of Laos.
If the Mekong Friendship Bridge which will be opened next Friday is the door to the
development of Laos and surrounding regions, this building is the key.
This is the place where immigration, customs, police, bankin&amp; and postal services from
the Government of Laos will facilitate the movement Of people and goods across these
borders. It will be an introduction to Laos for many visitors.
Like the Friendship Bridge, which it will complement, the Border Control Facility is a
very tangible expression of cooperation and friendship between Australia and Laos.
Australian companies designed and built it, drawing on traditional Lao design and on
Lao technical and other assistance.
It is a model of the best sort of development cooperation, because it involved not just
the provision of infrastructure from outside, but also training for Lao customs and
immigration staff'-some of them through sponsored overseas study teams.
And today, specialists from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation are assisting the
Lao television'and radio crews to ' cover this event as part of a five year regionaJ
pro-ram Australia is sponsoring.
Last September nothing existed on this site. Transfield Construction has completed
the building since then, on cost and on schedule,
Today we congratulate all those, both Lao and Australian, who have been involved.
It is a splendid tribute to the expertise of Australian companies, and I hope it will
encourage others to invest in the region. 
TEL: 6. Apr. 94 15: 01 No. Olb F. UZ/ uz
2
It is also a reminder of the friendship and good will which exists between our two
countries. On Australia's side those who deserve credit include Maunsell Sinclair Knight, the
project's consultant engineers; John Holland Construction, who were responsibile for
creating the earth platform from paddy fields; Gauard Shelton, the supervising
architects, and of course Transfield,
All of these companies provide a first rate example of what Australian businesses have
to offer in the development of infrastructure in South-East Asia.
Of course, it is not only in engineering and construction that Australian companies
offer expertise.
In mining, power generation, telecommunications and in education and training
Australians are active in Laos.
Some 50 Australian companies are now operating here and many of them, I am pleased
to say, are represented here today.
The signature of the Australia-Laos Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
which Prime Minister Khamtay and I have just witnessed will give added confidence to
potential investors from Australia.
I welcome that. and the opportunities for further economic cooperation between
Australia and Laos which are now being opened up.
Mr Prime Minister, I welcome also the new opportunities which this Border Control
Facility will bring to the people of Laos. and I hope it will remind all who pass through
it of the enduring friendship between our two countries.
And now it gives me great pleasure to declare this Border Control Facility officially
open. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIIE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
STATE DINNER, BANGKOK, 7 APRIL 1994
Thank you for honouring me with this dinner.
1 am delighted to be here in this great city and in a country whose unique and rich
culture and warm hospitality is legendary throughout the world.
It is certainly well-known to Australians, and held in great affection and regard.
For some time now Thailand has been a favourite destination for many thousands of
Australian tourists, aifd increasingly for Australian business people.
I am very glad that, as Australian Prime Minister, 1 have now had the opportunity to
make it my destination.
The friendship between our two countries goes back a long way, at least to 1945 when
the first Australian Mission was established in Thailand.
In the years immediately before that thousands of Australian soldiers had come in
contact with Thailand and the Thai people as prisoners of war on the infamous Burma-
Thailand Railway.
Through the horrors of that experience Australian soldiers came to hold the Thai
people in very high regard for the assistance they gave them and for their courage and
humanity, It led one of them, a very great Australian, Sir Edward Dunlop, to devote a substantial
part of his life to developing medicine in ThailFaind and to promoting a better and more
extensive relationship with Thailand and the other countries of the region.
Weary Dunlop died last year, but his message about Thailand and about Asia has never
been better understood in Australia than it is now.
We are old and good fiends. And today the opportunity exists to build that friendship
into a far-reaching relationship with great rewards to both our countries.
A summary of what we have achieved between us in recent years illustrates the
potential for cooperation, the potential for an expanded Australia-Thailand
relationship. In the past five years, two-way trade between us has reached more than $ 2 billion,
growing at a rate of 25 per cent and making Thailand our twelfth biggest export
market. 9 
Our aid program with Thailand is Australia's fourth largest.
We have an active defence cooperation program.
On a per capita basis, Australia has settled more Indochinese rcftigccs from Thailand
than any other country.
Our education links arc growing rapidly, with over 2,000 Thais studying in Australian
institutions and 50 per cent more Thais seeking visas fbr education in Australia in
1993-94 than inl the previous year.
Since 1991 there have been more than 40 separate ministerial and parliamentary visits.
Nearly 200,000 Australians visited Thailand in 1993 and more than 4,000 Thais are
now visiting Australia eachi month, with the latest figures showing a 50 per cent
increase on the corresponding period in the previous year.
B~ othi our countries recognise that we share interests beyond the bilateral ecollnic and
comnmercial relationship.
Wc recognise that it is in our mutual interest to ensure that the voice of mliddle sized
efonies is heard internationally.
We recognise that we have much to gain from cooperation on regional political and
security issues, as well as developing regional economic linkages.
We recognise these common ambitions and, fiirthcrmore, these days we know we canl
achieve t hem.
Wc worked together on the Cambodian peace settlement.
We worked together in the Cairns Group.
We are now working together with APEC.
It was a great privilege to work with you, Prime Minister, at the historic rnccting of
APEC leaders in Seattle last November. That meeting was concrete evidcnce ofthe
growin$ sense of community in the Asia-Pacific region, and the meeting ill Jakarta
later this year wAil be vital in building the momentum,
By bringing the economics of East-Asia and North America tog'ether in one
cooperative framework, APISC is a key to unlock the region's full economic potential
for the 21st century.
A rapidly growing economy linking thie developing economics of Indochina and the
rest of South-East Asia, Thailand also has a vital role to play aS a leader in ASEAN.
It is for this reason among others that Australia is very pleased to have built the
Mekong River Friendship Bridge a real and symbolic link between the developing
economics of Laos and Vietnamn and the dynamic ones of ASEAN.
For Australia, the Friendship Bridge is a striking symbol of the creative rolc we Call
play in the region.
We are in no doubt that Australia has a very great deal to offer Thailand as an
economic partner and as a source of skills and expertise. 
Much is happening within the relationship to demonstrate the truth of this. But we are
far from realising its full potential.
As a first step towards doing so that we must come to a fuller appreciation of the
changes which have occurred in both countries over the past decade.
We must understand present realities particularly economic realities.
For example, I doubt that many Australians are aware of the size of Thailand's
economy over 100 billion, the second largest in ASEAN.
And I doubt whether many are aware that your economic growth is predicted soon to
be the highest in ASEAN.
On the other hand, I am not at all convinced that the dramatic reform of the Australian
economy is widely appreciated in Thailand.
Australia's economy is now highly competitive, open and geared for integration with
the region and the world.
It is the fastest growing economy in the OECD; the lowest taxing country in the
OECD; and with inflation among the veryjlowe in the OECD.
The Australia of this decade is anew Australia. An efficient, productive, competitive
and creative Australia.
An Australia which is a very good place in which to invest, which welcomes
investment, which actively encourages investment.
An Australia whose companies are now constructing Bangkok's tallest building and the
Si-Chang Port Development, bidding for Bangkok's mass transit system, providing
ba-kin services, using Bangkok as a regional aviation hub, helping to build the $ 1.3
billion Muang Thong Tani residential project.
An Australia, in other words, able to play a constructive role in Thailand's future and
the development of the region.
Prime Minister, next year will be the 50th anniversary of the first Australian diplomatic
mission in Thailand, the first step in what has been a most warm and rewarding
friendship. The talks we have had today I hope will mark another step a very substantial step
towards fifty even more rewarding years in the Australia-Thailand relationship.
Thank you very much for extending to me and Annita the privilege of this dinner and
the opportunity to address you this evening. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEAJING, MP
B3USINECSS LUNCH, ] BANGKOK, 7 APRIL 1994
It is a great pleasure to be here in Tkhaan, and in Bangkok, one of the great cities of
the world and without doubt one of the citics of the future.
B~ angkok is a very important city to Australia. Not just as the capital and port of a
country which is an increasingly significant trading partner, but for many thousands of
Australians the gateway to Thailand and its culture, and indeed to) a wider experience
of Asia.
Bangkok has therefore played an important role in the transformation of Australian
thinking about Asia.
I make these remarks at a business lunch because we recognise that to successfully do
business in the region we need to raise our level of cultural understanding.
Wc rcalise that economic integration with the countries of the regioin means getting to
know those counties better.
And if our knowledge is still far from complete, there is no doubt thatt a great change
has occurred in the direction of our thinking and our perceptions.
These days not only do we look to the region for trade and investment, we now look
to it as we used to look almost exclusively to Euro-p-e -for culture, -fbr leisure, for
diiehrencc. And as I said in a speech in Vientiane on Tuesday night, this new orientation towards
Asia has brought with it the rather unexpected consequence of recasting our
perception of ourselves.
We learnt very quickly that to succeed in Asia we had to be iore competitive and, in
becoming more comipetitive, we learnt that we can work more efficiently, develop our.
skills and tcclinology, develop new p~ rodulcts and markets. 
We knew we had to find our competitive advantages and build on them, and in doing
that we learned that some of them alone and in combination were unique.
Above all, we have learnt from our increasing engagement with Asia that we can
succeed. My visit to Thailand, and earlier this week to Laos, confirms that fact.
I am confident that Australia has much to offer and the ability to deliver it.
I am also confident that our two countries have the capacity and the will to deepen and
expand our relationship.
Thailand and Australia have fundamental interests in common interests which are
revealed to us by the transformation of our economics and the opportunities for trade
and investment which have consequently opened up.
Two-way trade between Thailand and Australia last year amounted to just over $ 2
billion. Over the last five years it has grown at an average rate of 25 per cent.
If we do no more than maintain our share of Thailand's imports, we should double our
exports to Thailand by 2002: and it is a measure of the change in Australia's economy
Sincluded in that would be $ 1 billion worth of elaboratcly transformed manufactures.
And 1 believe that we can do better than maintain our share.
The capacity is undoubtedly there.
Thailand's economy is the second largest inASEAN and is likely to be the fastest
growing ASEAN economy within the next few years.
Thailand also has the strategic advantage of being located at the heart of continental
South-East Asia, linking Indochina with the ASEAN countries.
The Mekong River Friendship Bridge, which tomorrow I will formally hand over to
His Majesty the King of Thailand and President of Laos, is a powerful symbol of
Thailand's importance as a hub for the South-East Asian hinterland.
It is also proof of Australia's capacity to join with Thailand in contributing to the subregion's
development.
I am in no doubt that Australia has much to offer Thailand as an economic partner in
the long term.
The Friendship Bridge is one good reason to believe this.
I saw more evidence to support the view on my visit to Laos earlier this week, and I
have seen it in other Asian countries I have visited recently. 
I know I will see still more of it when I visit Vietnam on Sunday. Australian
companies are playing a very substantial role in the economic development of Vietnam.
Rut the basis of my belief in the future of our relationship with Thailand as with other
countries in Asia is the change we have made to the Australian economy in recent
years. We have undertaken significant economic, financial and industrial reforms which have
made the economy much more open and much more competitive.
We are now seeing the fruits of those reforms.
Our exports have grown to 20 per cent of GDP.
Our manufactured exports are now consistently stronger than rural exports and the
fastest growing component of these are elaborately transformed manufactures.
Our exports of services in 1992-93 are now at $ 15 billion.
The Australian economy is growing at 4 per cent, faster than any in the OECD, and
with low inflation.
Australia is now more efficient, productive and competitive than ever before and
more export-oriented.
We can offer to our economic partners first class tcclhnology, expertise and skills.
We can provide them to Thailand.
We can help Thailand develop its infrastructure.
An Australian company is building the tallest building in Bangkok.
Australian companies are installing a centraliscd trafic control system and fibre
optic telecommunications for the State Railway of Thailand.
An Australian company, in conjunction with a Thai group, is building the Si-
Chang deep sea port on the Eastern sea board of Thailand..
Australia can also offer high class services, education and training to Thailand.
We are presently pursuing a program of activities in higher education through a
memorandum of agreement with your Ministry of University Affairs.
We are providing computer assistance to Thailand's customs service.
Australia is a world leader in environmental technology. 
We have unmatched experience in shaping environmentally-friendly urban development
and in Bangkok Australian planners and architects are heavily involved in designs for
new urban development schemes.
For all these examples of success, there remains a well of untapped potential.
When it comes to trade, we are basically like-minded countries.
We have shared a commitment to the Cairns Group and to APEC which promises to
deliver real benefits to our business communities by stimulating and facilitating trade
and investment flows in our region.
The Uruguay Round outcome will improve the economic prospects of middle ranking
economies like ours.
But of course we cannot simply wait for the opportunities to present themselves.
I have to say that I do not believe we have yet made the most of our relationship.
Until now we have tended to take each other, I think, rather too much for granted.
This may be because there have been few major problems in what is a relationship of
many yoars standing.
Whatever the reasons, 1 would like my visit to be the moment at which Australia and
Thailand began to pay each other greater attention.
For instance, the level of investment, while increasing, does not do justice to the
relationship. We need to take steps to maximise the conditions in which investment
can flourish.
And we need to tackle the remaining barriers which inhibit the expansion of trade
between us.
I discussed some of these issues with Prime Minister Chuan this morning.
At the governmcnt-to-government level, we are putting in place the framework for
greater private sector cooperation and investment.
Today Prime Minister Chuan and I reached agreement on the formation of a
Ministerial Commission a regular ministerial forum in which to discuss ways of
expanding trade and investment links.
Prime Minister Chuan and I also agreed that the Australian Trade Minister, Senator
McMullan, will lead a major business mission to Thailand later this year with the aim
of identifying ways to expand our commercial links and develop cooperation between
us in third markets.
It is essential that through government contact we create an appropriate framework for
expanding trade and cooperation. 
But on this visit it is equally an objective of mine to highlight to the business
communities of Australia and Thailand the great opportunities which now exist.
Australian business has the chance to be a part of Thailand's economic success and the
certainty of burgeoning development in coming years.
And, equally, the major reforms of recent years have made Australia a very good place
for Thai companies to do business.
The Australian Government welcomes foreign investment. We actively encourage it
with a business tax system which includes generous accelerated depreciation
allowances and research and development concessions, and a 33 per cent company tax
rate after which foreign investors get tax free dividends.
Foreign companies in Australia also enjoy the benefits of a skilled workforce, cheap
energy, highly developed infrastructure including sophisticated telecommunications,
and a society and a political system as stable as any in the world.
It is, as I said, a very good place to do business these days.
Ladies and gentlemen, 1 will be very pleased with this visit if hereafter our two
governments and our two business communities acknowledge what has been until now
a somewhat unacknowledged fact I mean the profound convergence of our interests.
In the past few years we have worked together for the liberalisation of world
agriculture markets. We have worked together on APEC. On Cambodia. Our
companies are working together.
We have been building bridges together for some time now.
1 hope that my visit to Thailand will help both our countries to recognise that we are
standing on the threshold of a dynamic new phase in our relationship.
After my discussions this morning with Prime Minister Chun and his senior colleagues
I am confident that the Thai Government shares that view.
It is reasonable to infer from your presence here that the Thai and Australian business
communities have come to the same understanding.
If the Australian and Thai governments do everything that is practicable to make the
most of the future we share, it will still depend on your efforts to turn potential into
reality. You are at the heart of our relationship.
If there is to be a new era, you will number among the pioneers.
I congratulate you for your enterprise and wish you well with all your endeavours. 



M PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
KANCIIANAUUR! WAR CEMETERY, THAILAND, 9 APRIL 1994
Tis place honours those who died on the Burma-Thailand Railway. It reminds us of
the worst of which humanity is capable, and the best.
Almost one in five of the thirteen thousand Australians who worked on the Railway
died. With them also died thousands of men from Great Britain, Burma, New Zealand,
Malaya, Java, India, The Netherlands and Thailand.
Although they wcrc criminally mistreated and denied their rights under international
convention, those from the allied nations died as prisoners of war. The vast majority
of those from Asia upwards of throc hundred thousand of them died as slaves.
To visit lilifire Pass and see the scale of the work men were driven to do is to be
reminded that the task itself was inhuman.
When we are told of the speed with which it was done, the hours the men worked, the
disease they suffered and the brutality and sadism that they endured, we begin to
understand why the Burma-Thailand railway ranks among the most evil acts of World
Wa' II.
The images of our countrymen returning from those camps gaunt and debilitated
remain in the minds of every Australian who ever saw them. The knowledge of what
was done to them remains as shocking now as it was when it was first revealed almost
fifty years ago.
It is not because those inhuman acts can in any way be excused or forgotten that we
have come now to think less about the cruelty and more about the means men found to
endurc it and to help thcir comrades endure it.
The Burma-Thailand Railway has become one of those episodcs in our history from
which we havc chosen to draw inspiration. It has become a legend of courage,
comradeship, sacrifice and resourcefulness. iFi i~ 0t~ 0 SOooOoooooo, .1BJ 
And we have come to recognise tliat these qualitics were embodied in one man, Sir
Edward Ernest " Weary" Dunlop. the soldier and doctor whose remarkable bravcr'and
skill saved so many lives, eased so much suffering and, when it was so desperately
needed, inspired so much faith,
No Australian of his generation is more universally admired than Weary Dunlop, and it
is our duty to make sure that Australians of fuature generations know what he did and
understand the greatnec-s of it.
When we teach his story there is one great theme we should not neglect his great
respect and affection for the Thai people.
We should remember, as he always did, that were it not for their assistance
exemplified in the deeds of his great friend, Boon Pong the lives of countless more
Australian and Allied prisoners of war would have been lost.
From the war's end until his death last year, " Weary" Dunlop returned the friendship by
working to improve thc standard of medicine in Thailand and to deepen understanding
between our two countries.
It is worth remembering that Australia's first major engagement with Asia was in war.
In Korea and Malaya aind Vietnam it was again war.
Today it is a partnership with Thailand and other countrics of the region. A
partnership which will extend the domnain of our common interest and reduce the
ground for conflict.
It seems to me that there could be no better way to honour those Australians who
suffered and died here than to succeed in this enterprise. No better way to see that
what they endured, and what their allies and hundreds of thousands from the countries
of Asia endured, will not happen again.
Tomorrow I go to Victnam. The Australians who fought and died there have been
justly honoured in Australia as those who were here have been honoured, and for thle
same reasons for the sacrifice they made, the faith they showed.
In Vietnam the lesson is the same. The wounds have to be healed. The terrible legacy
of the past must not cripple future generations.
We must never forgct, but for the sake of future generations and in the name of those
who died, the memory should not hold us back) but inspire us to find the way to peace
and friendship, justice and prosperity.
The best lesson we can draw from this place is that here we saw the best in ourselves. 


PRIME MINISTER10PM ( AEST)SPR INY " I'f-PRTUR UIHISTXKR.-IHWXj~~ PZ MY=. Za! G, 11PUMM'DDIM~ 1 flfll fM BY 9 K Ii YO vu! MET; ? RMK1XESTMR OF TE SOCIIST REUBLIC OF V137MM AND: MDAUM,HANI, fl APRL 1994it is a&nbsp;&nbsp;very great. pleasxmre for me to be in &nbsp;Hanoi And a&nbsp;very great pleasure to see you again,&nbsp;Mr Prime Minister,&nbsp;after your&nbsp;welcome visit to Australia&nbsp;last year.
We live in a time of great change in Southeast Asia
In Laosand Thailand I have just ssen for myself the wswya in which economic dynamism nad a new openess between the countries of the region &nbsp;are creating an era of unprecedented opportunity.&nbsp;
Opprttmity. for growth and for peaceful regional&nbsp;cooperation.
Australia&nbsp;is: pleased to be a. part of these davelopments,, as we are pleased to be part of the changes&nbsp;in Vietnam .
Mr Prime Minister.In tfl. short time. I niave bleen in 11anoi I have bee-n ableto-tte for mysei~ f something of the impa ct of -YourCoveruext's Do -i Noi OCOnomic reform program-Yvu. policy, comzbinad with the ckill and anterprise nftbco* Vietnamace peoplp, have c'. een youir economiy gro. by.mnre than a-per cant last -year, and-. your exports grow by16. in-vCent in 1992.WP weicome your closer enqLñ i. eu&amp; t with the countries ofLhe region through participation in the ASP-AS Reqi.. Ons Igorm, and we look forwarti to your even J~ il. Uean. esiASEAN and AVEiC.Mr Prizme Minister, AustraLia, too, h2as undtmyuui= aneconomic revol ution. We have omened our induztry tovvmvetition and our cconomy to the world.-
It h as been. a difficult task. But, like you, we... know therewards -wi11l be innense.Lke-V! etnai r. Atist~ lia is. als; o sekn lsrLn with---our.-reigion niot: only economically,, but. cultur-allypolitic* ly . and st3rategically. as well.These parallel interests between our two countries arecreating extraordinary-new opportunities for U.-Traie* b4tiween: A ustralia and* Vietnam in 19.92 was $ 2million. In 1993" it was $ 366 million.*Anstr-alia is now Vietnais th ird largest foreigninvestor, -with:-nearly $ 800o million invested here.The companies involved axre some of Australia's largest.,like BNP, -Telstra-and the ANZ' B! ank, as wel1 l as s,. iqIa Or,-innovativecopne which have seen the great' potentialWe are ajlso developing new avenues for cooperation . on.reg~ ional issues;-Our common membership of the ASEMN Regional'Forum. willenable -us to -* contibute Ito -the. development : of ad -moresecure -and-peaceful. neighbourhoodMN Vitn. can count on-warmI zupport fZQLg1 AUW= 1i4 4*you m6ve-towards greater involvement in regionalorganisations.. Bilaterally,, our two countries are finding new:opportuni-ties-: to work-together.I was . very. p leased that we have reached agreement on thedetails of: the. parliamentary Consultative Delegatidnwhich you. proposed -when -you were in Austral ia, -and., which.will. visit vi~ tnamn in July.I was also pleased to be able to tell1 you today, M4r Primeminister, that. Australia. will double its * aid to more thana-new four-year aid-prograLm, waih, -wehope will cover areas such as education, . health,Infrastructure and commerical and administrative law.we have developed valuable people-to-people contacts inrecent year, and I am sure that in time the web ofcontact will be greatly str-engthened by the presence inAstralia of! a large, hardworking Vietnamese population.Hr Prime-Minister our friendship is not'. newAustralia -was one of the first Western countries torecognise the Socialist Republic of Vietnam more than
And, tbc fir_-t tc_. Z = G .1i aj~'~ L LLL GJ~ LJU.. LGW. 6 have a. good deal.. in. commoll.Austrañ 3Jdus. bold ! Me qualities ot rei1 nri andaptzbility. in high esteem. dua~ L the VietnamesepeOPlA'we se them in abundance.Bacaue-iWe ehere the view that. econuiu development... shnxld-b Iataaed with care f or the p 1--our. -economic-, reforms tiave. been accompanied ny programs. whi ch;taith. f= l to o= traditions of social nsceioand hIrMonY..* Prime MiiaterI am* tihe first Austzalian 2rime minister t o vi ! ni r. RarniBut I* will. not be the last.Ouzr common interests, the opportunities wflich lie ahtadof u. and theunderztonding which iz developing -; betiaeeanun-wi1l1 akb -sure of that-Thank you ' again for your wmrm hospitality.
I&nbsp;would&nbsp;like to propose a toast to tile health of HE President Le Duc Anh, the health of HE Prime MInister Vo VAn Kiet and MAdama, the happiness and prosperity of the people of Vietnam&nbsp;&nbsp;the further&nbsp;development . of relationsbetween&nbsp;Australia and Vietnam, and the health of all&nbsp;present at the banquet.



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HOLDEN'S ENGINE COMPANY, TWO MILLIONTH EXPORT ENGINE
MELBOURNE, 2 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you very much, Peter ( Thomas), Tom McDaniel and Bill Hamel,
Your Excellencies, the Consul General of Britain, and the Federal Republic of
Germany and other distinguished guests, and my Parliamentary colleagues,
the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria, and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here on this occasion, and the point is not lost on
me that in a week when the Government will deliver a White Paper on
employment in this country, the first in over 45 years, was the -s-am e time
years ago when the then Chiefly Labor Government, the Government that
produced the first White Paper on employment and post war reconstruction,
was the Government which was negotiating with the General Motors
Corporation to see the development of the General Motors Holden Company
in this country.
And now, just on half a century later, we have this amazing coincidence of the
Governments, Australia's, second White Paper on employment coinciding
with the export of these hi gh technology products, the tiv-rnillionth Holden
engine. I
On the occasion when the General Motors Holden Company unveiled its first
car, my predecessor, Ben Chiefly, doffed his hat to the car. Well, I don't
happen to have a hat to doff,* but if I did I would doff it to those high
technology engines on that clamp. Because what we are seeing here is the
face that the General Motors Company has displayed in this country from the
days of the old Holden Motor Body Company and the engines which General
Motors Corporation of the United States used to sell to the collaborative
program, the acquisition and then the building of GMH in Australia. 
And it was to many Australians recognition of the fact that we have come of
age as an industrial country, when we can produce our own motor vehicles.
And we saw the fledgling Australian motor vehicle industry emerge from that
time. We also saw Holdens being sold all over the world, but I am sure we
would have thought in market terms, in those days, of markets like New
Zealand and like South Africa and the developed countries of the Southern
Hemisphere, we wouldn't have been thinking in term of mainstream products
in the mainstream international markets of the Asia-Pacific, of your largest
customer for engines in Korea, or indeed supplying General Motors engines
to other parts of the General Motors Corporation Companies throughout the
world. So, the Holden's Engine Company has now a very great and distinguished
performance since its inception, and the tradition of the belief and faith that
the General Motors Company has had in this country and its working is borne
out of the successes the company is having today. And it gives me very great
pleasure to acknowledge and to salute that success.
We have been through, all of us, an amazing transformation in the last
decade. We turned our back on tariff protection, we've said we want to
engage with the world, we want to be part of the story of the Asia-Pacific. We
want to be part of the story of a confident, outward looking, dynamic
economy. And the changes which we have made, and we have all made
them together, all of us, have produced a now confident, externally oriented
country which can do things which we wouldn't have dreamt of ten years ago.
And so we are now seeing at this point that the country that lived its life on
wheat and wool, and then more latterly iron ore and coal, now finds that its
fastest growing exports are its Elaborately Transformed Manufactures.
We don't want to be a low wage, low productivity society. We want to be a
high wage, high productivity, high innovation society. We want to do the
clever things which can be done by research and development, product
innovation, education and training, commitment, employer to employee,
unions to management so that we advance as a country doing the skilful
things which millions of countries in this region won't, or will not be able to do
for many years into the future.
Fundamental to our view of Australia has been the belief that our great
comparative advantage is not our paddocks of wheat or the great harvest of
the bales of wool or the natural endowments of our minerals, but our great
comparative advantage has been our education system.
Australia is at a point now where this year eight kids in ten will complete
secondary school. That was three in ten, ten years ago. We are streaming
now 40 per cent of those through tertiary institutions and we are now
rebuilding vocational education along side the universities to carry the rest
into training and skills and to reskill them for life's work. The statement which
I'll introduce this week will say a lot more about education and training and 
particularly the importance we give on the school to work transition regarding
the period 15-19 years of age as a period of vocational preparation for work
and where we see the skills path start to open up already in secondary
schools.
This is the rock upon which all of our innqvaticons in the future will be built.
But perhaps beyond that the great structural dhantie of the last ten years has
been the collaborative and co-operative attitude of Australian employees at
work. And the attitude of Australia's employees and our unions and the
corroboration that has been engendered between them and management
across the country have given us now an inflation rate under 2 per cent; an
inflation rate for the last quarter of .4 per cent; the lowest interest rates in
thirty years; the highest profit share in our history and now coupled with a
company tax rate competitive with most any rate in the Asia-Pacific
massively competitive when compared to other industrial developed nations
these are the ingredients of a productive culture which Australia has not
really known in the past.
So, we're seeing this transformation across the economy, but I was glad that
Peter Thomas ( Managing Director, Holden's Engine Company) mentioned the
suppliers here today. Let me pay tribute to you too. Because I'm sure many
suppliers don't regard themselves primarily as exporters, but in fact they have
become exporters because the product which they produce, the efficiency
with which it is produced, the quality control and the delivery schedules, all of
these things that make up a good on-going commercial relationship have
come to pass and now we've got this great team spirit between suppliers and
particularly in the motor vehicle industry this has become very apparent.
It wasn't so many years ago, not so many, when motor companies in this
country would say to the Government we find it very difficult to survive without
a tariff wall of great size because we can't get the competitiveness into a
vehicle components parts industry; we can't get the commitment of
component parts suppliers. Well, that has happily all changed. I think one of
the things which changed it is the fact that we decided that we would be
competitive and throw off the protection of high tariffs and as we've seen
tariffs decline over. the period, this has put competitive disciplines on
companies, on motor vehicle manufacturing management, but it has also
brought the suppliers to the party so that now, together, we are all able to
produce cars of greater quality and lower price so that Australians can enjoy
owning a car of comparable international standards, but at prices which are
far more competitive than would have been the case a couple of years ago.
This has been a great endeavour and a great outcome by the motor vehicle
industry in this country and in this respect the commitment of General Motors
Corporation of GMH to that its national undertaking, has been central to the
change in the quality and price of their cars, to their export potential and, of
course, the spin-off in manufacturing of engines as we see in this plant here
today. 
So, this is a considerable success story and it can't be there simply because
of an enlightened management; it can't be there with enlightened and
competent plant managers, it can only be there with the commitment of the
workers, the employees to a partnership with the management that makes
these things possible and a commitment by the company to product
innovation and to playing a role in Australia's exports.
So, it is with a considerable degree of pride and genuine pleasure that I come
to this place, to Fishermens Bend, where Ben Chifley came nearly half a
century ago to take his hat off to the first Australian made car. And, as I have
the pleasure as leader of the Labor party and Prime Minister to introduce a
White Paper on employment in this country, on the development of regions in
this country; of industry policy; of training and re-training and a commitment
to the young, on this occasion, in this week nearly half a century later I have
the historic opportunity to visit Fishermens Bend and to not doff my hat, but to
pay a well earned round of tribute and praise to everyone involved in the
production of the engines of the Holden's Engine Company.
So, ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, one and all it is with very
great pleasure that I am here in the company of the Chief Executive Officers
of the Corporation and to be here on this the occasion of the building and
packing of the two millionth Holden engine.
Thank you very much indeed. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 5 MAY 1994
f I were to begin with a quotation today, you might expect it to be fr~ om Ben Chifley
or John Dedman, or Bevan or Beveridge, or some other author of a white paper on
employment. I will begin with a quotation. It's a very simple quotation and its from Samuel
Johnson, who is not generally regarded as one of the heroes of the Labor movement.
Johnson said, " Inj a civilised society, we all depend upon each other".
And I can't think of a better text for the day. I can't think of any more appropriate
injunction for Australia in the 1990s or any better broad definition of what this
Government is about.
We are about a civilised society.
And we shouldn't underestimate the forces working against us. Think of them. We
are as culturally diverse as any country on earth. We have people among us who in
other places are sworn enemies. But we do behave with proper regard for one
another. Even though we have close to half a million long-term unemployed, we live
in peace with one another.
The other force potentially working against our sense of society is the necessity to be
competitive. This might encourage us to think that the way to succeed is through a
creed of dog-eat-dog.
Some countries whose traditions should have instructed them better did read it that
way in the last 20 years. They took the imperatives of economic progress to mean
social regress.
Australia did not. Australia in the last decade has stuck by it's civilised traditions. At
every election, including the last when, after ten years of the same Party in office and
the worst unemployment figures in sixty years, the temptation was great, the Australian
people refuased to vote for a dog-eat-dog society.
They stuck by the principles which have their origin in the birth of the Labor
movement a century ago and in those true Liberals who believed that the imperatives
of civilisation should temper self-interest.
There was a profound lesson in last year's election. The people of Australia were given
a genuine choice: should Australia take on the ethic of unmitigated self-interest? Or
should they stand by their own values? 
It will not have escaped some of you, that Labor won that election by making the
difference as stark as possible. I know John Hewson has been inclined until recently to
say that we ran a scare campaign.
My answer to that is read Fightback. Remember what John Hewson said about the
unemployed and the disadvantaged. The echoes of Thatcher and Reagan were clear
and unmistakable.
The notion that if you reach back for the poor and the weak they will drag you down,
quite simply, stands for a set of values which Labor will never stand for and I don't
believe Australians will ever stand for.
That remark, as much as Fightback itself, threw down the political gauntlet. It
challenged Australians to abandon a century-old tradition which even at its worst ( in
Labor's eyes at least) his own Party had never totally abandoned. Labor did not run a
scare campaign, it put the traditional view that " in a civilised society we all depend
upon each other".
Faced with this stark choice, the Australian people voted for their beliefs. They voted
for one nation, not two. They voted for bringing the unemployed along with us. They
voted for what I called policies of inclusion a phrase which our opponents are now
using. This idea of " inclusion" is unremarkable. It simply encapsulates the idea of a nation
even a nation which for all sorts of geographic, demographic and historical reasons is
as loosely constructed as Australia. It encapsulates a nation of people as diverse and
easy going and individualistic as Australians are.
It poses no threat to that marvellous reality of Australian life and culture. It simply
means that " we all depend upon each other".
The fact that Johnson said it at a time when Britain was treating her own people
abominably, hanging and flogging the poor and preparing to shovel them off to the
other side of the world where they would be out of sight and out of mind, only goes to
show that words are not enough the only proof is what people do.
Whatever our problems as a Government since 1983, I hope we will at least be judged
as a government which did things.
Had words been enough for the Government in 1983, we would still be talking about
the need for Australia to be a competitive country. We would still be talking about
deregulating the economy. We would still be talking about lowering the tariff wall.
We would still be talking about opening up to the world and succeeding not just in
mining and agriculture, but as a manufacturing nation. We would still be talking very
largely about succeeding in the Asia-Pacific.
There are many things we would still be talking about. But instead we did them. In
1994, Australian workers are doing them. The regions of Australia are doing them.
And had we been satisfied with words alone, we might still be talking about the need
for extensive and sophisticated social services. About what a nice thing it would be,
and how consistent with our democratic pioneering traditions, if we implemented to an
extent greater than any other country in the world the UN Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
Or how we might one day recognise that this continent had belonged to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders. We could very easily still be talking about these things, but we
have done them. 
In 1994 we live in a country which has few peers in the world in the way it has
transformed its economy, developed its social services, extended freedom and
opportunity, and maintained its values through an era of extraordinary change. We five
in a country which has responded to every challenge.
We should never underestimate this. Few, if any, generations of Australians have
proven themselves more comprehending of what the challenge was and what was
required to meet it.
As a member of the Government in these last eleven years, I am proud that we painted
a picture of the reality. As an Australian, I am much prouder of the fact that the
people of this country recognised it. The Labor Party recognised it, the trade union
movement and an increasingly large section of the business community, and the
Australian electorate.
They recognised that cooperation in workplaces was better than conflict. They
recognised that we could be a manufacturing nation without a tariff wall. They
recognised that we could succeed ini the Asia-Pacific.
And why did they recognise it? Because they believed in themselves and that in their
country there was a wellspring of potential which had not yet been tapped.
They had what these days is called a vision and they knew that the best way of
realising it was to work with a common purpose, to work together.
In other words, they recognised that in a civilised society, we all depend upon each
other. The White Paper I presented yesterday is prefaced with a reminder of the things I said
on election night last year and on Australia Day this year. The words were that we
would not leave the unemployed behind.
There have been a few critics of this White Paper today who say that we should leave
them behind. They say it in various ways. They do not say it directly. They say that
to prepare the long-term unemployed for jobs, is to create competition for the shortterm
unemployed.
This is the moral equivalent of transportation. It is to say these people have lost their
right to a job like other Australians and we have lost our capacity and our will to get
them ready for a job. They are simply a problem and should be ignored. We won't
have it.
There is another argument which says that we shouldn't pick them up, and train them,
and get them back into the labour market where they can enjoy, not just an income, but
the self respect and social intercourse and creativity which work provides, because the
cost is too high.
This is the moral equivalent, not of transportation, but of keeping them on the hulks
keeping them in jail because it is cheaper. It takes no account of what the cost of
doing nothing is the cost to their lives and the cost to ours. The cost to our social
cohesion and order if we were to allow an underclass of Australians to form.
The cost also to our sk411 õ . The cost of wasting this potential. The cost to our
civilisation of saying that we don't depend upon each other that these people are
expendable. 
There is another argument that has been put. It says that the only way that we will
create jobs for these people is to so change our industrial relations system that wage
rates and conditions of employment will be debased.
This, it seems to me, would be to betray the unemployed as profoundly as neglect
would betray them. It would be truly a cruel hoax on Australia.
This argument says we will substitute an army of working poor for unemployment. It
says we will abandon our goals of a good and equitable society, we will lower our gaze
to a society where differentials of wealth are wide and profound. We Will have the
same problems of social disorder and alienation and decay but we will have the
unemployment figure down a couple of notches.
The argument is not only devious, regressive and deceitful, it's fundamentally wrong.
As the Green Paper pointed out, cutting wages in the great depression did not produce
a surge in employment. It made those high-minded, comfortable, middle-class
economists feel very morally superior, just as it makes some of our own academic and
journalistic pundits feel superior but it didn't solve the problem then, and it won't
solve it now.
Many of you would have read the Phillip Knightley article recently in which he
described how in Great Britain they have lowered wages security guards can be paid
as little as $ 2.50 an hour for an 84 hour week. There are women doing piece work for
$ 6.30 a day. The chairman of the company employing them at that rate earned
$ 270,000 a year. He said " we wouldn't get the productivity if we paid an hourly rate".
I will never accept for Australia the notion of a competitive economy being a synonym
for social regression.
Nor do I have to describe to people here the tragedy of American poverty. Some of
our opponents point to the American unemployment rate of 6 1/ 2 per cent and say that
is the model for us to follow. To which I would reply if you would like to fight the
next election on your support for an American social model and our support for an
Australian one, we will be very happy to do so.
As Geoff Kitney pointed out today, America is also paying an enormously high price
for widening the dispersion of wage rates.
Those who criticised the White Paper make one fundamental error or at least a
fundamental misjudgement about this Government. A long while ago, we committed
ourselves to finding a place for Australia in the very front rank of nations.
The point of opening up this economy and deregulating it, and lowering tariff walls,
and building an export culture, and best practice, was to make sure that Australia
became a player in the premier league. I mean where the technology is, where the high
value adding is and where the best jobs are.
To opt for any other goal is to opt for a place in the second division where the
second rate jobs are and where the national pride is missing.
Now we are not going to opt for the premier division in the global economy and, at the
same time, opt for the second division in our social goals. We are not going to accept
social decay, human alienation, rising levels of crime, a loss of faith and belief in other
words, an underclass cut off from the rest of the nation.
We did not take the economic path we have to end up with a second rate country. It is
so plainly true you cannot have a first rate economy and a second rate society. 
Let me give you just one little example of what I mean. When McKinsey surveyed
firms in regional Australa they found that just 4 per cent among them thought wage
casts were an impediment to growth. Increasing productivity and seeking out new
opportunities were the keys to the way forward.
The White Paper is not proof of success. But it is proof that this Government
continues to believe that words alone are not enough. We will do what on a strenuous
appraisal of the evidence presents itself as necessary.
On that appraisal, it is necessary to sustain economic growth and much in the White
Paper is about the means by which we will do that. We will do it by providing the
means for firms to build, to take advantage of the expanding markets in Australia and
in the region.
It is also necessary to make an effort of unprecedented intensity to lift the long-term
unemployed out of the mire in which they are trapped. That is the heart of it.
The economy in which skills are our greatest resource. Now I won't go into the details
again of how we are going to do that. But let me say that when you examine the
document, it should be apparent that it is a document for these times it brings our
labour market, education and training, and social security programs up to the 1990s
and they will serve us well into the 21 st century.
That's why comparisons with the 1945 White Paper on Employment are largely
inappropriate. They are different documents, informed by different ideas to meet the
imperatives of different times. They have two things in common: the 1945 document
was required to find the way to demobilise a million servicemen and women and the
1994 document has set itself the task of finding ways to remobilise a million
unemployed. That is the first thing they have in common. The second thing is they
were both done by Labor governments.
Growth is the context. Employment, training, support, help, is the heart of it.
I don't think we can stress enough how great the changes have been. How important it
is that we succeed in getting into that front rank. It has been, I suppose, something of
a highwire act. The rewards will be huge not just because it will maintain our
standard of living but improves them for generations. There are also basic quality of
life considerations involved in this.
Yesterday I quoted Chifley's definition of the social safety net the net under the
trapeze artist to catch him when he falls so that he can climb the ladder of opportunity
again. What we are doing with this statement on employment, is providing, on behalf
of the nation, the net and the ladder for the long-term unemployed and for the youth
of Australia.
If it is true that in a civilised society we all depend upon each other, we have to
provide that net and, principally through training and education, the ladder of
opportunity. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE COMMUNITY OF SUNRAYSIA, MILDURA SHIRE
COUNCIL CHAMBERS, FRIDAY, 6 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Shire President, Councillors Elizabeth Maffei and distinguished members of
the Shire Council, could I also acknowledge the Mayor and distinguished
members of the City Council, distinguished Parliamentary colleagues and
guests, ladies and gentlemen, one and all. It is a great pleasure to be here
and Mr Fitzpatrick, before I go on, as President of the Murray-Darling
Commission. It is a very great pleasure for me to be in his company here
today too.
I have had a most enjoyable morning and one knows about areas like the
Sunraysia, you learn about them at school, I did where I went to school and
the great irrigation areas of Australia because they are and were so much
part of the ethos of rural Australia, particularly in the post-war years and in
the case of Mildura, Mildura was even moving as an irrigation area before the
nation federated.
There is a great sense of tradition as Mr Fitzpatrick said, of heritage about
much of the area of the Murray-Darling catchment and for these particular
irrigation areas. I think that one of the things that we are finding with the
changed Australia, the new Australia, the open externally orientated Australia
is that the things which we did in the past for our domestic consumption
where we set up farm models and scales on European models for domestic
demand, these things are changing and the regions of Australia have an
opportunity now to participate in the new Austraifii economy, the more
competitive, faster growing externally oriented one which opens up the
prospects for a greater involvement by the people of regions and a greater
sharing in the prosperity of the nation than that which they formerly would
have been able to enjoy. 
Part of the ' Working Nation' statement of a day ago was about giving regions
a greater role in Australia, in the nation, in the governments of Australia and
we've, in the reports which we did commission, principally that by Bill Kelty
and his task force, the very extensive McKinsey research study and the
Industry Commission Report all reveal one thing and that is that regions that
know what they are doing, that have a sense of strategy about them, that
have a sense of cohesion between municipal government, between
employers, employees, trade unions, and other community bodies; generally
have a higher economic performance than those areas that don't have that
sort of coalescence of view or sense of leadership.
We thought one of the sensible things to do is to give regions a chance to be
able to resource some of the things that they might do in mapping their own
strategies. Give them a chance to see what they can do for themselves
because whenever regions are given a chance to do something for
themselves they always do better than something which drifts in from outside.
That's not to say that outside, that is the footloose industries from time to time
don't or wont' change an area, it happens, but by and large most of the
change comes internally. We want to see that those things could work.
So, in here we have got support for regional economic development
organisations. We've got funding there to resource them, to see if they can
refine th eir strategies and plans; we've got to change the tax treatment of
some instruments such as infrastructure bonds, which could be important in
some vital, if you look at an irrigation area a vital piece of public community
infrastructure, which can be provided privately if the tax system is set up
properly; in pool development funds where one, for instance, might see the
joint ownership of particular resources or even farms or production facilities
and where those people, groups, companies or bodies need more capital
through pool development funds they might have a chance now of raising it
with a much more advantageous tax treatment.
There are a couple of important instruments, we think, there. Like all of these
things one has to refine them. We've had a couple of goes at infrastructure
bonds, but now we have got a 33 per cent tax rebate in there which will affect
beneficially, say, super funds which are very low taxed and therefore a tax
deduction doesn't mean anything to them, but a re-batie does. So, some of
these things are a case of seeing what the market will'do with them, but
anyway the chances are'there and we're listening to see what the reactions
will be. We do think they will help in regions.
The other thing is we've got a capital works program there for particular
public works, community works which can be of special value to regions and
it is from that pool that we will be funding some of these salinity control works
which I have the pleasure of being involved with later on this afternoon, but
more particularly, that being part of the general salinity control problem. In
this case, in the Murray-Darling catchment system.
There are two approaches there is the generic approach to regions and
there is a specific approach to particular works. Where we think a region has 
in a mature way or matured their plans so that some Commonwealth and in
this case, State funding can go together to do something sensible because
you know it is going to be money well spent.
One of the most impressive things we have seen in the last six or seven
years is the collaborative work between the Commonwealth and the States in
the Murray-Darling area and let me pay a tribute to the people in the
Commission who have worked these plans up and produced a sense of cooperation
and collaboration so that we are now making substantial strides in
dealing with salinity problems and looking at the future of the Murray-Darling
in the long term Australia's greatest river system and it's one which we must
nurture. We have a much greater appreciation of the environment. We would now
shake our heads in horror at the clear felling of trees which has gone on this
country really since European settlement and which has had now such a
deleterious impact upon the landscape and upon, particularly, things like
erosion and salinity et cetera. And approaching it in a co-operative,
collaborative way is the only way because this system covers the various
states Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and you
need therefore a council, you need to think in national terms and you need to
work with communities co-operatively and bring them along and let them see
the point and purpose of it all.
This is, in fact, what has happened and a lot of progress has been made;
much is yet to be done, but one thing is very clear: once people get to know
about things they make the changes very quickly and at Mr Well's farm this
morning I was just interested to learn some of the finer points about drip
irrigation versus the sprays and that versus the gravitational irrigation and the
quality it brings to the grapes and the diminished demands for water and the
improved therefore salinity problem. All these things, no one group or
individual can change these problems, it has to be a community thing. This is
why, I think, with the Commonwealth involved with the States in the larger
scheme of things like rural adjustment, the case of Victoria Farm-smart, all of
these programs, Landcare, all these things help to make Australia better and
more productive.
With all these export markets opening up to us with tremendous demands for
horticultural products in this part of Australia and the tremendous demand in
Europe and in Asia for the products of this country particularly in agriculture
which we produce we have, I think, a great opportunity. So, sustainable
development is a very important phrase for our country from here on in. I was
very impressed with the advocacy of this in the Sunraysia by Mr Hewitt
amongst others, over a long period of time and we've picked those themes up
in the various task force reports and I'm very impressed indeed, with the
general sense of community and notion of common problems that I'm seeing.
Thank you very much for doing me the honour of meeting me here today. I
thank the Shire President for hosting this lunch and for the opportunity to look
around the region and see what is capable of being done. I hope that with 
the ' Working Nation' statement the more generic things on regional
development and the specific thing here in the Sunraysia on this scheme of
works for salinity control, we can just move the agenda of that commercial,
community and environmental agenda just on that much further so that
Australia is going to be a stronger and better place and the regions of
Australia will have a greater role.
Let me conclude on this point. Unemployment is a big problem here, it is in
many regional areas. It will be a test of a country's capacity to do things
innovatively and maturely to see how they can work. We will be intensively
case managing every young person under 18 years of age who is
unemployed from here on. That is, anyone who has left school, is
unemployed, they will have someone who is personally dealing with them and
managing them, understanding them, their aspirations, their educational
attainments, their aptitudes and trying to find things to do. Where work is
limited in regional areas we have got a thing called the New Opportunities
Programs where we are seeking community type works which we may be
able to fund through the labour market programs and it will be, I think, a
challenge for local government and other community bodies to come up with
some of those things. Beyond that, in the greater scheme of things, the
notion is going to be on education and training regarding the years 15 to 19
as a period of vocational preparation. We don't want kids dropping out of
school only then to be picked up and then brought back in someway into
TAFE and other things, but to keep them there and then, of course,
intensively case managing those people who have been unemployed for
twelve months or more.
There is a great challenge there in that agenda, but at least a day ago we
started moving on it decisively and, I think, we are doing things which
Australia may again be doing some novel things that other comparable
economies and societies are not doing in respect of employment.
Let me conclude again by thanking you for coming for the very warm
welcome and I look forward to meeting you all. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB POST-BUDGET
LUNCH, HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, FRIDAY, 13 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Chief Justice John Phillips, Leader of the Opposition John
Brumby, guests at the official table, my friend Bobby Rose amongst them
and ladies and gentlemen.
I really am glad to have the opportunity the Collingwood Football Club
extends to me as Allan ( MacAlister) said, for the first time in the week of the
Budget to offer up a few thoughts. And, of course, I always get a few
thoughts around the table.
Since I first became one of the many thousands of Collingwood members
and one of the millions of supporters, this lunch has become a bit of a
tradition and we might have moved the date of the Budget, but we maintain
the tradition of the lunch. The thing I've learned is you don't tamper with
Collingwood traditions. As a result of all this I now get to pay a visit to
Melbourne while there are still a few leaves on the trees and a little warmth
in the air and I am very pleased to be here.
As this national recovery grows, Melbourne is emerging as a major player
and that has to be good.
Victoria took a hammering for a few years, and I think it is a real measure of
the character of the place and the people that they did not lose their nerve or
drop their collective bundle.
This is a city with genuine spirit and toughness. It does have class it must
have because Leo Schofield has decided to move down here. Leo hasn't
come for the football he's come for arts and because he's grown to love the
place. And this is a great compliment from a Sydney sider for this great city. 
Australia needs Melbourne to succeed. If this particular part of the nation's
heart isn't pumping our whole constitution is weakened. So when we see
companies down here beginning to thrive again, we're pleased. And when
the Committee for Melbourne says it wants to build the Domain tunnel, we
want to help. When the Goulburn Valley gets a plan for its future tdgether,
we'll kick in with some Commionwealth assistance.
You might notice there are not a lot of Labor voters among any of those
categories, but, I think, the important thing is we all work together.
It's like working with Jeff Kennett. I don't mind that, but what's more
important, is given that he reckons we'll win the next election, he can work
with me.
But I want to say, I do like working with my mate John Brumby and I've done
a bit of work with him over the past and we'll be doing a bit in the future.
Mind you, the relationship will be more amiable if Jeffrey refrains from taking
credit for Commonwealth projects. in Victoria. I don't like him riding on those
trains in Spring Street when I pay we the Commonwealth to put the rails
down or plumbing to the Treasury building which we decided to refurbish.
And I also hope that in this new era of growth he doesn't forget I hope no
one in Melbourne forgets that Melbourne's future depends on not just
development but planning and preservation.
The world is full of second and third rate cities skewered by sixty-story
plinths towering over planning disasters. Monuments to myopia and short
term private interests over long term public ones.
The great cities of the next century, like the great cities of any century, will
be those that look good and are good to live in.
They will be efficient and vibrant cities which maintain their character and
quality. In a very real sense that is what this last decade of the century is all about
building the quality into Australia. Into the economy, into the society, into the
nation. I mean knitting the skills and technology into our ambitions and
traditions. I mean pulling all that great diversity and vast distance into a
cohesive nation a loose federation and a singularly independent-minded
and unregimented people, but a cohesive people.
We have learned a lot about these things in recent years.
We've learned that it's not enough to just grow and mine things we have to
make things as well and service things too. And what we grow and mine and
make has to be the best. 
That has implications for how we grow it and mine it and make it and service
it we have to do it as well as, or better than, anyone else in the world.
So the quality has to be built in. I don't think this is the time to give you a
talk on international best practice except to say that, whatever the degree or
detail with which business applies it as a code for the pursuit of excellence
best practice will increasingly govern the operations of the Commonwealth
Government, and should increasingly govern those of state and local
governments and regional organisations of this country.
The nation itself in the 1990s should work to that same goal.
We have built this into the regional development strategy we announced in
the Government's White Paper because regions have to find what they do
best and the best way of doing it. They have to find their niche in the
modem Australian economy, and in the international economy.
We are also bringing the same sorts of principles to the federation through
the Council of Australian Governments, the States and the Commonwealth
are beginning to remove a lot of the impediments to national efficiency. This
is a great thing, working together co-operatively in a way we've probably
never done before.
The Commonwealth has a decade of economic reform behind it. The truth is
that the next wave of change will have to substantially come from the States.
We have improved the environment in which our firms operate through
substantial microeconomic reform. Further progress is in store as we work
with the States to extend greater competition to the public utilities. Recently,
the COAG meeting in August will also consider specific reform to electricity,
gas, water, legal services and the maritime sector. So a* lot will depend on
what they do and on the sort of cooperative agreements we can strike in the
national interest.
The last decade of the nineteenth century, in some respects, followed an
uncannily similar path. It began badly and ended in unprecedented national
unity which is to say it ended in federation.
We need to end this decade the same way we need a degree of national
unity, cohesion and purpose such as we have never seen before.
I think we sometimes lose sight of the fact that we made some really
fundamental progress in this direction in the last decade. The Accord
between the Government and the trade unions was a real and symbolic
manifestation of the capacity for Australian workers and Australian
management and the Australian Government to work together in the national
interest. We have seen a cooperative culture develop in our workplaces as
a consequence. And we are seeing the rewards in low inflation, higher
productivity and greater competitiveness. 
The challenge remains to maintain and extend this progress. To do it, we
will have to vigorously push on not just with the microeconomic reform
agenda, but with enterprise bargaining. Because, it is not simply the agenda
of the government business enterprise which will determine how successful
and competitive Australia is or will be, but the competitiveness and efficiency
of each employing unit.
A lot of the responsibility lies in realms which are not the Commonwealth's.
In the case of government business enterprises or the States and regional
governments and with employers and employees in the case of firms. We
will only be truly successful when we build in the efficiencies from the ground
up; when the quality flows right through the economy; when in every tier of
government and every workplace the same goals and principles apply to do
things as well as they can be done.
That is what being internationally competitive means. It is also the
precondition of a good society in the twenty-first century. If we want a place
in the front rank of nations and the prosperity, opportunity and fulfilment that
goes with it, we are all going to have to work for it.
If this sounds a bit like a three-quarter time address, that is probably in the
stage of our development, now, appropriate that it does. Because in the
final analysis the words won't matter it will depend on what the players do
and that's where the issue will be settled.
I don't want you to get me wrong in thinking that prime responsibility to lead
the process of reform and, in spirit and effect, encourage national unity and
purpose lies other than with the Commonwealth Government it doesn't. But
it has to be a shared responsibility and we will put the pressure on the
States, on regional governments and on business and in the trade unions to
make sure we all move along together.
Perhaps the best illustration of what I'm talking about can be found in two
reports we commissioned on regional Australia. Bill Kelty's Taskforce and
McKinsey and Company surveyed the regions of Australia and each came
up with the same essential conclusion the key to success in the regions
was in the leadership and organisation. The key is finding the means by
which the material and human resources, the talents and energies of regions
can be put to best effect. This is a very telling set of surveys, a very telling
couple of reports which reveal that, as always, there's no substitute for
leadership and wherever we see it, we always see an organisation or a
region doing well. The successful ones are better helping themselves.
The lesson for the Commonwealth is neither to abandon regions in this
country nor to pour in material assistance the lesson is to give strategic
assistance, to give strategic help, the sort of assistance which will enable the
regions of Australia to get the best out of their physical resources and their
people. 
You see how the parallel with the three-quarter time address returns. And
the message is very similar we will succeed best if we share a sentiment
and an identity, if we are working to the same purpose, if we cohere, if we
call on everyone's talent and everyone's energy and will. In other words, we
won't make it as a nation, as an economy or a society if we don't make it
together. Success will depend on these factors tangible and intangible. But, the
other thing it is going to depend on is skill.
The phrase that is used these days, often in Australia, is value-adding. I
daresay a decade ago very few Australians had ever heard of it. These days
it is widely used and understood. It means, of course, adding another
dimension to a product and, in doing so, adding to its value in the market.
If value-adding was the catch-phrase of the last decade, kil's must be the
catch-phrase of this one. Our success as a nation the success of any
nation in the modern world will depend on the capacity of our workforce to
add value to products, and that will depend on their skills.
It follows that our ability to create jobs for Australians depends on the skills
of our workforce. Skills are our greatest resource. We will never return to a
time when there were vast numbers of unskilled jobs. If we want that place
among the front rank of nations in the twenty-first century, we need our
people to be skilled.
The White Paper on employment and growth is very largely about just that.
It is about skills. It is about making the country stronger and more efficient
by giving the unemployed, and those at risk of becoming unemployed, the
skills they will need if they are to find a job. That will make the country vastly
more efficient and, of course, vastly more just.
Some people have said that by training and giving work experience to the
long term unemployed, and removing disincentives to work in the social
security system, we are creating competition for new entrants to the labour
market. This is a polite way of saying don't worry about the long term
unemployed, just leave them behind. But commonsense and compassion
tell us, I think, that we can't do that and with the White Paper the
Government has said that we won't. It was never an option.
It has also been said the cost is too high. The answer is the same: we can't
leave them behind not if we want to maintain our national self-respect and
our social cohesion and order. The answer to those who say that the cost is
too high is count the cost of doing nothing. Count the cost to their lives and
to ours. The cost of wasting their potential. 
There are others who have said that the only answer is to so change our
system of industrial relations, that wage rates should be cut and conditions
of employment degraded. Well, this is a very old argument and a discredited
one. In effect it means emulating the model of Great Britain and the United
States. In Great Britain you will find men working as security guards for
$ 2.50 an hour for an eighty-four hour week and women doing piece work for
$ 6.30 a day. In the United States, where the unemployment rate is six and a
half per cent, there exists an army of working poor, they are in jobs, but they
are jobs which keep them well below the poverty line. In both countries the
gaps in wealth are wide and profound and there are unmistakable symptoms
of social disorder and decay symptoms which we do not want to see in our
country, in our society.
So, with the White Paper, the Government has signalled that Australia will
be a high wage, high productivity country making innovative, value-added
products. We have no intention of creating a first class economy but a
second rate society even if it were possible to do so.
With the White Paper I believe all Australians should understand, and most
of our political opponents should understand that the days when economic
progress was construed to mean a dog-eat-dog society are over forever.
There are two very good reasons for this. The first is that by their decision
at the last election, the Australian people registered the notion of such a
society, they voted for social compassion and cohesion, for a safety net and
for bringing the unemployed with us. As I said the other day at the National
Press Club, in 1993 the Australian traditions of fairness and equity which
had been born in the 1890s were profoundly reasserted.
But the people did not just vote with their hearts. They also voted with their
heads. They recognised the waste in leaving a great body of unemployed
people behind. They recognised the folly in a doctrine of unmitigated
economic rationalism the folly in believing that economic progress implies a
return to the social conditions and mores of the 19th century.
So, put another way, with the election of last year behind us in 1993 and the
White Paper of 1994, Australia has embarked without qualification on the
path towards a sophisticated social democracy underpinned by a
sophisticated modern economy.
We have made a decision to play in the premier league and that compels
us to build quality into every sphere of our national life.
That is what the White Paper is about and the Budget which consolidates it
which takes those costs and fits them into the national, annual economic
parameter. With them we say that economic policy and social policy go
hand in hand. 
We say that a first rate Australia, like a first rate city, will manifest not just the
evidence of growth and development but of character and tradition. It will
have a human dimension as well as an aesthetic one.
We also say a first rate country, like a first rate business or a first rate
football team, will be characterised by the strength which comes from shared
sentiments and fellow feeling and the competitive edge that only skills
provide. We say that a first rate country has all these things built in.
And finally we say that in 1994 we have opportunity unprecedented in our
history to do these things.
And every reason, every confidence that we will be able to do it and in the
doing of it set Australia out as a place that never lost its fix, its judgement or
its values. Thank you very much indeed
ends 



/ Ia.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO LABOR PARTY DINNER, GREEK CLUB, WEST END
BRISBANE, 16 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed for that tremendously warm welcome. And,
thank you Wayne, Roisin ( Goss) for coming along tonight, and the Lord
Mayor, Jim 8orley, and Mairy Phillips and our official guests, and all of you,
thank you for a tremendous welcome and tremendous enthusiasm. And, I
can tell you, quite sincerely, that it was in this room, this crowd, two years
ago, more than at any other time in the period that I had been Prime Minister,
that I got more cheer and more zest and more support than in any other
place. I was doing it hard at the time, and I needed a kick along, and I had had a
good couple of days in North Queensland and I came down here to one of the
best dinners I have ever been to, and certainly then, the best of my time as
Prime Minister. And, I would say this, there is no State branch of the Labor
Party that can put a show together like the Queensland Labor Party.
And I say that as a New South Welshman, I will be reminded of this when I go
home, but as Mike ( Kaiser) said earlier, it is a test of the Labor Party's
strength and vitality, that with a weeks notice there is just on 1000 people.
And, if it were not for the capacity there would be more then a thousand. I
thank Mike and the Party and Wayne for suggesting it, and Mike for arranging
it, and for all of you who have come, thank you very much indeed.
I am particularly indebted to Wayne for his very kind words of introduction,
and it is true to say that he and I had a very good day, I think, where we went
to a school here in Brisbane and we were involved with the teaching of
Chinese in a class room, and Wayne and I sat down at our desks in the
classroom while the class around us spoke Chinese. And, I thought what a
marvellous thing it is that a Labor Government in Queensland can lead the
country on this concentration on Asian languages, with now more then 
2
100,000 kids from Queensland learning an Asian language, and be the
forerunner of this nationally. As you probably know, Wayne proposed this at
the Council of Australian Governments, that the Commonwealth should join
the States in a national Asian languages program, which will teach Chinese,
Korean, Japanese and Indonesian in the first instance. And, for this to
succeed as a policy would tremendously change the nature of Australian
education and our capacity to relate to our part of the world. At any rate, we
have done it. And, the Commonwealth Government has committed funds to it
and as time goes on we are going to commit more and it will be a great Labor
initiative, but a Labor initiative that started here in Queensland with Wayne
Goss, and congratulations Wayne on that.
But, as Wayne has said, we have done many things together, and I said to
him today, you would have to go back half a century to find two people
holding our office to be members of the Labor Party, Labor Prime Minister
and Labor Premier of Queensland together in a, Queensland school and
doing things for the nation and for Queensland. Wayne was kind enough to
mention the collaborative program that we have decided on between us, and
we announced in the Budget to claim back that part of the Daintree, that
wonderful rainforest area of Australia, of Queensland, so that it remains as
part of the national estate forever and always, for our children. And, he
mentioned the National Training Authority, and let me just say this, that we
have made some very big decisions in education to support the University
system federally was probably one of the important ones. To pick up
retention rates in secondary schools was another. But, no doubt, the third leg
of those important decisions will be the development of our vocational
education system, of Technical and Further Education into a national system.
And I was able to announce for the Commonwealth's part our commitment to
be in that in the One Nation program in 1992, but it would not have been
possible without the support of Wayne Goss and the Government of
Queensland. And it is absolutely right and fitting that the headquarters of the
National Training Authority which will see the renaissance of vocational
education in Australia changing the Cinderella status of TAFE into a full
partner of Australian education, it is right that that headquarters should be
here in Brisbane.
But, after all, that is what Labor Governments are for, isn't it? I mean, here it
is, a lot of our kids who don't make it beyond secondary school to university
for one reason or another, often who drop out, we want them now to be part
of a better education system, with a much closer focus to the work place and
that's what TAFZE will be. And, so that is a great initiative, I think, between the
Commonwealth and Queensland Government, indeed the Australian States in
general. But, Wayne had a tremendously important role, and had a key role
in that, and Australian children will be forever in his debt.
Let me just say something about Mabo. Now, Mabo, we had a long rocky
road with Mabo. But, as we got down towards the hard part, and that's
rounding up the constituencies to support it, keeping some of the States in
there, Wayne Goss and the Government of Queensland were the key to 
keeping the State response to Mabo together. And, I can assure you that we
wouldn't have a Mabo Bill today, or one that we have today, without the
support of the Government of Queensland, of Wayne Goss in particular, and
his pivotal role in keeping the States into the collective support we had for the
Mabo legislation.
Now, that is something only a Labor Government would do, and we did have
the support of some conservative States, and they were there because they
believed in something better. But, the great leap forward in property and
cultural law which Mabo was wouldn't have happened without the Labor
Party. It wouldn't have happened without the 1993 election, it wouldn't have
happened without a Labor Government here in Queensland. So, these are
some of the great collaborative things we have been able to do together, and
there is much more to do. Queensland is either now leading Australia in
growth, sometimes it is in front, at other times Western Australia is, most of
the time Queensland is. And, it is because of that leadership that I think
Australia is now back to strong rates of economic growth with a State like
Queensland tugging the national economy along.
So, I am delighted to be here. Glad to have had Wayne's company today in
this important thing we were articulating in Asian education, but most
particularly, above all that;' in a collaborative partnership and working
arrangement between two Labor Governments of substance, of quality and of
sincerity. So, thank you, Wayne, and thank you for having me in
Queensland.
Well, I said it was two years ago since I last spoke to you. And I think it was
here in this room that Labor's journey to victory in 1993 really started to role.
Because it was here that I said, that the difference between the Labor Party
and its opponents was a matter of heart. It was here that I first said, if some
group drops back we will lean out our caring arm and pull them up. And, I
suppose it is appropriate, it is fitting and it is probably right, that I should
come back here two years later, one election later, to talk about the White
Papef, Working Nation, the device we have constructed to pull the
u nemployed up with the rest of us.
Only a Labor Government would conceive such a plan, and only a Labor
Government could execute one. And, I first articulated that view about
unemployment then, it very much separated us from our conservative
opponents and set the tone for the balance of the Parliament. So, this night
two years ago was a turning point in Labor's re-election in 1993. And,
wherein John Hewson replied, " when the Prime Ministers talks", he said,
" about pulling people up, doesn't he realise he will drag the rest of us down."
And, that set the tone. But, the fact is, we have done what we said we would.
We kept the promise and we kept the faith. Faith in ourselves, faith in
Australians and faith in Australia, faith in the enduring values of our traditions
as a country, of fairness of egalitarianism, of a fair go, and a capacity for
tolerance, and a great capacity for change. And, perhaps it is the last, which
is as important as any of the other, and that is the capacity to change. For 
change we have. Change as a nation we have. Australian's, I think, are
entitled to be proud of the change of the last ten years. For we have made
big economic and social changes in Australia to ensure our economic future
and to change from an inward looking country to an outward looking confident
society going out to trade with the rest of the world.
It has been our lot, as Labor people, as a Labor Government with now eleven
years in office to fashion Australia in an image of the Labor Party. Modern,
progressive, caring, to become a country which is economically strong and
robust, and efficient and dynamic, and which at the same time is socially
cohesive. In many respects the White Paper which I had the privilege of
announcing a week ago said it all, it was a declaration that division and
exclusivity was not for Australia. That we were not going to bust our
traditions in favour of a dog eat dog society, of a prosperous majority, with an
underclass of people to maintain it, of a low wage, low productivity culture,
with an army of working poor never freed of the tyranny of poverty and debt.
And, I made this point a week ago in the House of Representatives, for those
people on the conservative side of politics who believe the only solution is to
push labour rates down for those who are low paid, or those at the bottom
end of the work force, or indeed for even those in the middle of the workforce,
And I made the point, there is not any distinction in social terms between
someone who is nominally employed on a most meagre wage, who lives
below the poverty line, who permanently lives in debt, than someone who is
nominally unemployed receiving unemployment benefit. Because that is not
the sort of society we want.
We don't want an army of working poor in Australia. We want Australia to be
a high wage, high productivity society. Built on education, built on skills, built
on research and development, built ' on product innovation, built on access to
international markets, with pride in ourselves and what we produce. That is
the sort of society we want. We don't want to go for the low paid jobs, the
jobs which Australian's have now changed themselves and their country over
a decade to escape to a higher standard of living and better levels of
employment. So, the White Paper is a land mark in our development, not just
for what it does, but for the beacon it lights which says, " this is the way that
Australia is going". It is very much a declaration of where we are. And, we
came to this fork in the road in 1993 when the Coalition argued the case for
the economic rationalists, hard lined, dog-eat-dog case, and we argued the
case for social inclusion and social cohesiveness and economic progress
based on the common effort of the whole of the Australian nation. And, we
believe and we state, we declare, that when we have come to that fork with a
decision that people made in 1993, that this is the way that Australia is going
to go. That we have marked ourselves out as a country that will not take the
underclass route, that will not say to half a million people, " sorry you missed
out, too bad, bad luck". We don't believe that we can maintain the traditions
of egalitarianism and fairness if we say to those people, sorry you are the
buffer at the end of the station. You are the people that take the brunt of the
load of economic change, while the rest of us toddle off into employment and
to prosperity. 
Now, that has got to be a conscious decision. The country has got to get up
and say, no, we are not going down the Thatcher path. We are not going to
have the working poor, as there was in Reagan's America. We are not
having it. And the White Paper said, " No! Not for Labor and not for
Australia". So, our creed has to be economic change always changing economic
strength, social unity, fairness and a premium on human happiness, human
respect and human regard. And the day we move off those things is the day
that we forsake the great traditions of this country and the great traditions of
the Labor Party. So, the White Paper is no surprise it is simply an articulation
of those things, at a time when we have seen economic stress turn 350,000
people who have been unemployed for one year or more into that part of the
labour market where there is no demand for them. And, that is why we have
made the change. But, one of the important things is we have done all this,
this huge package which is not just novel in Australian terms, but novel in
world terms, we have done all this within a disciplined fiscal framework. A
Budget which sits with the best in the world.
So, let there be no doubt that Labor in this Epoch keeps a first class set of
books. The first Budget surplus is now history, and now a Budget to
consolidate the recovery. And, that is the thing that always gets under the
skin of the Torys. That Labor can run the show. And, what did the Budget
reveal? As I said, a Budget to consolidate the recovery, and some recovery,
per cent GDP growth, the fastest of any substantial western world
economy, two and a quarter per cent inflation, 3 per cent employment growth
or just under a quarter of a million extra jobs, and a deficit of under 1 per cent
of GDP by 1996-97 as low as any other country in the world outside of West
Germany.
And the Liberals and the National Party, they could have spat chips. As
Ralph Willis was reading the forecast out, " growth and low inflation", the
heads slumped down, and they thought it would all be theirs. The same John
Hewson who was predicting a double dip recession, and a depression, and a
currency crisis in the course of the election campaign, wanted to be now out
there claiming Labor's work as his own. And, could you imagine it? If it was
a Liberal Treasurer standing up there claiming 4.5 per cent GDP growth, two
and a quarter per cent inflation, 3 per cent employment growth and the deficit
coming down to under 1 per cent GDP. They would have been, honestly,
they would have been casting little gilt statues to them in some of these
business organisations. You can imagine the claims, you know, the role that
Dr Hewson would have played in taking the accolades for this. But, what was
he left to debate? The difference between 4 per cent and 4.5 per cent. That
was the big debate on Budget night, 4 per cent or 4.5 per cent. With the
western world growth average at 1 per cent, at one, and up to 4.5 per cent,
and they are saying, " oh no, no, 4.5 per cent is too much, it should be 4 per
cent". This is the same economy that was going to be in a recession. And,
the fact is, are they bitter, are they bitter. All semblance of equanimity is 
gone, for a while you see, after we had won a few elections, well, you know,
the born to rule gang, they were out of office and out of sorts. But a couple of
parliaments regrouping that see five election losses on the trot, five election
wins for Labor on the trot and all the fun has gone out of it.
All semblance of equanimity is gone whatsoever. And there it was last year,
where we beat them fair and square in a national election where they had
their best funded campaign ever, where they articulated with massive media
coverage their program... we won the election, we beat them
overwhelmingly, we brought in our Budget as the elected government and
they said, " All Labor governments are illegitimate, this Budget is our
business," and they went on then to lead us a merry dance in the Senate.
Not within a year of the government taking office. Now, this year our White
Paper and Budget are met with a scowling reassertion of the principles of
Fightback!. After, it got too much for them, the general support of the
business community, of the media, of the public, in the end rather than
saying, " Well, OK, it's not a bad budget and they're good outcomes and let's
fashion a policy around no, no, they went back to saying, " Look, hang
on, we are reasserting the principles of Fightback!." The sort of, sullen
contempt came out and out came the old policy.
So, two weeks ago at the retreat it was all social inclusion. Fightback! was
dead and buried. Well, inclusion lasted just about two weeks. Now, this
week, it's back to what they do best exclusion. Exclusive. See, they
always regard themselves as exclusive and their supporters as exclusive, so
the whole notion of inclusion is alien to them. It's only the Labor party that
believes in inclusion. And, so, they were deciding I said John Hewson
couldn't have been more obvious if he put on a toupee and a moustache
and he was out there talking about inclusion, well it lasted two weeks when
Peter Reith blew the whistle on them on the weekend and he said
," Fightback! was as good a package after the election just as it was a good
package before the election." Oh, it was a terrific package, Peter, terrific
package. But there was more.... he said, " Fightback! should form the
framework of the Opposition's next election policy." And, yesterday, Dr
Hewson agreed with him. He said, this is Hewson, he said, " An awful lot of
what we've said in health, family assistance, the aged, veterans, immigration,
you name it," he said, " will go forward in a refined form to the next election.
Well, presumably they're the same veterans Dr Hewson said were beneath
his abilities, the same immigration that led him to say multicultural ism was
absolutely a fundamental mistake.
But, he's returning to Fightback! Like Wiley C. Coyote, he's returning to the
scene of the accident. He said, " The essential philosophy of Fightback! has
to be preserved" like the coyote waiting for the anvil to drop from the sky.
But, they are an unhappy lot, these days, our opponents. No, they are no,
they are an unhappy lot. They've got positively no regard for one another.
And, we saw over the weekend Hewson and Peacock reported as referring to
Howard as ' The Rodent' and Kennett referring to Costello as, ' Dog'. Not ' The
Dog', just plain, ' Dog'. And, of course, Bronwyn, who enjoys almost universal 
contempt in the party, well she's had a rough couple of weeks and after we'd
presented the White Paper I was cruising down the corridor of my office and I
heard this great roar of laughter come from the office... and I put my head in
just as the camera was panning away from Bronwyn's press conference.
There she was talking to the camera, all by herself. You know, how the
budgie talks to itself in the mirror. There she was, up, talking to herself.
Oh no, well you laugh.... John Hewson was up there yesterday at his family
conference and I always remember something Jack Lang said to me, and of
course whenever I mention Jack Lang they always hate it, because they hate
the memory of Lang, you know.., he said to me, " Look, I'll tell you this, Paul,
never be worried about the skyrockets of politics. At first a shower of sparks
and then a dead stick falls to earth." And I thought, in fact, the fireworks
analogy fits this lot well. And some of you are old enough to remember
cracker night... and I've seen this bunch sitting on the front bench, crackers,
as crackers, with Hewson the skyrocket and Howard, Howard always such
promise. He always reminded me of that thing called the flower pot. Now, I
don't know if any of you remember the flower pot but that was the one where
it always promised a dazzling performance. And you'd light it up and it had
multi-colours and it did a show for you but, often, when you lit it up it went
fffftt, you know, a bit of a spark.... and there was a bit of a show and then
there'd be a bit more and a bit more, then, finally, it fell away to nothing. And
that's really, basically, very typical of his contribution.
Then there's McLachlan, our establishment friend, who was supposed to
have come to Canberra and really gone off with a big bang. I always think of
him as the bunger, you know, the big red bungers... The strong silent type
capable of the big bang, you light it up, everyone stands back and then the
wick sort of goes down.., and everyone's waiting... and they keep on waiting...
and that's it, it doesn't go off. And then there's Bronwyn, she reminds me of
the catherine wheel. We used to nail them to the fence and they'd go off and
they'd take off, spreadeagle the kids, burn the dog, run up a tree and then
fizzle out going round in circles. So, that's them. Bitter, burnt out and
accident prone.
Nevertheless, we can never be complacent about them. And we won't be.
Because, as Mike said and as Wayne alluded to, we have a generational
change on our hands. Our party, our great party, has been in office now over
a decade, federally and we are seeing a great generational change and a
great new set of challenges. And, even if the Coalition is not up to it, even if
they don't understand, even if they've learned nothing from their hard hearted
cynical politics that doesn't deflect us from our challenge and the challenge to
rejuvenate and to change as we go. And the enthusiasm, I think it's worth
saying, that the enthusiasm of our Cabinet has got to be seen to be believed.
The pride in the work, the commitment of people to the joint effort, the group
effort, and the zing at meetings of the Cabinet and the committees is a
tremendous reminder of the capacity of the Labor party to rise to the
occasion. And I look at people like the Attorney General here from
Queensland, Michael Lavarch, 31, the Attorney General, 31. You know, 
Michael Lee, 35, holding down that huge job in the Arts and Communications,
John Faulkner, all these new people have just joined the Cabinet recently.
John Faulkner, Laurie Brereton, Carmen Lawrence, Peter Baldwin, Bob
McMullan a tremendous group of new participants in the Cabinet process
and mixed with the experience of people who've distinguished themselves
over the years like Ralph Willis is doing now, as Treasurer, Kim Beazley,
Gareth Evans, Brian Howe, Simon Crean, Robert Ray, Peter Cook, Nick
Bolkus and Bob Collins. In terms of that mix of experience and commitment
and the new members with so much promise and hope and generosity, then
Labor is in for a very good time of being able to meet the challenges which
come along. And that, coupled with the tremendous competence of our
backbench and our ministry.
And, I think one of the things I'd like to report to you is that I think that we are
seeing, now, a corporatism and an understanding in our caucus to measure
up to the task of managing this recovery and taking on the new challenges in
a way I saw it shaping up in the 1983-84 caucus which carried us right
through the 1980s. So, this is a tremendously good thing for the country, for
our party and for the government. It is a tremendously good thing to see not
just a competent Cabinet and a competent Ministry but another group of
people who can fill their positions and who are prepared to commit
themselves to the work of the caucus and to the backbench, in a unified team
effort. I've never seen more policy unity in Canberra than now, I've never
seen a greater pulling together, I've never seen Labor any better than it is at
this time. And, this is a great thing.
But, we have challenges and Wayne mentioned a couple of them in his
opening remarks. One of them is, of course, the Asia-Pacific. We've got to
create structures not just in Australia but create structures for Australia,
outside of Australia. And we're doing this in bilateral relationships with
countries, we're doing it in APEC which is a trans Asian-Pacific body, we're
doing it in the development of the ASEAN regional forum, we're doing it right
around the world. But, we're doing it most particularly in this part of the world
and that job will always need constant work, it will always need constant
attention. And, we're going to be giving it that work and constant attention.
The other great change we embarked on in the last Parliament and this one
is enterprise bargaining in the workplace: the hardest, deepest microeconomic
reform in the country and of course, it's always left to the Labor
government to do it. The Liberals now bemoan the centralised wage fixing
system for its rigidities but it sat there all through their political history all
through the period of their governments. And, in a party which is aligned to
organised labour, to the trade unions, as the Labor party has, is the party
which always finds these things difficult to do, we as always, have done it.
When they've shirked it, we have done it and the challenge now is to make
sure that the culture of productivity, low inflation and better wages and profits
is exploited by the spread of enterprise agreements and enterprise flexibility
across the economy over the course of this recovery. And, as we see that
change home and it will take some seeing but as we see it home we will 
have broken the back of the last really deep and intractable microeconomic
area of the economy. So, after the big macro reforms of the eighties and
many of the micro reforms, in telecommunications, in land transport, in
shipping, in the airlines, we're now spiriting this change home. And, that's
one which we will be taking the challenge on in the course of the parliament.
The microeconomic reformagenda is never complete in any country that
is, all these little parts of the private economy and the public economy which
need to be honed up and lifted in efficiency. And, I'm very pleased to say that
I welcomed again, at Council of Australian Governments ( COAG), Wayne's
support for change at the micro level in respect of state authorities as the
Commonwealth and states have, together, got to reform their own authorities,
both tiers of government, to try and make this microeconomic reform a more
successful one. So, whether it is in wharf authorities or grain handling or any
of the other the production of electricity or gas or water this is another
area of great national endeavour which will, again, test our abilities.
Regional development is another. We have said that we want this to be a
recovery for everybody and, to bring the regions of Australia into it. So
that those people who live in provincial cities and of course this is the most
decentralised of all of the Australian states with many provincial and regional
cities and towns accross the state we want them to be part of the national
recovery and the national economy. And, we've done things in Working
Nation, in the White Paper, to make sure that we support the leaders of
regional Australia who want to do new and good things for their communities
and we give them that strategic assistance they will need to be able to do it.
And put in their hands some of the financing instruments which they might
use to pull their regions along. So, that remains a challenge for us.
Cultural policy tying up the threads of our national life, is another. And
we'll be releasing our cultural policy statement later in the year. But, this is
an important thing about Australia's identity which Wayne mentioned earlier,
about how we see ourselves and about how we see all the threads of our
economic and social lives becoming part of our culture and our cultural life,
perhaps, making it clear what sort of complexion it places on Australia as a
society and as a country. And then, of course the republic. Because it is not
just enough to say it's inevitable, if we believe in it, we have to do it. And,
again, like the White Paper, this will depend on the whole country because
this is something which has got to be done with understanding, where people
know what they're doing, know its value, see its cultural significance and see
its economic and social significance and it's something which the
Australian people will need to understand and, of course, support by
referendum. So, it's got to be done with the whole country.
All of these things have got to be done with the country, all of those things I
mentioned: the Asia-Pacific, enterprise bargaining, microeconomic reform,
regional development, cultural policy, our identity, the republic, these are part
of the forward challenges facing the government, facing Australia, facing all
of us as a people and as a country. So, I am delighted with the opportunity to 
talk about these things here in Brisbane at the same place that I started
articulating the policy which was the beginning Labor's return to the election
in 1993. And, maybe it's entirely apt that when Wayne approached me and
said why don't we have a day together in Queensland talking about some of
these major issues, including a dinner for the " true believers", the faithful, that
I thought, well, this has been nothing but a good omen for me and, I hope, for
the government. So, I hope that with the support of you people in the
Queensland Labor Party we'll be able to chart a course forward, not worry
about our opponents, leave them in our wake and go on to make the changes
which will make this a great and powerful, but really decent and nice, place
live.
The Queensland Labor party is a no nonsense show that has always kept
closely in touch with the community. It's not middle-classed out of existence.
It's a show which has that common touch and the earthiness which has given
it great strength and we can see this in the Queensland Government. I
think that this is one of the states where Labor has seats to win and will be a
key state in returning the federal Labor Government in the next election. So,
thanks for having me back on this occasion, it's a long way from the election
now but we've got a lot to do yet. And, as we do it I hope you people of the
Labor party in Queensland can be proud of this government, proud of what
we stand for, but, as important as that, know one thing, that we'll all stand
together Commonwealth Labor Government, Queensland Labor
Government, Paul Keating and Wayne Goss, our ministers, our party friends
and supporters, all of us, together. Thank you.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ZIONIST FEDERATION OF AUSTRALIA
36TH BIENNIAL CONFERENCE
HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE
28 MAY 1994
I am always grateful to be invited to speak to the biennial meeting of the
Zionist Federation of Australia.
This is the third time I have had the opportunity to address you. As a record,
it doesn't go near matching Mark Leibler's but it is enough to make me feel at
home here.
It is particularly good to be talking to you this year, when so many of the
Federation's long-standing goals seem closer to realisation, and when the
signs for a more peaceful and secure future in the Middle East appear better
than they have for years.
The changes in the world since the end of the Cold War have sometimes
startled even the most hardened sceptic.
What seemed impossible is now familiar the democratic revolutions in
Eastern Europe and Russia; the pace of economic growth in China and
Vietnam as they have dropped the old tenets of central planning; the
progress towards settlement of apparently intractable conflicts in regions such
as Cambodia.
And most recently, of course, we have seen Nelson Mandela's historic
election as President of South Africa.
None of these changes has been accomplished without difficulty. All of them
generate new sets of problems.
But the astonishing thing, when you look back ten years, is that they have
happened. So it is with the Middle East. 
Mark Leibler uses the right phrase In his President's Report to you this year
when he says that, with the Madrid Peace Conference in October 1991, the
Middle East entered a new epoch.
The lessons of history and the lessons of history in the Middle East more
than elsewhere are that we would be wise to temper our optimism with
realistic caution.
And for the key participants, the stakes are so high that prudence is always
called for.
However, with agreement on the Declaration of Principles between Israel and
the PLO on 13 September last year, an~ d the signing of the agreement for
autonomy in Gaza and Jericho, it is possible to have expectations, as well as
hope, for a more peaceful future in the region.
As I said in Parliament on 5 May, Australia warmly welcomed the autonomy
agreement. It is a real milestone in the quest for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East
and a tribute to the leadership of Prime Minister Rabin and PLO
C hairman Arafat, who held their nerve in the face of terrorist attacks by
violent opponents determined to disrupt the process.
Anybody looking for a reason to break off the negotiations would have found
many. It was no time for faint hearts.
The result is also, of course, a tribute to the untiring work of other
peacemakers, like Shimon Peres.
Now we look to the next stages of the process to agreements which will
bring a lasting peace with Israel's neighbours, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon,
and to the successful completion of the next round of Palestinian autonomy
negotiations.
With same contrast, Australia's international Interests lie overwhelmingly in
the Asia-Pacific region. That is where we do three-quarters of our trade.
That is where our key security interests are engaged.
That is where our future lies.
But we cannot and should not ignore the Middle East. The stakes there in
both strategic and human terms are so great as to Impose their significance
on all the areas and members of the international community.
That is why the Australian Government is keen to see the cause of peace so
actively supported. 
And our help has been of the most practical kind.
It Is seen in our three-year, $ 15_-mil -lion program of assistance to economic
development in Gaza and the West Bank for such things as training, health,
sanitation and water resources.
The success of autonomy will depend heavily on whether these basic
services can be delivered.
It is seen in our participation In the working groups on Arms Control and
Regional Security and on Water Resources, which have been ' set up as part
of the peace process.
It is seen in our military commitment to the Sinai MFO, now under Australian
command, which helps maintain confidence on the border between Israel and
Egypt.
And, not least, it is seen In the work of individual Australians and Australian
non-government organisations who have dedicated themselves to improving
conditions on the ground for ordinary citizens.
It is a welcome truth and a reflection of the changes at work in the region
that the views of the Jewish community and the Australian Government on
issues facing the community and on the Middle East have probably never
been closer.
Nor have the views of the Australian and Israeli Governments.
But even when in the past we have disagreed with particular policies of
individual Israeli Governments, we have never wavered and will never
waver from our commitment to Israel's right to exist within secure and
recognised borders.
And, beyond that familiar phrase, we will never waver from a deeper
conviction that the international community Is a better place, a more decent
place, for the contribution Israel has made and will yet make.
That is why we have been so willing to work to ensure Israel's full
engagement in the mainstream of International activity.
It is why we worked so hard with Israel to rescind the odious United Nations
resolution 3379, which equated Zionism with racism. We voted against its
adoption in 1975, and we co-sponsored its rescission in 1991.
It Is why we have supported Israel's efforts to broaden its diplomatic ties in
the Asia-Pacific. 
It Is why we continue to be active In making representations to the Syrian
Government regarding the welfare of Jews in Syria.
It Is why we urge Arab governments to lift their anachronistic and
counterproductive economic boycott of Israel.
Uke any strong relationship, our friendship with Israel is given weight and
value by the ties which exist beyond the actions of Governments, between
the people of our two countries.
The Zionist Federation of Australia has been an essential element of this
facet of our relationship, of course.
I want to note here the major role which Mark Leibler and the Federation
played in keeping the problem of UN Resolution 3379 at the forefront of
public debate in Australia and before the Australian Parliament where both
Houses voted unanimously in favour of the efforts to rescind the resolution.
Similarly, your Federation has done important work in sensitising Australian
opinion to the injustice of the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
But a lot of the Federation's most Important work has been in relation to our
own society.
On these questions, our views are close.
For this Government, the promotion of tolerance and respect for cultural and
religious differences, and a decent concern for the other members of this
diverse society, is at the core of our view of what It means to be Australian.
The Government continues to believe in the importance of involving
community groups in the development of policies.
Some of you will know that the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,
Senator Bolkus, will be appointing in the near future a Multicultural Advisory
Council. Helene Teichrnann will be well aware of this, because I was
delighted to hear that she has accepted an invitation to be a member.
The Council will advise the Government on specific matters such as the
cultural diversity dimensions of the Centenary of Federation and the Sydney
2000 Olympics, as well as on the means of fostering greater debate and
better understanding about Australia's cultural diversity.
I should note, in speaking of Senator Bolkus, that this Government continues
to regard Immigration and Ethnic Affairs as sufficiently Important to warrant
the attention of a senior Cabinet Minister. 
We are preparing to take a further step to safeguard our record of tolerance
with the introduction shortly of nationai legislation on racial vilification.
The Australian concept of tolerance embraces freedom of opinion and
freedom of expression. These are fundamental to our sense of ourselves.
However, some forms of expression are sufficiently offensive to be intolerable
in a decent society.
This was brought home to me when I opened the Children of the Holocaust
exhibition at the Australian War Memorial in February. The suggestionby
some that the Holocaust never happened fosters incipient racism and, in the
eyes of the Australian community, is obnoxious.
Mnother example was the jailing of people for a series of violent attacks in
Perth inspired on racial grounds.
While most Australians are offended by the racial aspect of those crimes, the
perpetrators were jailed under laws which do not recognise that aspect of
their behaviour.
Racial vilification and racial violence are offensive to the Australian
community. Our laws must reflect that.
The racial vilification laws will dissuade those who seek to incite violence and
hatred against particular groups defined by ethnic origin.
The existence of a legal prohibition should of itself persuade most of the
intolerant to think twice before parading their prejudices.
It will ensure that those invited to publish racist slurs have a legal ground for
refusing. But there will still be breaches of the law, and the Cabinet is considering how
they will be dealt with.
We are not interested in elevating racists to the status of martyrs.
But the vicious and the reckless who would attack Individual groups must be
made to know that they are assaulting the values of the entire community and
that there is a price to pay.
The very existence of such a law is a public and collective statement by the
community that there are types of behaviour it will not tolerate.
By taking such a step we will reassert the value our community places on
tolerance and respect. 
For the past ten years, Mark Leibler has been at the forefront of the Zionist
Federation of Australia's efforts to promote the cause of closer ties between
Australia and Israel, and the aspirations of the Jewish community in Australia.
I first met Mark about eight years ago, talking not about the Federation or
about Israel, but about taxation reform in Australia The work we were
engaged in then and since was not quite as difficult as reconciling the
interests of Israelis and Arabs, but it sometimes seemed the views of the
participants were just as resistant to change.
Ten years is a long time at the top of an organisation like this.
It is a tribute to Mark's skill and his commitment that the Federation has
remained throughout that period so lively and influential an organisation. If
the Government has not always agreed with Mark and the Federation, noone
should ever think it was because your President and his team failed to
carry your views forcefully even relentlessly to us in Canberra.
So I want to add my voice to all those congratulating him.
The contribution he has made over that decade has not been simply to the
Federation and the Jewish community. It has been a much broader
contribution to public debate in Australia about some of the key issues
affecting the nature of this society.
It Is a contribution he can be proud of, and for which we are all grateful. We
look forward to just as productive a relationship with his successor, and to our
continuing dialogue with the Zionist Federation of Australia. 



' or, S I. 4.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THB PRIM M[ NISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP AT
THE AIR FORCES* NORIAL RUIIYME SATURDAY, 4 JUNE
1994 We have come to Runnymede on the fiftieth anniversary of
D-Day to pay tribute to some of tWose who gave their
rives in defence of liberty.
We honour all those whose memory is preserved here.
Never were men braver or more selfless. They gave their
lives so that we might enjoy freedom.
We honour in particular our countrymen: those Australians
who left their homes and all they loved to cross the
world and fight in a war against evil.
Their deeds bestowed great honour on Australia, indelible
honour on themselves.
We should tell our children what this var concerned. Why
Australians came to right alongside the British, the
Americans and the Canadians. Why a generation of
Australians believed freedom was worth dying for. Their
spirit can nourish the life of a nation.
Shortly before I left Canberra my office received a
letter from an Australian, Xr Martin Pirrie, whose
father's brother commanded a small coastal craft offt the
coast of Normandy on D Day. It was his 24th birthday. In
support of the Canadians he went within range of the
enemy's guns and, with others of his crew, was killed.
His brother learned of the event while serving with the
Australian infantry in New Guinea. Kr Pirrie wrote:
I cannot help but feel that in many ways young
Richard typified the spirit of those Australians who
fought and died in the war and reflected the values
and spirit of the country they gave their lives for
in a foreign land.
it is true. It is why we remember them wherever they
served. (; 5199 
2
It is appropriate on the eve of D-Day's anniversary that
we pay tribute to all the Australians who served in
European campaigns: those who fought against the odds in
Greece and Crete; those who spent precious years of their
lives in prison camps in Europe; those who served in the
forces of other allied nations; those who fought and died
in the crucial war at sea.
In Australia the memory of every one of them who died is
held sacred: their names are recorded on the walls of the
Australian War Memorial with the 100,000 others who made
the supreme sacrifice for their country.
The names of 1397 Australians more than a quarter of
all our airmen killed in Europe in World War 11 are
inscribed here at Runnymnede. They number among the
eighteen thousand Au4stralian servicemen and women with no
known grave.
The Tomb of the Unknown Australian Soldier is for them.
The principles for which Australians fought in Europe are
universal ones. Liberty, justice and human decency do not
know the boundaries of nations or cultures, any more than
courage and sacrifice know them.
So it is right that they should be honoured here among
those from other countries with whom they fought and died
in common cause.
And it is right that they should be honoured in the
country from which came the most stalwart resistance to
tyranny. For Britain embodied the courage democracy
needed. Britain inspired the tree world and those whose
freedom had been taken from them. There can be no doubt
she inspired those whose names are recorded here.
In the course of the war two Australian Prime Ministers,
Robert Menzies and John Curtin, came to Britain and were
moved by her example.
John Curtin visited shortly before D-Day. When he
returned to Australia, he reminded the Parliament of the
epic dimensions of the British effort. It is worth our
being reminded now.
" They have thwarted an invasion by a great and powerful
continental foe" he said.
At the risk of their local defence they have
conducted campaigns overseas, and are at present
engaged in the greatest of all. They have
maintained command of the sea over a large part of
the globe. They have conducted an air offensive in
Europe. They have produced immense quantities of
munitions and supplies not only for their own
requirements, but for other-members of the United
Nations.
( f0 
4 3
Fifty years later the admiration John Curtin expressed
lives on. It is true that in fundamental ways our future
is less closely intertwined with Britain's than our past.
But whatever different paths we take the history we share
the story we share goes with us. The battles we
fought together will be remembered. The men and women
who fought them will be remembered. And Britain's heroic
defence of freedom will never be forgotten.
Nor shall the Australian airmen of this memorial be
forgotten.
Twenty thousand Australian aircrew served in Bomber
Command 3486 were killed, a death rate to compare with
that on the Western Front in World War I.
They were young men. They knew how high the risks were.
Rollo Kingsford-Smith commanded No 463 RAAF Lancaster
Squadron. The Squadron had an operational aircrew of
about 240, yet in the 18 months after November 1943, 546
were killed or posted as missing in action.
Mr Kingsford-Smith wrote to se a few weeks ago:
Young inexperienced crews coming into my Squadron
knew their death was almost certain, yet their
morale was always high and they fought the Germans
and the weather with equal determination. Other
Australian squadrons and Australians in RAF
squadrons would tell a similar story.
These Australians served their
fought at Gallipoli and on the
They fought in that tradition.
lives was an immeasurable loss
immeasurable loss to Australia. country as those who
Western Front had served.
The loss of their young
to their loved ones an
But it can never be doubted that they fought in a great
cause.
Mr Kingsford-Smith tells me that " many next-of-kin of
those Air Force men feel Australia has forgotten then.."
From today let there be no doubt that we will always
remember them.
RUNNYMEDE 4 JUNE 1994 G; 0I 



I I T1fhin aeqi
I cal
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING HP
TYPHOON MEMORIAL, NOYERS BOCAGE, FRANCE
6 JUNE 1994
MUBARGO: ll. OOPM AEST
This is a monument to the good which unites the people of
many nations with the people of France. It unites the
Australian people with the people of France.
It is not the only such monument.
The Australian airmen of World War II whose sacrifice is
commemorated at Noyers Bocage followed that heroic
generation of whom more than forty thousand lie buried in
the fields of France.
By their suffering and sacrifice, their courage and
character, that earlier generation gave birth to a legend
which still inspires and unites Australians.
As brave and selfless as any who came before them, as
devoted to the cause of freedom, as faithful to their
ideals, as full of hope, the Australians commemorated
here lived by that legend and died by it.
Like those who fought at Gallipoli and on the Somme, they
went into battle knowing that death was more than
possible it was likely. And more likely each
succeeding time.
Today in Noyers Bocage we honour the airmen of all
nations who fought and died in the strug-g to liberate
Europe in World War II.
And, because we are Australian, we honour our countrymen
especially. We honour those who left the place and the
people they loved and crossed the world to defend freedom
and advance the cause of justice.
Among those to whom we pay tribute today is Pilot Officer
Don Mason, whose Typhoon was shot down on the eighteenth
of June 1944 and whose aircraft and remains were not
discovered until late 1992. It was this discovery which
brought about Australia's association with the Typhoon
Pilot Monument.
W(-2 Aut Soc Thc haz
And hon vai our We
Nor peo corn nca
goo ocei I ki
liv
havw pool The'
inat ri2) the,
We to as for
Our the
and That val fro
liv 1
it
the sac and 
There is a tnreac In AUULLljQ'a hintory whioh has always
linked us to France. What the French called liberty,
equality and fraternity Australians were inclined to
call "' mateship" and the " fair go" for all.
Australians had in mind the same ideal of a free and fair
society. A better place for all men and women.
Those commemorated here, all those who flew those
hazardous missions, know the value of these things.
And their sacrifice made us know them better. When we
honour their memory, when we say they did not die in
vain, we mean that we know they made our freedom safe and
our faith the stronger.
We mean that we will never forget.
Nor can we forget today the trials endured by the French
people. The people of Normandy the people of this
community endured loss and devastation on a terrible
scale. They endured what we in Australia have had the
good fortune never to endure for we have never suffered
occupation and tyranny.
I know that the airmen who fought this war those who
lived and those who died would want it known that we
have not forgotten the support they received from the
people of France.
They would want it known that their own courage was
matched by the French Resistance; by the people who
risked their lives to protect them and help then find
their way to safety and freedom on the ground.
We see this monument to the Typhoon Pilots as a monument
to the courage of the French people as well. We see it
as a memorial to their resilience, and to their desire
for peace.
Our two countries are f ar apart in so many ways. But in
the events of fifty years ago common values were proved
and a story in common was written.
That is the reason for this memorial. It enshrines those
val~ ee and the story of a generation* who so believed in
freedom and justice they were prepared to lay down their
lives. It honours their memory and tolls new generations that
the peace and freedom we now enjoy came by their
sacrifice. It tells us that we must inherit their faith
and pass it on to our children. G3727 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
CIVIC RECEPTION, NOYERS-BOCAGE, NORMANDY, FRANCE
MONDAY 6 JUNE, 1994
Distinguished guests, citizens of Noyers-Bocage and veterans of the second
world war, from Australia.
I think we Australians feel proud to be among you and I'm delighted that so
many of us could be with you today. As I was moving around the crowd of
course, the faces all looked the same I didn't know who was Australian and
who was French. And, I think it is nice for the veterans to come back to meet
the community that they defended when they could never have met them, like
this, at the time. Because, it has to be real... one doesn't fight for something
and die for something which is ephemeral or imaginary and that which is real
is, of course, the kinship between Australia and France. So, for the families
who lost their sons and daughters, in some cases in this part of the
world, to hear the expression of heartfelt thanks from President Mitterrand
today is, I think, a very heartfelt, confident and reassuring thing.
When you see the village pictures at the front door you see how much
destruction there was here and how vicious and evil the Nazis were... and
entrenched and how hard they were to remove. But, the French understand
liberty and they understand democracy, as we Australians do; true
democracy, deep democracy. And, that is why we could never live, any of us,
under the tyranny of fascists like Hitler. So, these are lessons that we all
have learned expensively, some more expensively than others. This all
happened the year I was born. Fifty years later I want to remember and I
want all Australians to remember. And, Mr Mayor, we are in your debt when
your citizens remember, too.
So, let's agree that there is a great friendship between Australians and the
people of France. Indeed, between the people of France and all the people
who fought here. Let us agree that there is a kinship which extends across
countries, across borders and across -cultures. So, today, we again celebrate
our freedom and our friendship and faith in one another. And thank you for
being such gracious hosts to us, thank you for coming in such numbers to see 
my countrymen. We're delighted to be among you, we thank you, Mr Mayor,
for the privilege extended to us and hope that D-Day will never be forgotten.
Mr Mayor, I have a picture for you of an Australian flier shot down here. Pilot
Officer Mason who was reburied, as I said, in 1992. And, so in 20 or 30 or
years from now someone will look at the picture and understand what it was
all about.
Thank you very much, indeed.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPKECBY TE PRflIE MINISTR THE HON PJ KEATING MPl
AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY, PARIS 8 JUNE 1994
Thank you for inviting me to open this exhibition of
works by the women of Utopia.
I will pretend to no expertise in these works of art:
but I will say this.
The art and culture of indigenous Australians is a
wellspring of the national culture, and the more we make
it so the richer will we all be.
Increasingly, I think, we respond to Aboriginal art and
music and iconography, not out of curiosity, but out of
recognition. However limited our understanding of their meaning, we
see something in these paintings which is familiar to us
whether it is the colours, or the abstracted landscape,
or simply the " abrignalitya or RAustralianness" of the
themes and design.
A change has come about in our response to Aboriginal art
and I think that means our hearts and minds are opening
up to the place and the people. I think it means that we
are learning.
In a sense that is what is meant by " reconciliation" of
the indigenous people with other Ausltii-aians.-
It means not just making amends for past wrongs, great as
the wrongs have been.
Nor is it just a matter of compensation, though
compensation is certainly due.
Reconciliation means recognising how much we have to give
each other.
It is more than the giving and receiving of material aid
important as that is. it is more than the goods of our
culture in exchange for the destruction of theirs. U 762 
I think we will know we are making progress when our
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australians alike find pre
themselves thinking less about what can be given
Aboriginal Australians, and more about what they can give That
US. a cc
tha.
This exhibition might help to get us thinking along these Aboz
lines. it
These works of art by the women of Utopia shape our image hel;
and understanding of the Australian landscape and Inte
remind us how much they have always been shaped by
Aboriginal culture. I mi
ever
They tell US something about who we are and where we f it UtOF
in the story of the continent. priv Crea
They are a reminder that it is important for AUJ of us,
to have a story. This
Holm
And from that we might reach the conclusion that all our Aust
stories will be richer if we bring them together. Aust
We non-Aboriginal Australians have a lot to learn from Fina.
the Aboriginal story which is inseparable from the land weale
itself. noti
It has taken us a long while to read the lesson in that, anot
but I believe we are reading it now. it i
There is also a contemporary lesson for us in the way
Aboriginal people pass on their stories and the lessons
they contain from generation to generation. Australian
society generally will be stronger if we do the same.
in turn, the lesson is that the best thing we can return
Aboriginal Australians is a connection with the land.
At one level, this exhibition is a testament to the
resilience of Aboriginal culture a reminder that for
all-the destrui-ci6 Eukopeans have wrought on it, their
story and their art is stronger.
it is therefore a reminder of just how important culture
is in the scheme of all things and why governments and
communities must make it a central concern.
It is all the more ' appropriate I suppose that we should
be reminded of this in Paris.
At another level, the exhibition simply reminds us that
at Utopia we have some great artists producing images of
intriguing beauty and power.
Either way, we are reminded of the heritage late
twentieth century Australia has been delivered. It is a
living heritage of immense benefit to our culture and to 
our future, and we have a great responsibility to
preserve and nurture it.
Five That is why the late Robert Holmes a Court, Jane -t Holmes
a Court, and the Holms-a Court Foundation deiserve our
~ 1inksforthe support and encouragement th ey have given
ese Aboriginal art and artists over the years.
It is also why I am proud that the Australian Government
age helped to bring this exhibition to France through the
International Cultural Relations program.
I might also say I take a little extra pleasure this
it Uetveonpiian'g s fgrroema tr eacratlilsitnsg, thEamti lyt woK nqyweaarrsr eyaeg, o aIn dm eth ado net heof
privilege of presenting her with an Australian Government
Creative Fellowship.
This evening I should also thank the Curator of the
ur HAoulsmtersa liaa nC ouArmtb asCsoaldloerc; t ioann, d ALnynne TuBirto, d y; t heA laDni reBcrotwonr, oft hethe
Australia France Foundation here in Paris.
d Fwienlaclolmye, inI wpoaurltdi culliaker tNoa nctyh anPke tyyoaur rea llw hof ora t cvoemriyn g, s hoarntd
notice has made an epic trip from one artistic capital to
another. it is now my pleasure to declare this exhibition open. U 7~; 



* 1 tToh, su
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRINE IINISTER, THE RON P J KEA3rNG xP
FRDICH BUSINESS COINXNITY LUNCH, PARIS, WEDNESDAY S JUNE
Thank you very much for coming. It is gratifying to see
so many senior business figures who have taken time off
from their heavy commitments to be here today.
I am in France because fifty years ago Australians took
part in the landings in Normandy. Australians were here
then as they had been in the First World War. It is one
of the remarkable features of our history that a
profound part of it was written on the battlefields of
France. A tragic part of it, yet a part which shaped the
Australian nation and the national character.
In fact the threads of our relationship go back much
further than the wars: they go back to the foundations of
European settlement in Australia. In 1788 as the Aritish
raised the Union Jack on the shores of Sydney Harbour, La
Perouse was anchored just offshore.
Indeed, the Australian coast from Perth to Hobart is
dotted with the names left behind by La Perouse, Baudin
and D'Entrecasteux.
The map of Australia tells the story of a scientific or
academic interest, rather than a commercial one.
I" am here today to tell you that we believe the time has
come to convert your interest to wholehearted economic
engagement. To be an Australian in the nineties is to feel present at
a definitive moment in our history. Literally definitive
the culture, including the work and business culture,
the economy, the nation's identity and international
direction are all being re-defined and newly articulated.
Australia's place in the world is being re-defined.
I believe the decade will, in time, be seen as one in
which the remnants of post-colonial ambivalence were
swept away, not with any loss to our best traditions, but
with the creation of institutions and procedures. which
reflect the great changes of recent years and are
appropriate to the reality and needs of Australia in the
twenty first century.
67 2 8 Mai fri
wi rei 101
De' th: ma( cu2 In
cai tal rej
The ou: if
aI co AU en Su
de exj us
Jul us ini an
bu th Th wol
Thi thq Thi col wil 
The old barriers to the world outside and, in particular,
to our own region the Asia-Pacific have been
substantially removed.
mass post war migration, first from Europe, and then also
from Asia, long ago broke down the old monoculture and
with it the xenophobia which, if not entirely the
reality, was certainly the image of Australia for a very
long time.
Deliberate government policies, combined with what I
think is a strong underlying tradition of tolerance have
made it surely one of most successful examples of
cultural pluralism in the world.
In the last decade the Australian economy has also been
capital conro isadudroka araaic program ot
tariff reductions.
The sum result of the chanqes in Australia has been that
we now see ourselves in a much larger mirror a mirror
which reflects the comparative advantages on which we
must build and the comparative shortcomings which we must
rectify. The same mirror also suggests that we must clearly define
ourselves. If it is true that companies need corporate identities in
a competitive world, it is probably also true of
countries; and the need is greater f or a country like
Australia which has undergone rapid change and is now
entering the new world of the Asia-Pacific.
Such an identity does not need to be invented: the
deeper understanding and the imperatives which flow from
exposure to the world will essentially articulate it for
US. Just as this exposure in the plainest possible way told
us that work place practices had to change, and
international best business practice had to be applied,
and inflation controlled, and an environment in which
business, especially export business the business of
the future could flourish.
That is what has happened. And, because in a competitive
world change never stops, it is continuing to happen.
There has been massive structural and cultural change in
the Australian economy and the results are striking.
That is why, entirely without apology, I am urging French.
companies to invest inAustralia. I can assure you it
will be good for both'of us. 67 2.9 
3
Never has the climate for investment been better.
We have the highest economic growth in the OECD. In the
last twelve months GDP increased by 5 per cent and
employment rose by over 3 per cent.
We have corporate profit share at an all time high of
just over eighteen per cent of GDP.
We have interest rates at their lowest level for twenty
years. We have inflation at around 1 per cent even less based
on the product deflators in the national accounts. And
we have it locked in by an Accord on wages with the trade
unions. We have wages increasingly linked to
improvements in productivity.
A revolution in the industrial culture has given us the
lowest level of industrial disputes for decades.
There is strong export growth. Ten years ago exports
made up no mare than 13 per cent of Australian GDP
today that figure is over 20 per cent and they are much
more diverse. The proportion of manufactures is now
equal to the proportion of agricultural product. Exports
of elaborately transformed manufactures have risen by
per cent in the past three years.
And when you see where our exports are going you see
another reason why you should invest.
if rising demand in the domestic-market is the first 1
reason, the international market is the second. ourIt
firms have demonstrated that Australia is a wonderful c
base from which to export into the booming Asia-Pacific h
markets. AW. all of us here today know, the scale of change in Asia 9
isremarkable. d
Take China.
At the present rate of growth, China's economay is e
doubling every eight years. c
While world trade grew by about So per cent between 1996 a,
and 1992, the trade of the three Chinese economies grew Ki
by 180 per cent.
But of course there is much more to Asian dynamism than a,
China. There are the rapidly growing markets of South a
East Asia, including that of Australia's nearest T
neighbour, Indonesia, and the likely new tiger, Vietnam. i
67: 30 
It is with this most dynamic region of the world that
Australia now does most of its business.
Well over half of Australia's merchandise exports go to
-East -Asian markets. Almost two-thirds of our total
exports go to Asia. Australia's trade relationship with
Japan is one of the economic sinews of the region.
In the last five years our annual average -axpor-t -growth
to the ASEAN reqion has been more than double the growth
of our total exports and the increase in our exports of
elaborately transformed manufactures has been
particularly dramatic.
more and more Australian businesses are being born of our
new Asian export culture. One-third of our exports of
elaborately transformed manufactures are coming from
small firms that have begun exporting only in the last
ten years.
These days Australian companies measure themselves
against Asian levels of productivity and competitiveness.
We have substantial advantages: a skilled multicultural
workforce, high standards of education, political
stability, an effective legal framework, well-developed
infrastructure and a continuing program of microeconomic
reform.
Australia is a leading information technology country.
We invest more of our GDP in telecommunications than
Japan, Singapore or Hong Kong.
We have more computers per head of population a third
more than our nearest rival, Singapore than any other
country in the Western Pacific, and more telephones per
head of population than anyone else in the region.
Australia is a very good place to do business, a very
good place to establish regional headquarters which is
woat many international service companies have already
done. Not only can we more than match the newly industrialised
economies of Asia in skills, productivity, stability and
certainty, investors will find that the cost of an
international telephone call, office space and housing,
are significantly lower than, say, Singapore and Hong
Kong. They will find a corporate tax rate of just 33 per cent,
a 10 per cent tax rate for Offt Shore Banking Units, and
accelerated depreciation rates for plant and equipment.
They will find that the overall tax burden in Australia
is the lowest of all OECD countries. G7 3 t
p 
They will find a lot more space to live in, air that is a
lot cleaner and the trip to the office quicker and less
stressful.
They will also find a first class universal health
system, and schools, hospitals and social services which
in general have few peers in the world.
They will find a small public sector but an effective
one. They will find a Western culture in an Asian location and
in an Asian time-zone.
In short, they will find that Australia is a very good Y
place to live and work.
In the 1980s Australia rejected the socially regressive
forms of economic rationalism in favour of structural C
reform allied to inclusive social policies. I
Last month we delivered a major statement on employment F
a comprehensive strategy for training and returning the e
long term unemployed to the workforce.
The strategy will deliver to us greater levels of social t
cohesion and justice and a more skilled and flexible
workforce. A b
We are building our economy on skills and productivityt
coupled with a sophisticated social net.
We have no intention of im~ itating the wage regimen of w
developing countries. We have proved that we can compete r
by other means and be considerably more attractive toI
overseas investors.
In other words, Australia offers a perfect springboard b
for companies wanting to take advantage of the dynamic T)
Aslan markets. al
You will be aware that Australia has taken a leading role
in building new structures in the region for trade and s
security. t
Last year I attended the first meeting of APEC countries a
in 9 -eattle., There fourteen Asia-Pacific leiders laid of
down objectives for the future. t
The aim is open regionalism regional tradeLt
liberalisation which avoids disadvantage to others.
We envisage ultimately an integrated market bringing
together the economies of Australia, ASEN, the three
Chinas, Korea, Japan and North America.
63% 8 
A market of 2 billion people, producing half the world's
output, with harmonised trade and investment rules,
harmonised standards and certification and agreed means
of settling disputes.
APEC leaders will meet again in Indonesia later this
year, lending weight to the gathering momentum of
cooperation in the region.
It must be stressed that neither APEC nor Australia has
in mind turning away from others parts of the world. We
are certainly not talking about raising barriers.
We are inextricably linked to the world economy. We
depend on an open world trading system. We unequivocally
support the multilateral system.
our increasing integration with Asia does not mean that
Europe is fading from our minds.
Far from it, we remain actively engaged with European
economies and we want to do much more.
We want to do nore with France. And the gathering here
today rather suggests that we are and that we will.
At present only 7 per cent of exports from the fourth
biggest economy in the world go to East Asia. I know
that Monsieur Longuet wants to change that with his
" French Initiative Towards Asia". I am sure that he
-Qiti France to dramatically increase her trade-with the
region before other players take their shalre._-
I am in no doubt that great benefits will flow to both
our countries if French companies make Australia their
base for moving into these new markets.
There is also very great potential for increased trade
and investment between our two countries.
In recent times a number of French companies have made
substantial investments in areas as diverse as
telecommunications, air traffic control systems, resort
management, waste water treatment, film and television
and viticulture the last being an outstanding example
of cross investment combined with cooperation in
technology and research.
Ladies and gentlemen, if for the first two ' centuries of 6733 
Leadei
We find them in vineyards from Western Australia to the
Hunter Valley of New South Wales. We find them in the
industrial suburbs and the central business districts of
our major cities. we find thou in laboratories and film
studios. They are present in the booming tourist
industry of Queensland as investors and managers, and
as tourists.
We want to see more of France in Australia and more of
the French.
I therefore hope to see you, M. Longuet, in Australia
soon. I also hope to see those of you here today and
senior executives from other French companies later this
year at our second National Trade and Investment
Conference, when France will be the European country
invited to join representatives from the Asia-Pacific.
It is for this reason that I want to thank the people who
organised this gathering, particularly Club Australie
with which I know many of you have been associated, and
M. Gandois who has played a crucial role in developing
business links between our two countries.
It is great enterprise and I have no doubt it will be a
very rewarding one.
ENDS 67 : 14 RPdrrfiimaMt 



PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NEW EDUCATIONAL REALITIES CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE, 15 JUNE 1994
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to you today very pleased to address so many
people whose concern is Australian education.
With an economy now performing as well or better than any in the world, with so much
now in our favour, we have a marvellous chance to lay the basis of an Australian society
which is fair and cohesive, rich in opportunity and reward.
A great responsibility falls on our generation to seize the opportunity. It falls particularly
on people like yourselves because education is where one of the great efforts must be
made. It will be fuindamental to our success.
I am particularly pleased because you come from all parts of the education sector, from
industry and from the wider community. Success depends on your involvement. Our
modern education system needs your participation your efforts, all your ideas.
If we are to be a sophisticated and cohesive society, a society through which run both the
threads of ambition and those of tolerance and care; if we are to be a modern, competitive,
successful society in which opportunity and the common good are both enlarged; if we
want to succeed in the world and in our own region where so many chances are our
education system will have to meet the challenges.
If we want our children and succeeding generations to have the chances we have had and
more, if we want them to trust in and maintain our democracy and our best traditions our
education system will have to pass on the knowledge and instil the faith. 
If we want to put half a million Australians back in touch with the workforce; if we really
want to make the good society a reality for all Australians it is going to depend on our
education system and the people who run
We will need what is fashionably called a " vision" though I am not sure that " vision" is
precisely the right word. I have a suspicion that sometimes visions have a little in common
with hot air. I am not sure that the founders of compulsory primary education or our first
universities talked about " vision" very much at all. I don't think the real visionaries ever
do. I think the best of them have been like the best of parents they have simply taken every
care and responsibility for the future of succeeding generations. They have had not just
imagination but courage and persistence, and I daresay an absolute determination to see
that policies and programs work.
So what I offer you today I'm less inclined to call a vision than a schedule of necessity
the series of things we need to do, must do and can do.
The worst judgement that can be passed on a government or on a generation is not that
they lacked something as vague as vision but something as concrete as responsibility, the
responsibility to do what was necessary to secure the future.
In this there is no substitute for effort a great national effort. I have said this many times,
I know. I said it in One Nation more than two years ago and I repeated it in the White
Paper just a few weeks ago.
It is not just rhetoric it is the only way to succeed.
We are all aware of the criticisms which are made of us: bureaucracies for not following
through and delivering; business for standing back and not getting involved; government
for not having the imagination or courage.
Well, the Government, I believe has shown the imagination and courage in education.
And I believe business will get involved it is so obviously in their interests. And the
bureaucracy wijll deliver because government and business and every parent and every
child in the country depends on it and we are watching.
In the past decade the Government has massively expanded Australian higher education.
Seventeen universities have been created in the last eight years, many of them in areas
away from thi-main urban centres.
We now enrol thirty per cent of all seventeen to twenty-two year olds. Today we can say
that our higher education system is truly open and accessible. 
Perhaps even greater than this achievement has been the dramatic increase in secondary
school retention rates. In the space of a decade we more than doubled the number of
youiing Australians completing Year 12.
But comparing the present with the past is much less useful than comparing it with where
we have to be in the future. In international terms the present figure is acceptable but the
base it came off was deplorable. Fourteen per cent of our young people still drop out of
school early and don't go on to further education or training.
The Youth Training Initiative announced in Working Nation will maintain the momentum
of reform. It is designed to reach these young people at this turning point in their lives,
and stop the cycle of disadvantage and alienation.
Through the Initiative, unemployed fifteen to seventeen year olds will be case managed
and assisted into worthwhile education, training or work opportunities.
Young people who are still unemployed after six months will be offered a variety of labour
market and vocational training programs which may lead to permanent employment.
The Youth Training Initiative goes some way toward completing the expansion of postcompulsory
schooling we began a decade ago.
Our record in vocational education and training is not similarly impressive. Only one in
five Australians aged-sixteen and seventeen are in vocational preparation. The OECD
average is one in two. We have to reach a comparable level and do so quickly.
This is the great education challenge for Australia in the nineties to bring vocational
education and training up to the level our economic and social ambitions demand. A level,
for example, which compares with Germany, which has four times the number of
apprentices relative to the size of the workforce and twice as many people with education
or training qualifications other than university degrees.
Our objective and all Australian governments have agreed to it is that by the year 2001
ninety-five per cent of nineteen year olds will have completed Year 12 or an initial postschool
qualification, or be participating in formally recognised education and training.
In a successful Australian economy of the future, the key competitive advantage will be
our general skills.
To quote one very instructive example. Comparative studies of the hotel industry in
Germany and Great Britain in the 1980s found that the productivity of German workers
was fifty to sixty per cent higher than their British counterparts. The productivity of
German hotel managers is also higher because they did not have to regularly monitor their
staff. The difference was that the German workers had had specific vocational training
and the British workers had not. 
The same lesson can be drawn from the example of Australian car manufacturers who
have embraced training to lift quality and productivity.
In cooperation with TAFE they developed a Vehicle Production Certificate. They now
build world class cars. They export. The industry has a future. The car production
workers have a future.
The moral of the story could be applied to the nation as whole. Our long term prosperity
depends on nothing so much as the quality of our workforce both their vocational skills
and their general education.
Over the last five years we have taken measures to massively increase the quantum of
vocational education and training.
In cooperation with the States and Territories, we established the Australian National
Training Authority ANTA to drive the expansion.
It was a watershed in Commonwealth-State cooperation of the kind we need to succeed
with in our education system, and we laid the foundation for expansion with 1. 1 billion in
growth funding over the period 1993-1996.
In Working Nation we announced an ambitious plan for the expansion of entry level
training by 50,000 places over the next two years. This program will be supported by a
revised system of payments to employers who provide young people with training places.
The introduction of a training wage will also provide employers in new and emerging
industries with a single scheme of payments. Traineeships will be expanded across the
whole workforce and the supply of training places increased.
It is not enough to just expand the system. The system has to meet the goals we set it.
We need to find the means by which the different education sectors can be effectively
linked with each other and with the worlds of work and culture. We need to make the
system more responsive to economic and cultural change.
Post-compulsory education has been fundamentally changed by the increase in retention
rates. Yet the curriculum still reflects the days when most of those completing senior high
school were hoping to go on to university.
Now that a large proportion do not have this intention, schools need to provide studies
which are integrated with relevant vocational education. In future there should be no
segregation of general and vocational education. 
That is why Working Nation announced the creation of a new Australian Student
Traineeship Foundation a scheme delivered through regional partnerships between
schools and industry which will enable Year-I 1 and 12 students to combine school studies
with work experience in local industry and off the job training.
The traineeships will allow young people to complete their training and apprenticeships in
a shorter time. More generally, they should serve as a model for the next century when
schools must link as easily with vocational education and training as they now link with
universities. Similarly we must link industry and tertiary education indeed, we need to escape from
the tradition of keeping work and education in different spheres.
The task is to create an environment in which educational institutions and government
authorities involve industry in mainstream planning and decision-making and one where
industry feels bound to be involved.
The delivery of tertiary education must be more flexible to meet the wider range of
industry needs.*
The introduction of the second stage of the Government's Open Learning Initiative, which
includes the development of an electronic support network, will mean that employees will
no longer have to spend time away from the workplace in order to galn qualification.
Employers and education providers should be able to develop programs which meet the
needs of individuals at their own pace, at their own place.
Employers also need to be involved in developing a more streamlined and responsible
vocational sector. At present, they understandably complaln about the maze of
authorities, boards and processes they need to negotiate before they can get appropriate
training programs.
The National Framework for the Recognition of Training, which was meant to solve this
problem, has so far failed to deliver either national recognition or portability. In
cooperation with State and Territory Governments, the Commonwealth is seeking the
means of overcoming the problem.
One possibility is to increase the powers of ANTA, in order to give employers and training
providers a " one stop shop" where training can be nationally accredited in a single
streamldined process. Working Nation contained measures which Will assist cooperation
between business and training authorities. Administrative arrangements will be
streamldined. Industry will be put in the driving seat to make training administration simple
and relevant to industry needs. 
The National Employment and Training Taskforce will enable traineeships to be fasttracked.
The new Enterprise Stream for traineeships will allow enterprises to develop
their own training standards, develop their own nationally accredited programs and issue
their own national vocational qualifications.
Working Nation suspended the Training Guarantee for two years, and it will be abolished
altogether if business seriously comumits itself to creating new entry level training places.
That really is the bottom line. None of these reforms will be effective unless business
increases its own effort and cooperates with providers in setting directions for the future.
The presence of so many business people at this conference suggests that Australian
industry is in fact keen to establish a genuine partnership with government and the
education industry.
Industry wants more than specific vocational skills. They want employees with general
skills, general knowledge, judgement, self-discipline, literacy and numeracy.
That is one very practical reason why the emphasis we are now placing on vocational
education and training must not be seen as antithetical to traditional educational values. In
fact, we should be strengthening those values as we go.
Education is a foundation of the nation's culture and strength. It is where knowledge and
appreciation of our heritage and institutions is passed on; where our sensibilities are
broadened; where moral, ethical and aesthetic faculties are shaped.
I don't think that I am alone in suspecting that some of these things are not the priorities
they once were.
Yet our success as a nation and as a society, as much as the responsibility we have to our
children, demands that we do not let these values slip from our education system.
Perhaps most of all, our children should know what the privileges and responsibilities of
Australian democracy are. What their great inheritance is. What change is desirable and
possible. The creation of an Exert Group to provide the Government with a plan for a program of
public education and information on Australian government, citizenship and the
constitution may be seen in this context that is, as a means of strengthening our
democracy by enlivening our appreciation of it.
The composition and terms of reference of this group will be announced soon.
It is scarcely less important that we improve our understanding of the nations with whom
increasingly we deal. 
It will profoundly assist our relationship with the countries of our region if we understand
the languages they speak. Z.-
Today less than four per cent of Year 12 students study an Asian language. Only twelve
per cent are studying a second language of any kind. Yet the study of a second language
has a substantial practical significance both for the student and for our national
development. In the Budget the Government announced funding for a joint Commonwealth/ State
National Asian Languages Strategy which will see all Australian school children in Years
3 to 10 learning a-seco6nd language by the year 2006.
Sixty per cent of them will study one of four priority Asian languages Japanese,
Indonesian, Modern Standard Chinese and Korean and forty per cent will study any
other second language of their choice.
Twenty-five per cent of all Year 12 students will be studying a second language and one
per cent of students will go on to do a " Year 13" in Asia under the Young Australians in
Asia Program..
The program will greatly enrich our education system and with it the life of the nation. In
one sense, it is one more practical step in the process of opening Australia up to the region
and the world. In another sense, it is symbolic: symbolic of our willingness to meet other
countries half-way in our relationships with them, and symbolic also of our will and
capacity to devise for our education system new building blocks for necessary social and
cultural growth.
If we are to enter the twenty-first century with an education and training system large
enough and good enough to meet the aspirations of individuals and the needs of Australia,
we will need a national effort.
We will need State and Territory Governments to cooperate with business, and business to
engage as it has never done before. The States must streamlJine their training
bureaucracies: business must increase its own training efforts and share the responsibility
for shaping and implementing the training agenda.
As in so much else, the Australian education system will have to become more flexible.
The borders between schools and vocational training, and between education and work,
will need to come down.
Education must be a prime mover of necessary change, a vehicle by which the nation can
grasp the unprecedented opportunities which are now presented and all Australians can
share in the rewards and the responsibilities. 
8
I said in Paris a few days ago that to be an Australian in this decade is to be present at a
defining moment in our history. Your presence at this conference I take as encouraging
evidence that you not only share this belief: but are willing to share the responsibility that
flows from it.
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT THE LAUNCH OF THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ABORIGINAL
AUSTRALIA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 20 JUNE 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you very much, Robert ( Tickner), Dr Bill Jonas and David Horton,
the Chair person of ATSIC, Lois O'Donoghue, and ladies and gentlemen.
Well, I am very grateful for the opportunity to launch these volumes today, to
be asked to launch this massive work, six years I am told in the collation and
the writing. And I know it has been very eagerly awaited. It is very
comprehensive work, covering a vast canvas of infinite complexity and I think
it will provide all Australians, that is Aboriginal and non-aboriginal Australians
alike, with an invaluable source of information and understanding. And it
struck me looking through it, it will be particularly useful for young
Australians, and for the teaching of Aboriginal history in Australian schools,
for both teachers and pupils alike, to be able to refer to such a
comprehensive work and define something useful there in such a readable,
digestible way. It should play a useful role in helping future generations to
comprehend the extraordinary history and culture of the oldest continuing
civilisation on earth.
It wasn't so many years ago that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
were specimens of great anthropological curiosity, but little more as human
beings living in the modern world, they were until 1967, of course, in this
country not even citizens of Australia. And that is not that long ago, that's
only two years before I entered the national Parliament. This country did not
recognise the descendants of the original Australians as citizens. This
encyclopaedia examines that referendum. It should also be made
compulsory reading for some politicians, current ones, so they can see how
far they have wandered from the ideals of their predecessors. Maybe some
extracts and photocopies spread around might be the order. I don't think they
understand the vast majority of the Australian people gave the
Commonwealth the power to make laws for indigenous Australians where
they were deemed necessary. 
But, it not only looks at the referendum, it looks at the struggle for recognition,
and that which preceded it, the contribution that Aboriginal people have made
in that field, as in so many others, It also has a lot of interesting names of
Aboriginal people who have made a great contribution, and are well known to
their compatriots and it gives them, I think, the recognition they deserve. And
many of the references, are of course, in our epoch, in our time scale. And I
was pleased to see Lois O'Donoghue mentioned there, and I read her
reference, nothing in it could have said how much leadership she provided
when it really mattered to one of the great leaps forward in the recognition of
the rights of Aboriginal Australians and their right to land in this country.
And while the encyclopaedia refers to the native title decision of the High
Court it hasn't understandably yet referred to the Act because of the cut-off
point for publication, but not only the change in the statutory basis on which
such claims for land can be made came from all that, what came from it was,
I think, also something that needs to be put into the encyclopaedia under T,
and that's the word trust. Because I think a lot of trust, something very
ephemeral, difficult to get your hands on, very hard to develop, easy to
destroy, but terribly important to the way in which things are done. And what
happened during 1993 was the development of a lot of trust. Firstly between
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves, and the fact that
there was something of great moment happening, brought them together,
perhaps as never before, to sit down and negotiate with the Government of
Australia. As I am sure in a negotiation, never had such a discussion of such
significance taken place in the past. In one of the meetings I had with Lois I
stung her by saying that Aboriginal people don't know how to negotiate. And
I said it because I believed it to be true, hoping that they would involve
themselves in the process of negotiation, where you understand what your
core interests are, and you understand what the other persons core interests
are, and you try and negotiate a position that settles both. And by taking up
the leadership of this issue, and providing that the Aboriginal community Lois
brought together, as you know, that group of people who probably never sat
down quite in the same way before and discussed something of such moment
as then.
And a lot of people who are not mentioned in the encyclopaedia, but ought to
be in the future, emerged in whom I have great faith about the future of
Aboriginal people in this country and their leadership, Marcia Langton is one
of them, she is here today. Young people, who really, really started to turn it
before, with Noel Pearson another, David Ross another, and there are many,
many examples. And these will have, I think, an interesting sprinkled position
throughout the encyclopaedia for their contribution in ushering in a new order
of trust between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
And we saw this repeated again just last week in our discussions on the land
fund, and certainly a new order of trust between the Aboriginal and Torres-
Strait Islander people and the Government of Australia. Because I think
when the Mabo battle really started to heat up Aboriginal people kept coming
back to the Government, " is it still all right, are they still right". A couple of
weeks later it got hotter, " still ok". " Still ok". And it went on to the point where 
3
as the problems became more stronger we saw these things being negotiated
around so we could comprehend the problems.
I am speaking, perhaps, inordinately long about this, because I think it is such
an epic period between the relationship between Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and non-aboriginal people in this country, in this very
important epoch that just passed.
So, we have seen periods of change in respect of the Aboriginal community
and its relationship with the nation, if you like, and the Parliament run through
high and low points, and we saw periods in the last, certainly since the
referendum, when a lot of hope has been dissipated, and a lot of spirit has
fallen away to see it come back and flourish again. I hope we can capture
some of this in the encyclopaedia in later editions as it comes along.
The important thing is in the reading of this anybody seeking out the
references can start to pin point things and events and times and places of
significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, that's not in any
written history because no written history ever existed. And so they're little
snapshots, pieces of the matrix that can let both Aboriginal and nonaboriginal
people work out what the story is. That, I think, is its great value.
And it is such a quick and handy reference, but across such a very large
scale. It is a mighty piece of work, and David Horton deserves the greatest
congratulations for the undertaking, he has also assembled an array of
excellent contributors to match that vision with Ian Howie-Willis and Dallas
De Brabander featuring most prominently, but of course there are many
others. I would also like to congratulate the Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Studies headed by Marcia Langton and Bill Jonas for their
commitment to this massive project. It is a great job of work, well done, and
well undertaken, and I hope it becomes one of our long run best sellers. It is
out there and people have it in our schools and at home and to make that
when they have the thought, or they want to know something, that they go
and they find a quick reference to it, but a comprehensive and readable one.
Congratulations to all concerned, I look forward to this huge work in its later
editions for some of the matters I mention, but I think all of us stand in some
awe at the amount of time and effort that has gone into this, and appreciate
ever so much the great initiative and the work which everyone has
undertaken in bringing it to fruition. It is with very great pleasure that I launch
this important publication, these two very special volumes.
Thank you. 



V
4
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OFFICIAL OPENING, EUROPEAN MASTERPIECES FROM THE
NATIONAL GALLERY OF IRELAND
NATIONAL GALLERY OF AUSTRALIA. 24 JUNE 1994
It is a great pleasure to be here today to welcome all of you, especially our friends
from Ireland, and to open this great exhibition.
This is the first exhibition to come on ioan from a national gallery to the Australian
National Galleriy, and I anmde lighted that it comes from a Ireland, the country where
learning and expression are themselves considered national treasures, the country with
whom we share so much history and culture and beliefs, the one so close to so many
Australian hearts.
Contemporary Australia is not derivative of any single nation, but there is an awful lot
of Irish in the mixture.
Tonight I won't go over the familiar ground of the things we have in common, the
singular contribution the Irish have made to Australia or the great bonds between us.
Except to say that this exhibition in a way points towards other realms of experience
we share.
Living at a remove from the centres of European art and culture and for a long time a
colonial remove at that might have meant succumbing to a temptation to be imnitative
or deferential in our creativity and taste; or perhaps equally, an instinct to be
aggressively parochial.
In various ways, to various degrees and at various stages of our history we have
resisted this. And in their ways our National Galleries speak for this resistance.
Their collections might be read as the embodiment of the development among us of a
love of things which are good, no matter where they come from: Guinness from
Ireland, wine from Australia, Velazquez from Spain. And much else from each of us. 7041 
Of course this is the century in which it has become possible as never before to indulge
in these things.
One of the great liberating forces for Australians has been the Boeing 747.
It is now possible.-not necessarily easy, but possible for Australians other than the
most wealthy to travel to Europe where, among other things like meeting their Irish
relations they may see masterpieces such as these.
Even more liberating, and more democratic in this century it is increasingly possible
for these works to come to us.
Or for works such as Sidney Nolan's to go to New York, or Aboriginal artworks to be
shown in Paris where I saw them just a few days ago. It is a two-lane air highway.
On the evidence of this exhibition, you would have to say that perhaps some people let
themselves down by visiting Ireland and not visiting the National Gallery.
It should be unthinkable like visiting Canberra and not visiting the National Gallery.
Let me congratulate those who have managed the task of bringing this exhibition to us.
The principal curator, Sergio Benedetti, and his helpers, Irish and Australian alike,
faced a tremendous challenge and we are deeply gratefual for the courage and skill
with which he met it.
I am not sure whether we have ever seen a Velazquez in this country I am told there
may have been one in the 1 960s. But since there are so few in the world outside the
Prado, it was a bold decision to let even this one painting travel from Europe.
But the rarity and splendour of that one work will not blind us to the value artistic as
well as monetary.-of works by Titian, Goya, El Greco, Murillo and Tintoretto.
Raymond Keaveney deserves the greatest thanks for letting them all come to us.
Annita met Raymond when we visited Ireland last year and found him typically [ rishk
which is to say charming and generous.
And recognising these qualities in him not to say those of the marvellous paintings in
the gallery she took advantage of his native good will and his need to find a
temporary home for these works while his gallery was repaired.
The result of their conversation and one or two letters between them is here before us
this evening.
But many others, of course, brought it from conception to reality and I know you
would want me to thank them all.
Dr Tony O'Reilly, who has sponsored the exhibition, deserves our most sincere thanks.
7042 
3
I must make mention of my friend, Betty Churcher, for her involvement in yet another
triumph. And we must thank Ireland and the Irish people. Their love of the best in life, the
engagement with the human spirit and imagination, their passion for expression, is
evident in the making of this collection.
We in Australia never forget the things for which we should thank Ireland this
exhibition of great European masterworks is one more thing. 7043 



29/ 06 ' 94 07: 36 F-AX 62 21 3903839 EEMSB GGENN OOFFFCICE
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
EXPANDING HORIZONS AUSTRALIA AND INDONESIA
INTO THE 21 ST CENTURY, JAKARTA, 29 JUNE 1994
Let me say how pleased I am to be here at the opening of this historic event,
and I welcome you all.
Three months ago I launched the Australia Today Indonesia 94 program in
Sydney.
Today we launch the centrepiece of the program this trade. and Investment
forum which in time may well be seen as a turning point in the relationship
between our two countries.
I am particularly pleased to be joined today by Indonesi a' s Co-ordinating
Minister for Industry and Trade, Hartarto. Minister Hartarto has been a great
~ iipporter of expanding economic ties between Indonesia and Australia. The
success of the Australia Today program in Indonesia owes much to his efforts
and I thank him most warmly for that.
We have with us today Ministers and representatives from a number of
Australian State Governments. I welcome them here.
I know how they have worked to develop economic and cultural links between
Australia and Indonesia particularly links with various provincial
governments in Indonesia.
The Australian States have a crucial role to play and there is no doubt that
they are playing ft.
Most of all, I am pleased to see so many Australian and Indonesian business
people here.
The trade mission which my colleague Senator Bob McMullan is leading
includes representatives of over 200 companies.
This Is the largest trade mission ever to leave4ustralia. It Is an outstanding
response -and a measure of interest and jo; pnt among our business
P PM PRESS OFFICE Q~ 002 
V~ UD~ 047 : 36 FAX 62 21 3903839EfGEOFIE PMRSSFIC oz
2
communities which underlines the force and meaning behind the title-
" Expanding Horizons".
It is useful to bear in mind the reasons for this sudden explosion of interest in
the relationship between Australia and Indonesia.
It is not merely because we are neighbours. We have alay been
neighbours. And far-sighted individuals in each country have been urging the
value of closer links for decades.
The heightened interest flows from a mixture of new circumstances and new
resolve. It derives partly from changes at work in the wider world, and partly from
changes in our two countries.
The end of the Cold War has fundamentally altered the way the international
community operates. Old structures have broken up or loosened. New
options have opened up and new linkages are being formed. Regional ties
are getting stronger. Uncertainties have grown.
At the same time, developments in the global economy technological
change, quicker and easier cammunicati6n, the free and rapid flow of
Investment funds are bringing changes to the patterns of International
commerce and to the role which governments must play.
Developing countries are becoming more important In the global economy.
For example, In the past decade exports from developing countries in Asia
have grown at twice the rate of world exports. And over the same period
these countries have grown two and a half times as fast as the world.
economy. Like any substantial change, this has caused a degree of unease.
Many have found the adjustment difficult; for many It threatens difficulty. Irvr
meetings with some of Europe's leaders-earlier this month I argued that the
developed world should not fearthe products of the developing nations, and.
should not try to stem the tIde of their growth.
Developing countries have the right to expect that their products will be able
to flow to world markets without meeting new protectionist barriers, either
direct or disguised.
And why should they not expect open markets, when the fact is that they can
benefit'all of us at home and abroad? 
These changes in the structure of the world and the world economy have run
parallel to internal changes in Australia and Indonesia. To keep up with the
world, we have opened up to the world.-_
It is a difficult, even painful, step. But it is the only sensible one to take.
The clear evidence is that the comforts of protectionism are illusory, that
without the stimulus of competition economies stagnate and structures decay.
In Australia we are now seeing why the hard decisions of the eighties had to
be made. We are seeing some of the rewards.
The Australian economy is growing at five per cent, faster than any other
developed country. Our inflation rate, now around I per cent, is expected to
remain low.
With the floating of the Australian dollar and the abolition of exchange
controls, with the total abolition of quotas and the reduction of the general
rate of tariffs with few exceptions to five per cent or less by 1996, the
Australian economy is now one of the most open in the world.
Australian exporters particularly our manufacturers have embraced the
challenge of competing in world markets.
Our exports grew by more than seven and a half per cent in 1993, faster than
either domestic or world economic growth . And elaborately transformed
manufactures now represent over 20 per cent of our exports, compared with
11 percent In 1983.
The results of Indonesia's liberallsation are similarly clear. GDP growth last
year was more than six per cent.
This, too, is a product of resolve.
Over recent years indeed in recent dM~ the Indonesian Government has
undertaken significant deregulation and reform, removing non-tariff barriers
and reducing tariffs, taking steps to deregulate industry and to create a moreliberal
investment environment
This commitment to reform Is bound to boost the confidence of investors.
That Indonesia continues to reduce Its tariff levels is of course a matter of!
direct interest to Australian exporters. But as Indonesia industrialises, furtherliberallsation
of the Indonesian market will mean more productivity and more
competitive Indonesian exports as well-
Changes In recent global trade arrangements wvill also help our economies.
TOOJ MaSININ awmid a3 IdAo NoD ejia 6CfZC TZ Z9 MY LZ: 9O M6 90/ 6Z 
W ug~ j2 ' 2 1F3A9~ 0 839Efl GEN OFFICE PM PRESS OFFICE
4
At the beginning of the next century the Uruguay Round alone will be adding.
well over $ 400 billion annually to the wqrdd economy. Of that amount, about
$ 120 billion is likely to benefit developing countries such as Indonesia.
Indeed, once all the effects of the Uruguay Round have flowed through,
Indonesia could receive a stimulus to Its real GDP of 7 per cent or more.
Australian research suggests that global tariff barriers on industrial products
exported by Indonesia will fall* by 42 per cent under the Round. Most of
Indonesia's exports will have secure access through bound tariffs in its major
markets. Real exports could Increase by 30 per cent.
Through APEC we can add to that momentum by setting ourselves goals for
free trade; and by harrmonising standards in key areas. The benefits to
Indonesia from further lberalising In concert with other APEC members will be
even greater than those flowing from the Uruguay Round.
It Is one of those cases where you have to be In it to win and all who are In it
will gain.
These are the realities which underpin our new horizons. These are the
reasons we are here. We have all seen the opportunities.
Already, two-way trade between Australia and Indonesia has grown at a trendrate
of 22 per cent in the past five years to reach $ 3 billion in 1993.
Over 180 Australian companies are now operating in Indonesia, and of
course I hope that will rise over the next few days.
Australia is one of the top ten Investors in Indonesia.
And the composition of our trade Is changing. For both of us, manufacturesz,
are an increasing percentage of the total. In 1984 only 7' per cent, of'
Indonesian exports to Australia were elaborately transformed manufactures-.
In 1992, the figure was 25 per cent. For Australia, the figure has risen from-.
19 per cent to 24 per cent In the same period.*
I expect services trade to be an Increasingly strong area of growth in futurez-
Australia is-already the fourth most Important source of tourists to indonesia
And more than 7,500 young Indonesians are already studying in Australia.
All these very welcome developments are no accident And we should not baFshy
about-saying so for they mean the pain of economic reform had: apurpose.
It Is a reminder that common sense and the courage to exercise it have--
rewards. It means that cooperation has rewards.... l1 005 
0. vg: Jb A1 82 21 3903839 EMB GEN OFFICE PM PRESS OFFICE Q~ 006
The rewards, of course, come in the form of jobs, higher standards of living,
greater economic strength and resilience, access to knowledge and
technology, and the satisfaction that comes from nation building for future
generations of our people.
They come in the form of successful enterprises successful companies.
The companies represented at this forum illustrate what is happening to the
relationship. With so many present it is almost invidious to single out a few.
But I want to note the contribution of New Hope Corporation of Australia. and
its local associate the Swabara Group of Indonesia as co-presenters of the
forum. New Hope Corporation's bulk commodity port project in Kalimantan is an
excellent example of Australian design skills, engineering excellence and
financial expertise combining to meet Indonesia's infrastructure needs.
It shows how technologies specifically developed in Australia can be
transferred to Indonesia.
When the first stage of the port is completed in early 1996 at a cost of $ 150
million it will be the only deep water port outside Australia built specially for
buik commodities.
There is a great diversity among the Australian companies now in Indonesia.
The ANZ Banking group is Involved In a joint venture with the Pan Indonesian
BanWo7ffiering financial products to the commercial market. -The AMP Society
and the Panin Group are launching a joint venture which represents the
largest eVer Australian involvement In the Indonesian financial services
sector. Davids' Asia have signed a Technical Assistance Agreement with PT Hero for
the development of a modem warehousing and distribution operation in
Indonesia. BTR Nylex is involved in a joint venture with KCI producing glass packagingfor
a wide range of markets.
ABB Australia is involved in power generation and distribution; Boral Is.
engaged in producing materials for the construction industry.
AWA has provided air navigation and road traffic control systems with its-
Indonesian joint venture partners and Is looking to expand its operations.
Goodman Fielder, with Its partner the Sinar Mas4Goup, is involved In the food.
manufasturing sector. BHP and CRA have major investments in the minerals-' 
rA Z 21 3903839 EB G OICE PSS OFFICE 007
6
sector; Transfield in engineering projects; Lend Lease Corporation in a range
of service industries.
And let me here pay a small tribute to some of the pioneers in this area.
Southcorp Holdings through Rheem Indonesia, established in 1968 what may
well be the oldest Australian investment in Indonesia. Commonwealth
Industrial Gases set up a joint venture with Industrial Gases Indonesia in
1972. The John Holland Group began operations in Indonesia in 1974.
The Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation has operated in Indonesia for
almost 25 years and its expertise will be in growing demand as Indonesia's
resources are developed.
I could go on, and perhaps I should because it is a roll of honour. But there
are too many to name here.
Governments can significantly help by creating structures for closer ties.
That is why President Soeharto and I agreed during my first visit to Indonesia
to establisif -Fodrrum through which our Ministers could explore the
possibilities for co-operation.
The Ministerial Forum will meet in Canberra for the second time later this
year. Its agenda continues to lengthen.
In the past three years there have been twenty seven visits to Indonesia by
Australian Ministers, three times the number over the preceding three years.
And the Australia Today promotion has brought a further eight Australian,
Ministers here.
These bilateral developments are strengthened by developing regional
structures. One of the most important issues President Soeharto and I discussed.
yesterday was the APEC Leaders' Meeting which he will chair orr
November in Bogor. I believe the Bogor meeting will be as pathbreaking as
the meeting at Bandung was forty years ago.
Both of us see the meeting as critical to consolidating APEC and developing
an open Asia-Pacific region.
Both of us want a region which will be actively involved in liberalising trade;
facilitating commerce, and strengthening economic linkages between a group
of economies which represent half the world's population and more than half
its production. A. a 
2 V 39389 EB GN FFIE PM PRESS OFFICE ( o
7
As President Soeharto has said our aim is to improve ' the stability, security
and welfare of the people of the Asia-Pacific region under a spirit of united
community'. Australia will be working very closely with Indonesia towards fulfilling that aim.
I also discussed with President Soeharto the proposal we are studying to
promote closer links between the ASEAN Free Trade Area and the Australia
New Zealand agreement on Closer Economic Relations.
With all these things happening, I firmly believe that the conditions global,
regional and bilateral which have caused this new burst of activity in our
relationship will continue to impel us in the same direction.
Because this relationship is not some temporary, take-it-or-leave-it affair.
It is-no transitory fascination; no purely academic interest. It is a deep,
complex and, I might say, exciting relationship which has to work if both
countries are to live up to their potential.
As I said In March, no country is more important to Australia than Indonesia.
I also said then that the job of developing the relationship will not be easy.
We are very different countries with very different societies, we stem from
different cultures, we -are at different stages of development. Indonesia's
population Is ten times ours.
We are an industrialised country; Indonesia is a rapidly developing. one.
So can we sustain a relationship of depth and worth across this divide?
Of course we can.
Of course we must.
But the doing of it requires clear sight and sensitivity. Courage, hard work.
boldness openness.-
I want Australia to be much better known in Indonesia for what it is,. X
sophisticated, technologically-advanced. society with a, diverse, operr and
tolerant people.
It was painful, for example, to learn as part of the research for the Australia
Today promotion that most Indonesians still think Australia has a raciallybased.
Immigration policy. 
80339Efl GEN OFFICE ** PH PRESS OFFICE 0 9-
In turn, I want Indonesia to be known by Australians for what ft is, in all its
cultural richness and ethnic diversity, with all its challenges, its achievements
and Its aspirations.
That is why the Australia Today promotion goes beyond business and trade,
and offers an insight into Australia's diverse contemporary society.
Next year Indonesia celebrates fifty years since its declaration of
independence from Holland. Just a few years later Australia will celebrate the
centenary of our Federation.
As I said back in March, the relationship between Australia and Indonesia can
be a model for ca-operation between developed and developing countries,
between countries based on Western structures and values and those based
on Asian models.
So my message to all of you in this room, and to the increasing numbers of
people in both our countries who see the great potential in our bilateral
relationship, is that your commitment will be worth it.
I said at the beginning of this address that it was worth bearing in mind where
the new interest in our relationship came from.. I said it came from a mixture
of circumstances and resolve.
It is worth bearing in mind because there is a lesson in the story. The fact is
that people can live side by side forever and never really be neighbours they
only'truly became neighbours w hen they begin to talk to one another, and
cooperate and share an interest In each other's lives, however different those
lives might be.
These relationships do not develop by accident, there is nothing inevitable
about them. They have to be initiated, common ground has to be
established, along with mutual respect for different history, culture and
aspirations. So long as we share the neighbourhood and we always will these efforts
will be necessary and very worthwhile.
So long as we share the neighbourhood, we should share its responsibilities
and its potential.
That is the reason for all this bilateral activity. That is the reason for our
support for APEC. It is why I am here, and why you are here because we
have recognised the widening horizons of our relationship and are determined
to explore them.
I most sincerely thank you for coming and wish you well in your endeavours
of thepcext few days. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE FINANCIAL REVIEWS CONFERENCE " AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRY AND THE KEATING GOVERNMENT', SYDNEY,
TUESDAY 5 JULY 1994
Let me begin by congratulating the Financial Review for taking the initiative in
organising this conference on the future of Australian industry.
Just a few years ago there were some who would have placed a question
mark at the end of the title of any conference on Australian industry.
And the agenda would have largely revolved around tariff levels and sectoral
support measures.
At such a conference there would also have been those who argued we would
be better off to turn our backs on the reforms of the
We should, the argumentwyould run, have re-regulated the economy and
returned to a regime which sheltered Australian industry from a more
competitive world.
At the heart of that debate was a test of our national will and a test of our
national nerve.
Last week in Jakarta I saw the results of having passed those tests.
In Indonesia I had the privilege of opening Australia's biggest ever trade
promotion in that country.
More than 200 exhibitors participated in an impressive display of just how
much Australia has to offer the world and, in particular, the Asia Pacific.
After visiting the exhibition you could not fail to be struck by what a distance
we have travelled in the past decade. 
The overwhelming impression the exhibition projected was of a diverse,
vibrant economy with world class capacities in services and manufactures.
Industry sectors ranging from building and construction to education and
training and from marine, engineering and manufacturing services to power
and energy were all strongly represented.
So I come to this conference this morning with fresh evidence of what
Australian industry is achieving and a well-founded confidence that we will
build on these successes.
The Financial Review has therefore picked a very appropriate time to stage an
examination and discussion of industry policy.
As a starting point the Government does not see industry policy being
developed and implemented in isolation from the other major policy streams.
Industry depends for its success as much on macro-economic, industrial
relations and trade policy and micro-economic reforms as it does on specific
industry develo~~ ri6nt aind supp'ori m-easures.-
In fact, much of what we are striving to achieve in industry policy is intertwined
with our objectives in these other areas.
Industries committed to world best practice need a Government committed to
ensuring the domestic impediments are cleared away.
Our industry policy is, therefore, in many respects an international competition
policy which seeks to identify and encourage those characteristics we need to
be able to compete in world markets.
Australian industry should. approach the future with optimism.
Few other developed countiribs can match the circumstances in which
Australia presently finds itself. Few countries have such good prospects for
growth. No predictions for the future of Australian industry can be made, however,
without comparing its condition now with the situation of a decade ago.
While we had some strong export industries at that time particularly in mining
and agriculture the manufacturing sector was still sheltered from
international competition by absurdly high tariff barriers.
For all this protection, the reality was that industry was not strong.
The steel industry, with our resource endowments, should have been one of
the nation's strongest industries. Instead it was going out the door backwards. 4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
Australian made cars were becoming less and less competitive both in terms
of price and quality. The response of the outgoing government was to
propose yet more protection, with tariffs~ of up to 125 per cent.
While other countries were increasingly participating in world trade, we were
putting the shutters up.
When we introduced the first tranche of tariff reductions we were warned we
would have a disaster on our hands. While the last generation of Australian
managers may have been found wanting in certain respects, they certainly
had an entrepreneurial approach to finding reasons for government
assistance. We were told that our market was too small to allow international
competition, our labour force was unskilled, lazy and strike-prone and that
nobody else had a level playing field and so why should we.
Instead we have a story of outstanding success.
Exports of elaborately transformed manufacturing have grown by 17 per cent a
year ince 1988, one of the very highest rates of growth in the OECD.
Services exports, which have grown by about 9 per cent a year, now account
for 20 per cent of exports.
Small firms have emerged from the former torpid business environment and
become innovative and export-oriented McKinsey has identified more than
700 small and medium manufacturing exporters.
Foreign-owned companies that told us they could well leave Australia without
protection, have invested in state of the art plant, competed successfully with
imports and also entered export markets.
Whole industries that were set to be counted among the dead or dying have
undergone Lazarus-like revivals.
Firms have embraced innoVtion, giving us one of the highest growth rates of
business R&amp; D among developed economies if even from a relatively low base.
The reasons for such success are complex. Partly it is due to the basic skills
that were lying dormant in Australian industry. We were also helped by some
natural good fortune, such as our location in this dynamic region of the world
and the fact that we are reaping great benefits, in terms of productive
diversity, from our multicultural population.
Some credit must also go to the Government, for having the courage to take
the hard choices and stick with them.
Policies in a range of areas will support the future growth of Australian
industry, and a continuation of its success in world markets. They will help us
maintain high rates of employment growth so we can reduce unemployment.
We want to bring an unemployment rate of 5 per cent within our grasp by the
4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
turn of the century. To achieve this, we must have a high rate of economic
growth. We must also ensure that this growth is sustainable.
We have made an impressive start.
We are growing at an annual rate of 5 per cent, which makes Australia a star
performer among OECD countries. We have added 260,000 new jobs over
the past year and re duced the unemployment rate to under 10 per cent.
Inflation is running at less than 1 1/ 2 per cent and expectations are for a
continued low inflation environment.
As a nation we can take satisfaction from this progress.
But even more importantly, we can expect to see strong growth with low
inflation continue.
Of course, there will be the permanently miserable who will want to talk up the
risk of the economy overheating, of economic boom followed by economic
bust. In their minds, the risk flickers from too little growth to too much growth.
But the reality is quite the contrary. The nature of this recovery gives us
confidence that strong growth can be sustained. We have what we term a
" 1rolling" recovery.
Initially, the recovery was driven by public demand, the pick up in dwelling
investment and strong exports. The strong export performance is set to
continue, but as the recovery proceeds the stimulus from the public sector is
quite deliberately being wound back while the dwelling cycle will naturally
begin to wane. In its place, business fixed investment will both support overall
demand and provide the wherewithal for greater production.
The rolling nature of the recovery is not limited to what is happening in
Australia, it is also a characteristic of what is happening internationally. Some
of you may have seen a sh~ t article in the latest OECD Economic Outlook
reporting that major OECD economies are not synchronised in their current
cycles. The US recovered earlier than Japan and much of Europe which are
both now beginning to turn.
The consequences for Australia are very healthy. Commodity prices have not
gone on a roller coaster, with the result that our exchange rate has been more
stable. Our traders continue to benefit from favourable international
competitiveness which is still around 30 per cent better than in the early 1980s
notwithstanding the recent rise in the Australian dollar.
Moreover, as this international cycle has helped keep inflation low worldwide
so our rolling recovery has helped in Australia. The OECD now sees inflation
remaining between 2 and 2 1/ 2 per cent over 1994 and 1995.
We have established a low inflation culture and we intend to keep it. 4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
We have not done this by telling the Reserve Bank to blindly pursue zero
inflation and then washing our hands oftthe matter. Instead, we have given
inflation a central role in all economic policy.
Of course, monetary policy has a major role to play in containing inflation. But
monetary policy, by itself, doesn't deliver a change to the culture of inflation. It
is too indiscriminate and cannot be left to apply indefinitely.
Today's low inflation has been achieved through monetary and fiscal policies
as well as through the Accord with the unions and the flexibility we have
introduced into the supply side of the economy. The attitudes of those directly
involved in setting prices or wages have been changed.
And it is these changed attitudes that are at the heart of keeping inflation low.
We won't achieve that by relying on any simple-minded formula to control
interest rates. Instead, we need to maintain comprehensive policy action
through: the continuing commitment to low inflation via the Accord VII;
the improved responsiveness of our workplaces to enterprise bargaining
and higher skill levels;
the lessening of the risk of bottlenecks by re-engaging those unemployed
for lengthy periods with the labour market;
the greater competition to our product markets from domestic and
international sources, via the exchange rate and lower tariffs;
the progressive winding back of fiscal stimulus as the recovery proceeds;
and when action is warranted, appropriate adjustments to monetary policy.
All of this represents a mature approach to policy. And the increasingly
mature approach to business that we are seeing in our workplaces is also
delivering results.
The A=" r will continue to play a central role in wages policy. It has been
crucial in achieving appropriate aggregate wage outcomes since 1983 and
pulling inflation down. It has facilitated the move towards a more
decentralised productivity related wage fixing system.
Enterprise bargaining has become the primary focus for wage fixing and a
vital catalyst for workplace reform. The new industrial relations legislation
provides the framework to achieve the labour market flexibility, productivity
growth and wage restraint necessary for strong and sustainable economic
growth. 4V7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
As I announced in Working Nation, the Government aims to see 80 per cent of
employees in the Federal award sector-covered by direct bargains by the end
of 1996.
In addition, awards will be reviewed and simplified.
Working Nation spells out the close interrelationship between industry policy,
the creation of secure and rewarding jobs in flexible high productivity
workplaces, and the policies we need to educate and train the work force that
industry needs.
Working Nation contains a number of important initiatives to get
unemployment down and the skills of our work force up including a Job
Compact for those unemployed for over 18 months, and a Youth Training
Initiative. Under these initiatives training and jobs will be provided for people who have
become marginalised from the mainstream of economic life during the
recession. We want to ensure that this is a recovery for all Australians not just for the
top end of town.
But the case for doing so is not just based on equity arguments, important as
they are. Failing to address long-term unemployment would be very costly to
the whole economy.
But we are succeeding in meeting this challenge. In the past three years,
close to a quarter of a million long-term unemployed workers have been hired
by employers through JOBSTART subsidies alone.
As from yesterday, the attractiveness of Jobstart has been improved.
Subsidies have been incregsed, the period of subsidy has been extended to
9 months and a bonus payment is available to employers who keep these
workers on for a year.
Employers will also have the incentive of the new training wage which will be
payable to all unemployed people and new entrants to the labour force.
Together with Jobstart, this will mean an employer will be able to receive
subsidies ranging from $ 5000 to $ 8260 for taking on a long-term unemployed
person. The training initiatives in the White Paper were also directed to the longer
term needs of industry. They encompass a comprehensive strategy to enable
industry to sharpen its competitive advantage through getting the training it
needs. 4/ 7194 9: 54 PM 
We all must recognise that training is not a welfare issue. It is not something
the Government is promoting because we feel sorry for the unemployed.
Training is a mainstream economic issue, and promoting training is the
responsibility of all of us business, unions and government.
Both management and work force skills are vital to the competitiveness of
firms. Access to capital and investment in technology are important of course,
but these can often be replicated by competitors. Replication based on the
skills of individuals in a firm's work force is much more difficult.
Whatever the reasons for the failure to invest in training in the past, Working
Nation wipes out any excuse for this state of affairs to continue.
The Government has set up NETTFORCE, chaired by Lindsay Fox and
including Ivan Deveson, Bert Evans, Ted Wright and Bill Kelty as members, to
ensure companies are aware of the benefits available, and assist them to take
full advantage of them.
NETTFORCE is developing 21 national, industry-based traineeships. It aims
to cut through the delays of the past and provide employers with a one-stop
shop to put together training and industrial packages to get trainees employed
quickly. Industry is being given the opportunity to have more say in early vocational
education. The Australian Student Traineeship Foundation announced in the
White Paper will provide funds directly to local groups, which may be
committees of employers, to run traineeships for year 11 and 12 students.
Students will combine school studies with work experience in local industry
and off-the-job training. The traineeships will allow young people to complete
their training in a shorter time.
Industry must set the direction of training and drive the administrative
processes so that they are simple and relevant to the needs of firms.
I I
To show our faith in this approach, the Government has suspended the
Training Guarantee Levy. Now it is up to industry to take advantage of the
funding we have provided. It is up to industry to take control of the training
agenda. Industry must play a strong, positive role and capitalise on the opportunities
the world is offering. The game plan has been spelt out in Working Nation.
There, we have set out a comprehensive industry policy that will help
Australian firms achieve world class excellence. It is about providing a
competitive environment for doing business and enhancing the capacity of
businesses to succeed by being competitive both in Australia and on world
markets.
Tax policies have worked to reduce industry costs and enhance our
competitiveness. Australia is the lowest taxed country in the OECD. Working
417/ 94 9: 54 PM 
Nation includes tax initiatives to encourage private investment in public
infrastructure, investment in smaller and medium sized enterprises and the
location of regional headquarters in Australia.
The Government's telecommunications, Government Business Enterprises,
shipping, aviation and waterfront reforms are reducing input costs, increasing
the quality of goods and services and ensuring the reliability of supply.
We've introduced competition to telecommunications and seen domestic call
rates fall by about 13 per cent and international rates by more than
per cent in the past three years. Further falls in prices and improvements
in service quality and diversity can be expected as carriers position
themselves for increased competition after 1997.
While domestic costs have been cut, the export sector of the
telecommunications industry is thriving. Exports reached $ 545 million during
1991-92 and are likely to grow to as much as $ 2 billion in 1996-97.
In shipping, the average crew level on Australian ships has come down from
28 in 1959 to 18 and is expected to be reduced to as low as 16 in 1995.
These reductions will save over $ 80 million a year across the Australian flag
fleet, or about $ 1.2 million a year on an average ship.
On the waterfront, the workforce has been reduced from 9000 to fewer than
4000 in the face of strongly increasing trade volumes, more than doubling
labour productivity. Container handling rates in the more efficient terminals
are now at levels comparable with our trading partners. Ship turnaround times
have been cut by nearly 45 per cent. Truck queues and waiting times are
much shorter.
We are increasingly look~ ing to the States to achieve, in partnership with the
Commonwealth, rapid progress with the reform priorities that remain. Here
governments are working to reform electricity, gas and water supplies, further
maritime reform, and to ref&amp; m the legal profession. Industry will benefit from
lower input costs and better services.
Most importantly, we are working with the States to implement a national
competition policy, which will increase the transparency of pricing practices of
public monopolies and provide a more systematic basis for reforming public
utilities, the professions and agricultural production and marketing.
The transformation that our manufacturing and services sectors have
undergone during the past decade has produced a new generation of firms
and business leaders.
No longer are they producing just for a protected domestic market, accepting
second best methods. 4/ 7194 9: 54 PM 
Rather they are operating at the leading edge of their industries using world
best practices and technology.
Our industry policy reflects these changes. From a phase when the focus was
on opening up the Australian economy, we have moved to policies which
support our firms to grow, be innovators and ultimately prosper in world
markets.
Access to finance will be improved through a range of measures including the
provision of expert advice, promotion of the role of the Commonwealth
Development Bank, greater tax concessions for equity finance provided by
Pooled Development Funds, and the extension of the Export Finance
Insurance Corporation's facilities to cover the services sector and
manufactured goods.
Innovation will be encouraged by a more generous R&amp; D tax concession, a
program assisting small and medium sized enterprises ( SMEs) to
commercialise new technology and a national network for technology access
and diffusion.
Management and marketing skills will be encouraged by expanding enterprise
development services to SMEs including a major effort to target potential
exporters focusing on innovation, quality, research and development,
marketing and management skills. SMEs will also be helped to form networks
and alliances.
SMEs will benefit from the National Regional Development Strategy that will
provide more than $ 150 million to regions over the next four years to enhance
the development of their competitive industries.
The establishment of Au~ lndustry within the Industry, Science and Technology
portfolio will improve coordination and delivery of programs and bring together
all the Commonwealth's business assistance programs under a unified
marketing structure. The Chair of Auslndustry's Advisory Board and a
significant proportion of its membership will be drawn from the private sector.
Auslndustry will provide the entry point for all Commonwealth business
improvement programs and, through the existing network of the National
Industry Extension Service, provide a major link to State and Territory
programs.
The successful pursuit of global m~ rkets is vital to the future success of
Australian industry. The growth of world trade has been faster than the
growth of world output in nearly every year since World War 11 and much of
this growth has been happening right on our doorstep with exports from the
developing Asian countries growing at twice the rate of world exports over the
past decade. 4/ 7194 9: 54 PM 
The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round and the creation of the new
World Trading Organisation will add around $ 400 billion annually to the world
economy. For Australia alone the Uruguay Round will be eventually worth an
annual $ 5 billion.
As well as big gains for Australian farmers and miners, the Round outcome
will bring great opportunities for our manufacturers and services exporters.
The Round achieved the largest global tariff cutting package ever negotiated
with tariff cuts on products of interest to Australia of more than 50 per cent.
The new GATT agreement on services will allow Australian services exports,
already worth some $ 15 billion, to compete on an equal footing in this fast
growing $ 1 trillion ($ 1,000 billion) area of world trade. Sectors such as
telecommunications, banking, insurance, professional and business service
sectors stand to benefit substantially from this agreement. On current trends
by the end of next year Australia could well be a net exporter of services.
With APEC, we are working to build an enduring framework for trade and
economic relations in the Asia-Pacific. Already, APEC is doing work that will
greatly facilitate Asia-Pacific trade and investment.
In November this year, I expect APEC leaders will endorse a set of investment
principles that will define some common approaches to the treatment of
foreign direct investment flows. Work on harmonising product standards and
mutual recognition of standards and conformance arrangements is also
proceeding well. This will have tangible benefits for Australian businesses
trading and investing in the region.
Having recently met President Soeharto, who will chair this year's APEC
leaders' meeting, I am convinced that in November APEC leaders will again
push APEC on to a higher. plane of activity. President Soeharto and I both
want our region to be actively involved in liberalising trade, facilitating
commerce and strengthening economic linkages between APEC members,
whose economies are now the powerhouse of the world economy.
And we want business to drive the APEC process. After all, business, not
government is responsible for the high level of economic integration amongst
APEC economies intra-APEC trade is even higher than intra-EU trade.
Business now needs to give APEC governments a clear message on what it
wants. One way this will happen is through the APEC Business Forum, which
was established by APEC leaders last year in Seattle and will report to the
November 1994 leaders meeting in Bogor, Indonesia.
We are exploring with ASEAN countries the possible link between CER and
the ASEAN Free Trade Area ( AFTA). This is an attractive proposal. Our
economies are very complementary and linking them could create a market of
335 million people with a GDP of about $ 1 trillion. ASEAN members have
4V7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
agreed that the idea merits further consideration and we will continue to
discuss it with them.
At home, the Government is working directly with exporters through Austrade's
and other exporter assistance programs and in industry-based strategies
such as for those for agri-food, construction, and health services to jointly
harness Government and industry export efforts.
Australia is on the threshold of a new and exciting era.
Australia has opened up, culturally and economically, to the rest of the world.
We are ready to reap the harvest of opportunities presented by the new
technologies, the new era of trade driven world growth and our proximity to the
most dynamic and fastest growing region of the world.
Our immigration and multicultural policies have nurtured a unique human
resource on which astute businesses are beginning to capitalise a culturally
and linguistically diverse nation, whose migrant and ethnic communities are
drawn from all parts of the world, including our fastest growing export markets
in the Asia-Pacific.
All this means that Australia can become one of the great social democracies
and one of the great trading nations a nation with a vibrant, multidimensional
culture underwriting a strong, vigorous and internationally
competitive industrial base trading extensively in all the continents. Our
cornerstone will be especially close links to the Asia-Pacific nations.
In all this, industry must play a prime role. Industry must be able to capitalise
on the full range of skills, talents and potential in Australia's human resources,
including its youth, its women, and its many migrant and ethnic communities.
There is still a long way to go. We will succeed because we are a naturally
innovative nation with the will to change. Our unique combination of policies
to free up markets, while en'suring social justice for all, provides the
opportunities, fairness and cohesion needed to succeed.
Thank you 4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 



SPEECH NOTES FROM THE PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATES TO THE WOMEN LEADERS FORUM, 14 JULY
1994 " The Forum is built on the recognition of two dynamic trends: first, the
opening up of Australia to new commercial and trade links with the Asia-
Pacific region, with the enormous opportunities foi; growth and employment.
And second, the move of many more women into business and management,
with the benefits for Australia of their talents and resources."
" The fact is women have not been a firm part of most of Australia's trade
missions. Yours is a unique trade mission, which capitalises on the expertise
and contribution of business women to developing new commercial and trade
links. If we are to project a contemporary image of Australia's business
capacities, then it must be an accurate one and must include leading women
executives." " An important aim of the Forum is to achieve greater recognition of the talents
of Australian women recognition by governments, the media, the community,
and business both in Australia and in the region. If Australia is to have
internationally competitive, high quality management in the future, we must
harness the talents of women in business."
" The Forum is an exciting initiative. It is an example of the entrepreneurship
that Australia needs to take full advantage of the recovery and the
opportunities opening up in the Asia Pacific. It deserve9 to succeed. I have
no doubt that it will achieve signifcant advantages both for your corporations
and for Australia."
" I wish the Forum every success and congratulate Georgina Carnegie,
Telstra and the other corporate sponsors on your vision in conceiving,
organising and supporting the Forum."
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESENTATION OF THE IBM ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH PROGRAM
AWARD TO THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MARINE SCIENCE
TOWNSVILLE, WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is extremely gratifying to be able
to announce an IBM Corporation Environmental Research
Program award to the Australian Institute of Marine
Science. I have just had the pleasure of launching the Great Barrier
Reef Strategic Plan, a milestone towards the ecologically
sustainable management of a world treasure. This is
becoming a very satisfactory and environmentally friendly
day for me.
The Institute has every right to feel a little bit pleased with
itself about receiving this award. IBM is a corporation that
sets and expects the highest standards. IBM also
possesses and values highly its reputation as a good
corporate citizen. Its very generous sponsorship, through
the IBM International Foundation, of programs such as the
one which has produced this award amply illustrates that.
IBM has offered the Institute assistance in the form of
funding and computer techn0ology to the value of $ AUS1.4
millibn. Now, they used to let me deal with large sums
when I was Treasurer, and I can tell you that is a very
generous figure. The award is one of only four granted
worldwide, so is not only generous and practical but also
very good for the Institute's reputation.
I understand that the project outlined in the successful
proposal submitted by Dr Eric Wolanski will significantly
boost the research work being done at the Institute. Dr
Wolanski's proposes to undertake multi-disciplinary 
research to model oceanographic, environmental and
fisheries problems on coral reefs and mangroves. The
project will produce new conceptual tools to assist
managers in their understanding of these threatened
marine environments for conservation and sustainable
management. Information from this project will be passed on to
collaborating universities, and marine modellers from a
number of developing countries will be trained. The
project will greatly facilitate communication between
scientists and environmental and resource managers both
here working on the Great Barrier Reef and in South East
Asia. The benefits of this award are not restricted to the
Institute alone.
I believe IBM is to be commended on its corporate
responsibility and foresight and I am pleased to extend my
government's warmest thanks to the corporation for its
generosity. The Australian Institute of Marine Science, ( or AIMS for
short) makes a very important contribution to the national
environmental research effort. Like the IBM Corporation,
the Institute enjoys a high international profile for
professionalism and excellence. It is acknowledged as
Australia's foremost research body in tropical marine
science, and is the world leader in areas including coastal
dynamics and the oceanography of coral reefs and
mangroves. It has a proud record of achievement in a number of
diverse and complex areas.
The Institute, with Commonwealth support, has also
recently begun a research program in a part of northwestern
Australia containing not only the nation's most
intense marine industrial activity, such as gas and oil
production, but also some of our most spectacular and
fragile ecosystems. The research focuses on the key
marine science issues relating to sustainable management
and regional development.
The importance of the Institute's work is acknowledged in
the most sincere way in the 1994/ 95 Federal Budget.
AIMS was included in an increase in base level funding for
three major Commonwealth research agencies by $ 34
million over three years. 
The Institute is also a major partner in two Cooperative
Research Centres, or CRCs: the CRC for aquaculture and
the CRC for ecologically sustainable development of the
Great Barrier Reef. Both play crucial roles in formulating
ecologically sustainable development and management
strategies for their particular areas of concern.
I mentioned earlier the scope for regional cooperation that
the successful AIMS project proposal offers, and this is an
area where the Institute already plays a part through its
membership of the International Tropical Marine Resource
Centre, or INTROMARC.
INTROMARC is currently providing training in the
ecologically sustainable management of tropical marine
ecosystems to countries including Malaysia, Vietnam,
Indonesia, the Philippines and Papua New Guinea.
The Commonwealth Government places a great emphasis
on environmental management and cooperation in our
international region, reflected in our involvement with
International Environmental Cooperation mechanisms.
Memorandums of Understanding on environmental
cooperation have been, or are being, concluded with
regional neighbours including Indonesia, Singapore and
Brunei. We play a role already in several regional cooperative
bodies, and look forward to co-operating with
ASEAN in their new projects. As well, we are members of
APEC, whose March meeting of Environment Ministers in
Vancouver resulted in an environmental vision statement
and a framework of principles for integrating economy and
environment in APEC.
Let me again thank the IBM Corporation and congratulate
all those involved in the successful project from AIMS. I
wish both organisations every success with their future
endeavours. They have given much to the world already,
and show every sign of giving much more in an area where
it is certainly needed and where an island nation like
Australia should hardly be afraid to take the lead. 



TEL 20. Jul. 94 17: 51 No. 015 P. 01/ 08
L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, KAMORUNGA ENVIRONMENTAL PARK, CAIRNS,
WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
E&amp; QE PROOF COPY
J. Prime Minister can I ask you, first you were approached by the
gentleman on the way in and he discussed Sky Rail with you, do you
see that as a bit of a contradiction in terms to be planting trees on the
one hand and, as they say, pulling them down on the other.
PM; We are working on a bigger front than that. I mean, the declaration of
the world heritage area was, I think, a huge leap forward for North
Queensland and the Commonwealth, of course, committed, I was the
Treasurer at the time, we committed the better part of $ 90 million to it
and established adjustment schemes for those who were formerly
employed there. And what I am doing today is announcing the further
development of those adjustment schemes where we've taken forestry
workers and put them into re-establishment of forests and
rehabilitation of forests. So i think, you know, one has got to look at
the big gestures because they are the ones that matter and as far as
the specific projects go, I think Senator Faulkner is coming up anyway
in a week or two's time and he can debate that then.
J: Mr Keating, can you tell us why so long between official visits here to
Cairns?
PM: I have been here three times this year.
J: But they were private visits though..
PM: They are all the same when you drive through, whether it is public or
private, they are all the same. I was here, I had a long inspection of
thDe ~ ireo about a year ago and as a result of that the
Commonwealth Government has now committed with Queensland
million to buy back the hole in the heart on the other side of the
Daintree river and to try and repair the damage done by the Bjelke 
TEL 20. JuI. 94 17: 51 No. Ul1) r. uz/ uo
2
Petersen government in that disgraceful development on the other
side of the river. So that came from my last unofficial visit. So I do
things here officially and unofficially.
J: ( John O'Farrell) Your concern about the development of Cairns the
last time you were up here.
PM: I haven't seen you for years, how are you going?
JO'F: Long time.
J: You thought he was dead didn't you?
PM; No, he's too smart for that.
JO'F: Since then there have been major developments either started or
announced, is this getting worse. Is Cairns getting as bad as the Gold
Coast, is that the way it's headed?
PM: Well I don't think so. I think that I'm very encouraged by what I see as
a renewed interest, you know, a more mature interest in the
management of our heritage areas and the understanding that to
preserve the heritage is not only intrinsically important, important in its
own right, but because the region has such huge tourist potential that
everything that then is done in the built environment as well as in the
natural environment becomes important. There is a point of harmony
between the two and I think people are getting to that and what we are
seeing here today is a further example of that.
J: What about change to the city itself though, I mean you had some
harsh words about development in Cairns, that it was looking like
another Gold Coast.
PM: And I think people take some notice of those sorts of views and maybe
change their attitudes a little. I'm optimistic that I think that Cairns can
grow through another phase of economic growth. Just remember this,
the Federal Government has got the economy growing at 5 per cent at
the moment. The Australian economy is growing faster than any
economy in the Western world. One per cent inflation, 5 per cent
growth and 3 per cent employment growth. Now that sort of growth will
bring its development pressures with it and, I think, you know, a
municipal government has got to be alert to that and say right there is
going to be another phase of development how do we handle it.
J: Those factors for growth, do they include low interest rates and loans
for houses?
PM: Well they include the maintenance of low inflation principally, and -the
fact that the country is now imeasurably more competitive. I mean,
Australians have done a lot to produce their own cornucopia of growth 
TEL:' 20. JU1. 94 1 K: t~ l NO. U IZ r -1I
3
and opportunity and one of the points I always make about my
opponents, they are always trying to sort of cruel the pitch. They are
now trying to say the recovery is too strong: " too good, too good, the
recovery is too good. We might have to have higher interest rates in
there shocking." What we have got to do is preserve the recovery and
preserve low inflation and that is, I think, going to be important to all of
us. And it is going to be no less important here in Cairns where I think
there is tremendous potential. For a start, there is a shift of population
to Queensland and beyond that, of course, the carriage of very large
visiting communities of tourists. And we want to do that and do it well
and still preserve the best of what we have.
J: Ralph Willis said this morning that the sale of the FAC is very
important to the success of the Budget, do you agree with that?
PM: Well I got asked about that down in Townsville.
J: Does it worry you, the way, that the Coalition is targeting the seat of
Leichhardt the number of senators and opposition spokesmen they are
sending up here?
PMV: Well they can do their best, but basically it is the Commonwealth
Labor Government that put international tourism on the map. I mean,
the growth in the prosperity of Northem... Queensland was there
because of the Commonwealth Labor Governmnt. iI It was there from
the early 1 980s and it is now being helped by a sensible State Labor
Government who we work together with very well, I mean, Mr Downer
is out there in the Financial Review saying today: " I won't be giving
detailed policies, they are saying we won't be giving detailed policies,",
where a month ago he was saying the public are entitled to some
detail about policies. They want to be in the debate, these characters,
without any policy. And, at the same time, trying to claim from you that
which a real government has put into place over ten years. That is,
you know, this area has been completely changed for the better
because of the policies of the national government.
J: Rockhampton, Townsville and Cairns are all part of the itinerary, Prime
Minister, everywhere that you have gone, protests, are you happy with
the welcome you have received?
PM: Oh, absolutely. It's an amazing reception. I had 1,100 kids turned up
to have a general talk down at one of the principal schools on the
itinerary and I really enjoyed that, I mean, I think particularly year 11
and 12 students, they are as sharp as tacks, they are a tough
audience. And I really enjoyed a chance to talk to them. I met another
very large community group in Rockhampton, I got a wonderful
reception. I had a tremendous civic reception last evening in
Townsville and then a bumper party function in the evening and I have
had the same sort of general goodwill here in Cairns. So I couldn't be
happier. I mean, you will always get the odd person with a placard 
20. Jul. 9 417: 51 No. 015b . ua/ uo
TEL: 4
about this or about that. You know, it will be Hinchenbrook(?) Island
or it will be something else. But I mean, look at the big mass of
people, how they respond and the answer is very well.
J: Well the issues up here like this Sky Rail and the Hinchinbrook issue
you just mentioned there, environment issues. How important is the
environment generally going to be at the next election?
PM: Well I think it is going to be important and I think the Labor Party is
going to be the best at it. Because we are the only ones that care
about it. I mean, here we are in the national Budget just a month or
two ago, announcing the fact that we are going to buy back the land in
the hole in the heart which was, I think, disgracefully developed and
sold in the 1970s and 80s and these sort of, if you like, broad ticket
issues in the environment are the ones that matter.
ENDS 



7
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESENTATION OF CHEQUE FOR WET TROPICS TREE PLANTING
SCHEME AND OPENING OF THE KAMERUNGA ENVIRONMENTAL PARK
CAIRNS, WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
Ladies and Gentlemen
Its a pleasure to be here today in such a beautiful location to demonstrate my
Government's support for such a worthwhile shceme as the Wet Tropics tree
Planting Scheme and to officially open one of the fruits of the scheme's
labour, the Kamerunga Environmental Park.
As many of you will know, the Wet Tropics Tree Planting Scheme has been
operating successfully since 1989 when it was established as part of The Wet
Tropics Structural Adjustment Package. Commonwealth funding for the
scheme has totalled some $ 6.3 million. When you consider the benefits both
in terms of the employment generated and the environmental improvements,
to my way of thinking, that has been money well spent.
To date the scheme has operated successfully in four shires, Hinchinbrook,
Eacham, Douglas and Mulgrave. Through the development of infrastructure,
ii~ luding f6ur nurseries', and expertise in nursery operations and tree
planting, the scheme has done a superb job in reducing soil erosion,
improving water quality and replacing lost rainforest habitat. These
achievements are a credit to the commitment and energy of all those who
have participated in the scheme.
But the scheme will not stop there. Like any dynamic program, the scheme is
experiencing exciting changes, changes that will see the scheme restructured
into a community-based employment company, providing training and work
experience opportunities for long-term unemployed people.
I have to say that the scheme's track record in environmental repair and
management and the enormous amount of expertise that it has developed
gives me great confidence in its ability to provide on-the-job training and'
supervision as part of the Commonwealth's Labour Market programs 
especially the regional environment employment program announced as part
of the announcing the White Paper on employment.
I also have great confidence in its ability to operate independently of
recurrent Commonwealth funding from the 1996-97 financial year.
As an illustration of my Government's confidence in the scheme, I am here
today to present the first instalment of a total of $ 3 million that the Federal
Government has committed to assist the scheme in its transition to
independence.
As part of the new arrangements, the management of the Wet Tropics Tree
Planting Scheme will be transferred to the North Queensland Afforestation
Program joint board. This will see seven councils Thuringowa, Cardwell,
Johnstone, Cook, Mareeba, Atherton and Herberton -join the original four
participating shires to manage the scheme. The joint board is well placed to
manage the scheme. It was established in 1992 specifically to pursue and
coordinate tree planting throughout the region, for both environmental and
commercial purposes.
The board will now have responsibility for the future restructuring, operation
and success of the scheme. The Government trusts that the new
arrangements will see a continuation of the cooperative approach that has so
far characterised the scheme's operations in employment, environmental
successes and training.
I'd like to congratulate all participating councils in the scheme for having
taken such positive action in addressing the environmental challenges of your
region and through this, doing so much for the region's unemployed. It would
be difficult to find two more deserving activities than creating jobs and
reversing environmental degradation.
But as you all know I am not only here today to hand over a cheque. I am
also here to officially open the Kamerunga Environmental Park, a perfect
example of the kind of work being done by the Wet Tropics Tree Planting
Scheme. This glorious 54 hectare park which you can see all around you,
extends for more than 2 kilometres on both banks of the Barron River. It is
here that the Mulgrave unit of the scheme joined forces with the Queensland
National Parks and Wildlife Service and others to involve community groups
in'preserving, restoring and reconstructing the naturally occurring vegetation
along this part of the river.
I've been told that when they first began work, the river foreshores were in a
terrible state. Rubbish had to be removed, exotic plants controlled, noxious
weeds removed and the area where sand had been mined, filled and levelled.
Since that time, more than 30,000 trees have been planted to restore the
river foreshore, and paths and picnic areas have been developed. 
From what I have seen today, I can say that the original aims of the project
providing a mixed forest demonstration plot and education site, enhancing the
public amenity of the area, and improving the scenic value of the park
have been well and truly met.
The restructuring of the Wet Tropics Tree Planting Scheme will enable the
valuable work of replacing lost rainforest habitats to continue. It will also
provide opportunities for additional projects to be undertaken by local
councils and other Commonwealth and State agencies, adding to the
scheme's potential to create long term employment in the region.
The scheme has built up a significant store of expertise and has become a
very popular initiative. Restructuring now offers great potential for meeting
environmental, labour market and industry development objectives in the
region. In ' Working Nation' the Government spelt out its plans for providing
support for the regional coordination of labour market initiatives. The Wet
Tropics Tree Planting Scheme has the potential to be a model for other
regions. I am very pleased to launch this new phase of the Wet Tropics Tree Planting
Scheme and have great pleasure in handing over this cheque for 1/ 2 million
to Mike Berwick, the chairman of the North Queensland Afforestation
Program Joint Board.
I am also very happy to declare the Kamerunga Environmental Park open. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUTOMOTIVE, FOOD, METALS AND ENGINEERING UNION CONFERENCE
SYDNEY, 27 JULY 1994
Let me begin by saying how good it is to be with the members of one of
Australia's great unions, the AFMEU.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I very much welcome this opportunity to speak with
you today for yours is a union that has led the way in workplace reform.
You have played a vital role in preparing the Australian workforce for a new
century.
You were the first union to put in place skills-based career structures.
You were at the forefront in implementing occupational superannuation.
You were at the forefront of restructuring unions.
I understand that you will soon be making another attempt to amalgamate with
the PKIU.
From what I hear the PKIU is ready to take a positive approach to the issue,
and that's encouraging for all concerned.
We are now less than six years away from a new century.
Clearly, what we do for the remainder of this decade will determine the sort of
Australia that enters the twenty-first century.
This Government has been out there driving the changes that will make sure
Australia remains a great place to live and bring up kids.
Over the past year, we have undertaken more activity than probably any other
Federal Government be it securing the Mabo legislation, getting agreement to
implement the Hilmer Report, building up APEC, or introducing the raft of
initiatives contained in the White Paper. 
We have sought to build structures both inside and outside Australia that will
deliver long term gains for all Australians.
If, as a nation, we can remain comfortable with change keep change our
friend then change won't be forced upon us.
If we can anticipate and prepare for change, then we will have greater control
over our future.
It will be our future and not an imposed future.
As you well know, with an increasingly global marketplace, the waves of
change are growing larger each day and they're coming more frequently.
That can seem very daunting at times.
It can leave many people unsure about the future.
What all Australians must learn to do is surf the wave of change.
That calls for new skills, new capabilities in our working people.
It calls for new thinking, new attitudes and a renewed commitment to doing the
right thing by those who will come after us.
That goes for employers and governments just as much as it goes for workers.
As we prepare for a new century, we must prepare for it in a way that only a
Labor movement can.
That means we keep on board our sense of fairness, decency and
compassion. This is what Working Nation is all about.
The policies we put in place in Working Nation are Labor policies to the core.
Only a Labor Government could have cared sufficiently to make the changes
that will ensure ours is a fair, decent and prosperous Australian community.
Consciously or unconsciously, and I'm not sure anyone has worked Alexander
Downer out on this one, the Liberal's prescription is for two Australian societies
one for the haves, the other for the have-nots.
What's more, the conservatives are frightened of change.
And when they reluctantly choose to embrace it, it's a change backwards
rather than forwards. 
Only a Labor Government could have had the imagination that created the
programs in Working Nation.
And only a Labor Government could have the commitment to see those
programs through.
Where were the Tories in all this?
All they could muster were a few miserable and misplaced comments about
cutting the deficit.
And we all know what that really means.
That's Toryspeak for cutting more Australians out of the picture.
Working Nation is designed to ensure that unemployed people share in the
economic recovery.
But it will only come about with the support of all Australians including the
employers and unions.
In order to expand the opportunities available to young Australians and to
provide Australian industry with the skills needed in a modern economy, we
have committed funding to support an additional 50,000 entry-level training
places by the end of 1995-96.
These additional places will be created in training programs such as
apprenticeships and traineeships, in institutional pathways and in labour
market programs with a significant training component.
To prevent the very young falling into long term unemployment, the Youth
Training Initiative combined with individual case management, will help ensure
newly unemployed young people gain access to a suitable education, training
or work experience opportunity.
Over a four year period from 4 July 1994, we will spend a total of $ 10.3 billion
on employment and training initiatives.
Under Working Nation, there will be some 645,000 labour market and entry
level training commencements a year by 1995-96.
Under the J. obCompact, we will assist over 550,000 people who have been
unemployed for 18 months or more over the next four years at a total cost of
$ 4.6 billion.
During the 1995-96 financial year we expect to place some 160,000 people in
the Job Compact, with around 100,000 in subsidised jobs under either Jobstart
or the National Training Wage, and 35,000 in New Work Opportunities. 
A training wage will provide an important option for employers and another
avenue of choice for young workers and unemployed people.
The training wage will be particularly valuable for those without existing entrylevel
skills or qualifications.
And it will only apply where the training is structured, portable and certified.
By 1995-96 there will also be some 360,000 labour market program places
available for non-Compact unemployed people a year.
And Government funding will provide support for some 94,000 apprentices and
trainees. Of course, all this won't happen overnight and it won't happen without the
support of unions like the AFMEU.
With your backing we can deliver the outcomes of Working Nation.
Where would we or, more importantly, where would long term unemployed
people have been under the Liberals?
Even the warm and fuzzy version of Fightback would have cut $ 790 million
from support for unemployed people.
Fightback 2 wanted to delay the savings by 12 months.
That would have meant they'd be introducing their cuts about now!
Fightback would have reduced spending on labour market programs by more
than 25 per cent that's the equivalent of 150,000 places.
Under the Coalition's AUSTRAIN proposal, unemrrpjpye~ d people would have
been paid as little as 7per cent of the award wage but ( with no obligation on
the employer to provide any training.
Would the Coalition have been capable of implementing an enterprise
bargaining system that protected workers but was also good for the economy?
Would the Coalition have been able to map out an Accord with the union
movement that would have as its minimum goal 500,000 new jobs in the three
years to 1996?
Would the Coalition have delivered an agreement with the union movement to
support a package providing two Safety Net Adjustments of $ 8.00 a week, one
in this year and one next year?
Would the Coalition have agreed to work with the union movement to look at
new ways to assist families? 
It is through the Accord that we are cementing low inflation as a feature of the
Australian economy low inflation critical to creating more jobs and rising
standards of living over the long term.
We've been able to make progress on enterprise bargaining because of the
support from the union movement in the broad and the AFMEU in particular.
It has been the Metals Industry that has led award restructuring, workplace
reform and enterprise bargaining.
Since 1991, we've seen around 700 finalised enterprise agreements in the
Metals industry covering around 160,000 employees and accounting for close
to 40 per cent of all enterprise agreements.
And while much of the reform has been in the medium to large enterprises, I
understand the AFMEU is discussing with the MTIA how enterprise bargaining
can flow through to the smaller enterprises.
Enterprise bargaining has become the primary focus for wage fixing and a vital
catalyst for workplace reform.
And that's why we want to see 80 per cent of employees in the Federal award
sector covered by direct bargains by the end of 1996.
It's also why we've set up a new program that will help unions and business
alike to negotiate workplace agreements.
We've ratified a number of ILO conventions and changed the way the
Industrial Relations Commission functions.
We now have an industrial relations framework that will deliver the labour
market flexibility and productivity growth that is essential for strong and
sustainable growth.
The whole thrust of these labour market and education and training reforms is
to ensure unions have an organic role in the labour marketplace.
These reforms are backed up by a superannuation system that will ensure all
Australians, and not just the wealthy few, have greater security in their
retirement. We've also introduced a child care rebate, a home child care allowance and a
parenting allowance.
And last November we cut taxes.
But we didn't stop there. 
Would the Coalition have been capable of introducing industry policy initiatives
that will build competitive firms and create more growth and more jobs?
Working Nation recognised that industry policy can't be developed in isolation
that industry policy depends as much for its success on macro-economic,
industrial relations and trade policy, as it does on specific industry
development and support measures.
Industry policy is about encouraging the development of those characteristics
critical to success in the global marketplace.
It's about creating secure and rewarding jobs in flexible high productivity
workplaces. The raft of Working Nation industry initiatives are good for industry, good for
employment, and good for Australia.
Improving small firm access to finance and increasing research and
development incentives will enable small firms to grow and employ more
people. Giving industry better access to the government purchasing market will also
lead to more jobs.
And because it is new business new products and new services that are at
the forefront of global economic growth, we're embarking on a major campaign
to promote the fundamental need for innovation in everything a firm does.
And that includes seeking out the ideas of those who are down there on the
workplace floor.
It's about tapping into the imagination of all workers.
We want to drive the industry innovation debate over the coming years.
The policies we are embarked on are Labor to their core.
The task we now face is to drive home the White Paper changes over the
coming 12 months.
We want to make the policies outcomes.
It's a big ask, but it's one both I, and my Government, are committed to
achieving. Unions, such as the AFMEU, have a big role to play in meeting this challenge.
And I see the AFMEU playing a leadership role in developing flexible high
productivity workplaces. 
7
You have already taken major strides in the right direction.
And your continued support for change will ensure that this Labor Government
delivers the sorts of outcomes that only a Labor Government can.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NEW SOUTH WALES ALP DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, SYDNEY,
WEDNESDAY, 27 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Bob ( Carr), Terry ( Sheahan), John Della Bosca, Neville and Jill ( Wran),
Lionel and Clare ( Bowen), my parliamentary colleagues, Mr Speaker and
distinguished ladies and gentleman.
Well, it is a bumper audience. It's the largest I've seen in this room, and I've
been to many of these over the years, and I thank you very sincerely for the
tribute you pay us in coming. I thank Bob also for his very generous words
towards me and for the thought, the good thought, that the things we have to
do are to do things together and to get things done because as we all know in
public life, and in business, the system runs itself. What matters are the
changes. And the changes are promoted in the public sphere by Ministers
and, in the case of leaders, by Prime Minister's and Premiers, by
Governments, and that whole co-operative notion that Bob has just raised is
of course, central to that.
Now, I want to see Bob Carr as the Premier of NSW. It's not particularly
because I don't get on with John Fahey, it's just that he won't do anything.
Now, the thing is, this is not a partisan remark, you go to Queensland all
sorts of things happen. You go to Victoria, you can get things to happen, but
you can't get them to happen in NSW. Because, this is the state where major
when is the last time you ever heard of a major project starting in NSW?
this is the state where they crimp them off. This is the state where there's a
scandal a week. There's someone falls out of the ministry every second
week, and out of the Parliamentary liberal party every off week. And that's
how it goes along. But above all else, the public interest doesn't get a go
because the place isn't going ahead. And here we are, with the most
conducive circumstances and it's not happening. 
But Bob touched on a theme when he started to speak, saying we've always
had and I think we, the Labor party, or certainly, certainly since the period
when Neville was Premier, beginning with his governments a great
relationship with business in NSW, particularly in Sydney. And we think, I
know it's unfashionable, that we've got to earn our freight. And we try and be
relevant, and we like you to be relevant too. And we see a relationship
between us. But Jeffrey Kennett is down there hopping into the business
community in Victoria today, I don't know if you read that, those little bon mots
there saying, you see if you're not part of the Ron Walker squad, well you're
not in it. If you can't join o1' Potato-face Ron and his crew, you're not in the
game. And if you don't line up the way they like, well then you get a serve
from Jeffrey.
And then of course, you had Mr Downer a couple of weeks ago, saying to a
question from some journalist naive it must have been saying: " well, Mr
Downer, what have you got to say about what the Christian churches had to
say about you today?", and he said:, " Oh well, the key point here is the
Christian Church are in my good book at the moment." You see, you've got to
have a lot of front to say a thing like that.
But it comes from, you know, those days when he was in Stoke Lodge in
London for so many years, going down to see the British Conservative Party
in the House of Lords. And of course, there, all the Church elders sit in the
front pews. And it's a case of who's running who. It's a case of whether the
State sort of runs the Church, or the Church this is the sort of game he's in.
Now, that's his view of life, of course this is right at the time, dare I say, that
Prince Charles is saying well I don't think there should be just one official
church in Britain, but Alexander Downer says well, the Christian Church is in
my good book at the moment. Giving them a hint that, you know, all those
Bishops out there, they better stay there. Meanwhile, in the great southern
state, the business community has got to line up with Ron's little team
otherwise Jeffrey will not approve of them and he'll admonish them as the
case may be. Now, the Labor Party I mean, poor silly us we're out there
saying look, can we do some more for you? 5per cent GOP growth, 3.5 per
cent employment growth, under 2 per cent inflation, we're still working at it,
stock market back to 1987 levels. The profit share in the economy, with no
historic precedent, spreading enterprise bargaining through the workforce,
creating structures in the Asia-Pacific for trade, but somehow there's a game
we're not on to, you know.
I mean I thought today, sort of said something about it. You know, here was
the news from the conservatives that the Citizen Initiated Referendum was
now off the agenda, that the potpourri of constitutional changes was to be
scrapped. Now this was Mr Downer's sole policy since becoming the
Opposition Leader. The Citizen's Initiated Referendum, the support for 4
year terms after Mr Reitli, by the way, was promoting these, was the
principle opponent of the 4 year term measures to prevent the
Commonwealth signing international treaties. Now this is the potpourri of
reforms. I mean, some reform. You see, clip the Commonwealth's wings so 
the Commonwealth can't sign international treaties, and put a time limit on
double dissolution bills. Well, that's really going to change the way we live.
Now, and I thought, well here I was this morning at the launch of the
wonderful history of the Australian Olympic movement written by Harry
Gordon it was a very nice event and here were these journo's rustling
around for a comment about the Citizens Initiated Referendum, and of course
overnight we had Tim Fischer saying it was a law-making cancer, and then
Alexander Downer stepping back from it, giving the journo's the hint that
during the day that he would walk away from it. And they're all asking, you
know, is the Prime Minister going to give us a comment? And of course, silly
me, I'm interested in the inflation rate. You know, I'm such a dag, I'm actually
interested in the inflation rate. And there it came out at under 2 per cent.
Decelerating the trend inflation down from 2.1 to 1.9 per cent in the face of
the fastest growth in the Western world. With all the attendant influences for
inflation for interest rates and for everything else. And I thought, I normally
give you know one hopes you know a studied.. . well the underlying rates
are down to such and such and such and such, meanwhile back at the
coalition ranch, they're hopping out of these Citizens Initiated Referenda
and you've got to say, what's going on in the public debate in Australia,
really? What is going on in this country? I mean, what about a bit of rejoicing
in the fact we got 5 per cent growth? And Western Europe has got about
per cent. What about a little bit of rejoicing in the fact that our workforce has
seen the value of wage restraint for employment and we are sitting today with
further confirmation that inflation is decelerating and we've broken the back of
a 20 year scourge with double digit inflation, and comprehensively broken it,
and watching this year, 3.5 per cent employment growth. I saw buried on
page 2 of the Australian and the only paper that reported it last week from the
IMF: Australia and Canada leading the world in employment growth 3.5 per
cent OECD leading us. Not page one, not splashed over the front page of
the Herald, down on page two. But at least Tthe Australian reported it. On
the back page of the Economist, where they have the OECD, the 27 member
states of the OECD economies, each month, this month what's the little
banner flash across it? ' Australia . dot. dot. dot... still ahead of the pack.'
Still ahead of the pack. Well God you wouldn't know it here. You wouldn't
know it. But people in business know it, and people in the community know it
because we are coming back very strongly and we are doing it in a way that
is going to be great for Australia, with low inflation.
People say to me, I had someone ( journalist) ask me today, you know, " The
polls say you are arrogant, what have you got to say about that?" I said,
' Well, if people knew me as much as you do, they would like me much more
than they do now, and when you get to know him, you sort of can't help but
like him" that sort of thing. And they said, " oh yeah, ok, well that's the
answer to that one, what about the next one? And, it went on like this. They
got down to saying, " well look, you know, Mr Downer is ahead of you." I said,
" yeah well that's very strange isn't it, because this guy is a policy free-area.
He hasn't got any policies." I said, " let me just tell you something here, it was
only six months ago that Bronwyn Bishop was ahead of me". And she was, 
she was. She was preferred Prime Minister. So you see, you cannot react to
this stuff, you've got to let it wash over you a bit, but I think it is worth, you
know, worth actually saying.
You really wonder what has happened to public comment in Australia, where
it used to be the case the news was where the weight was. An editor wrote
his stories where the weight of the news was and people would give you the
story and let you read it. And you would make your own mind up about it.
But now, it's never the weight, its the angle. You know, its the poll, its
someone new, its not the weight. And the reason why the weight is the
weight is because it affects everybody. And so the Government has been
concentrating on weight while the coalition and other people are into floss
and nonsense and I think the weight matters but you feel like getting out on a
loud haler because its almost a dark secret about the things that really
matter. Now, I just want to say a couple of things about the Government in this term
of office because, I think, it is worth saying. In the last election campaign,
John Hewson said we would have a double-dip recession and a depression.
He said we had all the workers in the gun sights. Remember the gun-sight
ad?. In fact, we are growing faster than any western economy and we have
had 3.5 per cent employment. growth. The Government focused on that
recovery. The One ' Nation spending is now running strongly. We are
spending $ 1 million a day on the rail system right this minute. From
Brisbane to Melbourne and a standard gauge across to Adelaide, all that
spending is going on. We pulled the right policy lever with One Nation, when
private spending was down, we put public spending up and we pulled
Australia out of the recession faster than any other Western country. We've
now got it up and running and we are still yet to have, in full measure, the
investment phase come through and I'm pretty sure its going to come through
strongly. So it is going to go on. We've had first public demand, then public
demand in housing, then consumer spending and housing, and now,
investment: a rolling recovery. So we concentrated on that recovery. And
it's coming through. And you can imagine the claims, had the coalition won
the election. It would have been all their doing. They would have said " oh
remember the Government the former Government members were down
there, has us in a recession all this growth is because we're in office. The
growth is here because of the policies of the Federal Government the
Federal Labour Government and the success is there because of the
commitment which the Australian people have given to the recovery. And I
think Australians deserve the chance to rejoice in their own work and we
should acknowledge the fact that the place is coming up very strongly.
Now a number of things have occupied us since the election, since March
1993. Let me just run through them quickly: there was Mabo, APEC, Hilmer,
the White PapeRr Working Nation the Accord and the new jobs
arraii-emrents and the-Republic. Let me just say a couple things about each
one. Let me say something -about Mabo. Now, for a lot of people, Mabo is an
extraneous matter, it doesn't affect them immediately, they live in the cities, 
it's not a matter which comes their way. But ask yourself this. How many
Governments and how many countries could cope with the fact that its most
supreme of Courts said that native tradition and custom is a source of
national common law and that there's a native title in the common law? What
do you do with a decision like that? That means that every title in this country
issued, and certainly since the Racial Discrimination Act of 1975 was
introduced, was under question. And in mining, that's most of it. That's the
great mining tracks of Queensland and Western Australia and New South
Wales and South Australia and there's big pastoral areas and it could be
resolved by one court case after another, one claim after another, which
would take 20 or 30 years, but how would we go for certainty of title? How do
you resolve all of the legal uncertainties? What happens when a bank says
"$ we are no longer supporting your facilities, because you can't guarantee us
title?". That is what it meant. But the opportunity of Mabo was to make right
a wrong. To overturn the fiction and the untruth of terra nullius and to repair
something which should have been repaired in our history long ago. And that
was to say to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians we will be the
stronger, and this place will be the fairer when we are all as one and we
share in this country equally. That was the promise of Mabo and the
Government took it up. And the other thing is, we were not going to leave the
High Court out to dry. Now, you often hear these Tories tell you, we believe
old law and order, they get law and order out every half a dozen years.
They're always in favour of the law and the rule of law but remember the catcalling
and the attacks upon the Court from those who formally were great
supporters of this institution until it happened to say something that they
didn't like. And we had the Justices make what I think was a courageous
decision; not one that could work in terms of an administrative solution, but as
a point of principle, a courageous decision and it was for the Government to
take the opportunity and to preserve the Court's prestige and encourage them
to make such decisions.
And so from a clean sheet of paper, we put together one of the largest pieces
of property and cultural law of its kind in the world with lovely straight lines of
logic after long consultation with Aboriginal people and as a consequence,
we brought certainty to all those titles; we have given the opportunity for
those with the traditional association with the land to claim it, we got a chance
to hold our head up and say that we are no longer going on with the lie that
there were no people here at the time of European settlement. Beyond that,
of course is the land fund which extends the rights to land for those who can't
avail themselves of Mabo. In doing all that we did it in 13 months. It would
have taken, I'm sure, the United States 10 or 12 years, or somewhere else.
And there are a lot of lawyers in this room. Look at the property laws of New
South Wales a great collection of tomes it's a most complex area of the
law. But to start from a clean sheet of paper and say " how do we build this
structure?" We've done it. And we did it with the consultation with the
Aboriginal community who for the first time negotiated with the national
Government as never before, and both Houses of Parliament passed it. And
we will now see it coming into affect the tribunals are being established. 
Now apart the inherent decency of it, when you go to Asia now, people say
" that's very interesting because these European tribes never give anything
away and maybe the Australians have turned over a new leaf. Maybe they
really mean what they say. They want to be in it with us and we approve very
much of the way they treat their indigenous." Now I think that is important to
Australia. I think Mabo was important for what it meant, it was important to do
for our self-esteem and for the simple justice of it and it was not just done, but
it was done in a way that I am sure most Governments couldn't have
contemplated. It was one of the things we have done in the last 15 months
and a coalition Government wouldn't have done it. They opposed it tooth
and by jowl all the way and John Hewson described it, as we brought the Bill
from the Senate then back into the House of Representatives to support the
last amendments, as " a day of shame".
Now, that's the difference between weight and quality and no quality and
nonsense and it is one of the things we have done. Let me move on.
APEC. Neville is Australia's eminent person on the APEC Eminent Person's
Gr7. Weaeseigt ul nAi-Pacific economic community. We
are seeking, from our country, to interest others in a structure which turns
what was a co-operative sort of mini OECD information sharing secretariat
into an executive head of government body. Now, we worked this initiative
up. I pedalled my way around the Pacific through most of 1992. Neville
worked on the Eminent Person's Group. Our Foreign Affairs Department put
their shoulder to the wheel and gradually we got people to support it. So
much so, with some real confidence, I was able to say to President Clinton
that I believe that it's possible to put together a head of governments' meeting
for the Asia-Pacific, but we needed a catalyst for it to happen. That catalyst
came when Bill Clinton extended the invitation for people to attend in Seattle
last year.
When those fifteen leaders sat down, half the world's production and over
half the worlds population sat down there with them. And, for the first time in
our long history, Australia was at a very big table. But, not only that, a table
which it, in some substantial part, had put together itself. This Labor
Government did that.
I had Alexander Downer a couple of weeks ago saying ' I don't think we ought
to be having foreign investment in the measure we're having it'. He caballed
the fact we are investing abroad. Last week he was saying ' we belong to
Oceania, we don't belong to Asia.' Now, if one wants to get technical and go
back to the atlas, we are in the bottom end of the South-Pacific and we
belong to Oceania or what used to be called Oceania. But, 75 per cent of
our exports are in the_ Asia-Pacific. That's where the markets are growing 6 to
8 per cent a year. So, wFitfprice the Liberals being able to conceive, much
less put it together, when they are even disputing the fact we're in the region
that APEC is all about. But, the Government has pursued it. Neville has just
come back from an Eminent Persons' meeting and I've just met President
Soeharto to talk further about the upcoming meeting which is in Indonesia in 
November at Bogor and we have every prospect there of advancing the
APEC agenda.
And, when Australia is linked and linked well into the Asia-Pacific, when are
exports are growing as they are now rapidly by these bilateral linkages, but
as we multi -lateral ise, multi-lateral agreements within the Asia-Pacific area
then we are really going to see Australia plugged in in a way it has never
been plugged in before. Because, we are not part of natural growth areas or
big markets like the European Community. We don't have contiguous
borders with France or Spain or anywhere else, or North America. We are
not part of NAFTA. We are an island continent. We've got to do it ourselves.
We've got to be part of something if we can we must create or be a part of
something someone else can create with us. But, if we get set in the Asiapacific,
we are set for at least a century.
Now, that's what this Government is about. It is about that sort of weight. Not
citizens initiated referendums and mucking around over treaties or saying the
Queen doesn't matter, she is irrelevant and quaint. It's not about that sort of
babble. We are about things that matter.
Then there is Hilmer. Hilmer is an attempt to the Hilmer Report on
competition polity--is-an attempt to make the States' authorities as open to
competitive pressures as the rest of us are. I mean, there are a lot of unions
here tonight. They have been open to competitive pressures. They have had
to find themselves a productive place in Australian enterprise. They have
had to adjust the way in which they are organised. They have had to adjust
their awards. They have had to amalgamate unions. They have had to
restructure. They have had to accept productivity related wage adjustments.
They have had to adjust. Business has had to adjust. But, the States are
sitting taking hundreds of millions in monopoly rents, out of electricity, out of
water, out of gas, out of ports, and sticking them into State budgets. And
what the Commonwealth is saying is " well, hang on, we'ye now opened
Australia up by knocking the tariff wall over, removing exchange control, we
have got a free flow of funds, a free flow goods, we've got natural advantages
in this country. We have got a coal seam right down the east coast of
Australia. We've got quite a large supply of natural gas. We have got natural
advantages, we can actually promote ourselves, give us a comparative
advantage. God knows how hard it is to get a comparative advantage and we
are trying to open this up". And we got the States to agree at the last COAG
meeting the Council of Australian Governments to do that.
But, I got a letter in the mail this morning from Jeffrey. He is on my mind
today Jeffrey. Most of the time I like him, but I don't much today. But,
anyway, he said we are not going to be in this reform unless the
Commonwealth pays for it. Well, when we cut tariffs in the 1 980s, I don't
remember the Americans giving us a cheque. When we did things that cost
the Commonwealth budget, no one paid for us. So, they are saying well look,
we'll introduce these reforms, but if you pay for it. Well, anyway, we are
going to argue about that, but the important thing is the quality of the reform. 
Get these competitive changes in the States authorities of this country and
the Commonwealth authorities and we've already got the competitive
disciplines in business and we are off and running. You know, you are flat
out holding Australia back. It is another issue. We are going to debate it
soon at COAG. It is another issue of enormous weight.
And then there is, of course, the White Paper Working Nation. I said on
election night that we wouldn't forgiet the long-term unemployed. People may
say " well, that's the Labor Party, it is a party of compassion, it believes in
these things, these people are part of its natural constituency." All that is
true. But, what's also true is that we will make a tragic mistake as a country
believing you can have an underclass. Believing that we can move on those
of us who are well off, got a job, some incomes, some assets that we can go
off and pick up the joy of a recovery, but the people who carried the shock or
the absorption of a lot of the change are left as long term unemployed people.
And, we are yet to see how societies live with underclasses. The United
States is now trying to handle it. So is Britain and the British people have
shown over the years they'll take a hell of a lot of pressure and a lot of social
stress because they are a very strong and robust people.
But, this is a new era, a really new era of two speed societies. What we
decided in March 1993 at that election is that Australia would be one society.
Now, it is all very easy and well to say " oh well, yes of course that is decent
rhetoric, you expect the Prime Minister to say one society". But, while, we
say one society, we mean one society. When the Liberals say one society,
they don't mean it. They mean one society for those well off and the others,
well, they can just take their place further down the queue. And, you have got
to draw a line under it and you've got to say, well, should 350,000 people be
long term unemployed? And at any rate, where is our labour market
complementation, skills formation going to come in this recovery? It is not
going to come from migration as in others. It is going to come from the labour
market. We have to train, re-train those 350,000 people and get them back
into work.
In the next four years, we will spend $ 10.5 billion on labour market programs
creating 650,000 places a year. Now, the unemployed I can't remember the
exact number, it is around 900,000 odd 650,000 places will actually be
created by the Commonwealth. We are going to be spending $ 10.5 billion
over four years an enormous contribution but one which we've put with a
declining trajectory of our deficit to go and do that. We will be personally
case managing that is one to one one person talking to another person
about their employment background, their educational attainment's, their
skills, their aptitudes, one to one we are going to be case managing, next
year, 560,000 people. This is an absolute revolution in social policy. This is
the first country in the world which will have done this and as always, it will
only be done by a Labor Government.
And, it will mean, that we will get people back into work. We are also saying
that we won't accept the fact that any young person under 18 slips out of the 
9
system. If they slip out we will personally case manage them back into the
mainstream education system or into training or into work.
The same with the training wage. In terms of apprenticeships and
traineeships, there is going to be a huge expansion in apprenticeships and
tranineeships and, of course, all of this comes on top of these massive
participation rates in schools. Ten years ago the Liberals were happy
enough to see four kids in ten complete secondary school. This year it is
over eight in ten. Next year it will be nine in ten 40 per cent of them are
now streamed through university and we are now building the TAFE system
beside the universities to take the balance so that the whole of that group
to 19 which we will regard now as a period of vocational preparation, will go
on to become part of the clever country, the smarter society, the trained
workforce and the ones that drop out the young people who drop out we
will pick them back and put them back in. And, in secondary school, in Years
11 and 12 for the students who know they are not going on to a tertiary
education, we are going to start to give them accreditation for TAFE courses
in Years 11 and 12, for units of TAFE in Years 11 and 12 and some work
experience. So, their lives pattern starts in Years 11 and 12.
I mean, these are the things that the White Paper means. It is not just a one
day Parliamentary flash in the pan. It is a change to the way we live. It is a
restatement of our values Labor values that say, one nation we will be, an
inclusive society we must remain.
Finally a couple of words about the republic. I'd turn no, we can't turn the
pictures over, it would be rude. We will never fully appreciate or exercise the
full limits of Australian sovereignty and Australian aspirations whileever our
head of state is the monarch of another country.
It stands to reason that the Australian head of state should be an Australian
person. It is as simple as that. It is not some frumped up, phoney
constitutional set of grab-bag potpourri like the citizens initiated referendum,
or crimping the Commonwealth's right to sign an international treaty, or
mucking around with the time a Bill can qualify for a double dissolution which
is a little bit of political nit picking and messing around. It's the real thing. It's
the real thing that matters to us. Now, here we are with all these great
changes in this country and the whole country has been in them knocking
down exchange controls, watching our investors go off shore. You know, 12
or 11 years ago, we have 3 per cent of our GOP invested abroad. This year it
is 20 per cent. This year it is $ 80 billion in"-esfed abroad $ 80,000 million of
Australian funds are invested abroad. If it wasn't you could cut our debt by
$ 80,000 million. But, are we better with the debt and investment abroad.
Well, of course we are, because we are in those markets building organic
positions. Now, we have seen those chances. We've seen the tariff wall come down.
People are saying if you do that you will kill our manufacturing. What's
happened? Manufacturing production has doubled. Manufacturing exports 
have tripled in the time since. I mean, there was a time in that crazy debate
with John Stone, you know, the great Treasury guru saying " well, we don't
think you can have a competitive manufacturing sector beside an
internationally competitive primary exports sector because wool, wheat and
minerals will over value the exchange rate and that will produce cheaper
imports, so you can't have a manufacturing sector." Well, you didn't have to
be a political scientist or a graduate of the London School of Economics or
somewhere to know that that was absolute balderdash. And, we've knocked
the tariff wall over and what's happening? All the innovative companies are
going for it look at the McKinsey Report. Hundreds born global. Didn't
starve domestic industries at all, just straight out into exports.
I was up there in Indonesia two weeks ago at a huge trade fair which had
everything from St Vincent's Hospital and the Austin Hospital in Melbourne to
the water authorities to the electricity authorities to the big product companies
like BHP and Pacific-Dunlop to the smaller innovative companies and the
telecommunications companies like AWA, represented here tonight, the
retailers, and there is Australia out there, going out to the world to do all
these things. And, we put these changes into place, but we can never really
say " here we are.. ". here we are," borrowing the monarch of another country.
So, here we are, we're not quite certain of ourselves, not quite sure, but look,
we are getting our pecker up, we are getting our confidence up, but we are
not quite confident enough to put an Australian in the job. So, for the moment
we will keep on borrowing the Queen of Great Britain. But, when she goes
abroad she promotes Britain and British goods. But, when the Governor-
General goes abroad, and he went recently to some of the old Soviet States
as you know, and they had to ring the British Embassy to find out whether
they could receive him. Ding-a-ling, " Mr Ambassador, look the Australian
Governor-General wants to come and see us, is it ok?"
Now, this is the head of state that Alexander Downer wants us to have the
deputy of a foreign monarch. And, of course, we can't have it. That
nonsense has got to stop. So, the Government is saying this and we will, in
this debate, at the appropriate time and some of that is going to be sooner
rather than later, put down very clearly where we think the debate should go.
So, you round the things up. Mabo, APEC, Hilmer, the White Paper, the
spread of enterprise bargaining which is now we expect to see 80 per cent
of federal awards by 1996, turning this rigid labour market into a flexible one,
the republic, all of these things are the things of weight and of value. And the
Liberals, there they are out with their Alexander Downer said, and let me
just quote him here, he said ' Australians are entitled to reasonably detailed
policies from both parties'. He said that eight weeks ago. This week he said
' the forthcoming policy statement will be only very general in nature'. So, in
other words they are going to hand us pap.
And, of course, you know why with the Liberals, you see, in 1984 they had
Andrew Peacock as the Leader. Now, Andrew went around pulling faces
serious faces, happy faces, funny faces right throughout the 1984 election 
and he lost it because he didn't stand for anything. And, the Liberals said
ofoh, well, I suppose it's only one loss, but we ought to learn our lesson. Let's
not get in the habit of having the Labor Government around, we'd better get
someone with some policies." So, they said " we'll get John Howard." Now,
John was a former Treasurer, he had a bit of a clue about the economy
made a bit of a mess of it but still a clue about it. A few crude notions, a tax
bribe he had in the so-called ' Boxhill tax package', out he went and we blew
the tax package to pieces, his numbers fell away all over the place and he
started articulating his policies, particularly some of his immigration policies
and he lost. They said, " the problem is here you don't go fighting elections
with policies. You don't fight elections with policies, you fight the Government
who has got policies, you have notions and you attack the Government. You
don't have policies." So they went back to Andrew Peacock. And, Andrew
was out again a bit older, a bit smarter, but not much and in the 1990
election, you know, flim-flam again stuff, no policies, you know, as sure as
night follows day remember that one you know, as sure as night follows
day. The went through that for three weeks and they lost again. So, it was
really then back to the drawing board, all the hard heads the Petro Georgios
and the all back to something. With, really, three elections on the trot lost,
they can't have that, " look the problem really is we have got to have policy.
Let's find a policy guide. Now, there is Hewson. There he is, a professor of
economics, he went all right in the election campaign, we will get him." So,
they give him the job. He is the Leader. Before he knows it he is shadow
treasurer and next thing he is the Leader. And, then he starts and he thinks,
" well, what I'll do, I'm really on a roll here so I'll really go for the big one
Fightback, the consumption tax, I'll take a big slap of income form the low
paid, kick it up the wealthy, we'll knock off Medicare, give the doctors a break,
the lot, we'll really have dot pointed policies -T'is dotted and ' T's crossed." He
had policies, but they were the wrong policies and, of course, he lost. So,
they said, " you can't win with policies, you've got to go back" so they've got
Alexander. That's what I said the other night. See, if you go Peacock to Howard soft,
hard Peacock to Hewson soft, hard, soft. Soft, hard, soft, you get the
pattern. Now the pattern is that Downer is the softie again and, of course,
this is where the flim flam polices come from.
Meanwhile, the Government, naively is back on the weight Mabo, APEC, the
recovery, Hilmer, the White Paper, enterprise bargaining, the republic, but,
he is going to give you feeling about his policies. Give you some little things
and meanwhilePeter Reith will run off with some and if they don't go to well
they'll get pulledbackiJ__ he republic, the monarchy, he was going to take the
Government to the wall and, me in particular, on the monarchy and when I
had an opportunity and I did in France, I was encouraged by Francois
Mitterand, I mean, he can be a bad influence on people Francois sometimes
about republics and I come out and said that I think Australia should be a
republic, that we can't have the monarch of Great Britain and straight away
Alexander one step back, two steps, two weeks later the Queen didn't matter,
she was irrelevant and only quaint. 
12
The thing about Alexander Downer is he stands for nothing. Seriously, he
stands for nothing. He is a policy flake and he'll go the way of policy flakes,
and that is to the political graveyard. Now, there is some distance between
now and then, but I've got a route mapped out for him.
Now, they have had a tremendous go, and of course, they think that's what
the game is. So, this thing about Alexander Downer is is he thinks he is
currency. Well, he is, but he is pre-decimal. He is back there in the 1950s
and so whenever they have a new idea the Liberals it is always back to
some idea. It is never forward. They always believed in going back.
So, there it is. This is going to be an interesting period for Australia because,
I think, we are on the verge of a change of quality to our economy, to our
society and inflation is, I think, a measure of that, of our social compassion, of
our sense of inclusion, for the first time living near the biggest and fastest
growing markets in the world, with linkages we've never had before, we've
never been in a decade of this promise not ever.
So, what I say to Australians is let's take up the challenge. Let's rejoice in the
challenge. Let's take it up and let's go for it. And, let's get the weight back
into the newspapers. Let's get the real issues back in the public debate and
let there be some understanding about the merit of big policy outcomes and
not see great national achievements, like today, again with inflation frittered
away in the flim flam comments what passes for the public debate, covering
an Opposition that have run out of ideas, with a leader who hasn't the
courage or the wit to fabricate any.
That's why the Labor Party is the great party of change in this country. It's
already made huge change in the last decade and we'll go on to make more.
And, in this State let me finish were I began in this State, as Bob Carr said,
you'll never do better than a really conducive working relationship between
the Prime Minister of Australia and the Government of the Commonwealth
and the Premier of New South Wales and the Government of New South
Wales. And, when Bob Carr is the Premier and a Labor Government is here,
New South Wales will join the recovery which it's not doing to date and then
when the bigger State kicks along, the whole of the country will kick along.
And then, when you come again, we can report further progress. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE SEX DISCRIMINATION ACT
SYDNEY, 29 JULY 1994
It's a great honour to be with you to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Sex
Discrimination Act.
When this Labor Government enacted the Sex Discrimination Act ten years
ago, it did so against opposition that was vocal, hostile and ignorant.
This Act was one of the most fiercely contested legislative measures in
Australian political history.
But then again, this seems to be the way of politics in this country: on the big
issues the ones which carry real weight it is always, and only, the Labor
Government that is capable of taking the bold policy step.
The Sex Discrimination Act stands as one of the most significant pieces of
legislation in our history.
But when the Bill was first brought to the House, it was pilloried as the
brainchild of radical feminists radical feminists supposedly intent on
destroying the nuclear family, creating a unisex society and, most dangerous
of all, defying the laws of nature.
Women would be forced into the workforce where they would wreak havoc
because of what one Senator described as " compulsory close cohabitation"
with men.
I should add this enlightened Senator went on to express the grave concern
that husbands would be surrounded by glamorous women intent on
seduction. Of course, the Sex Discrimination Act did not force women into the workforce
women have always been in the workforce.
What the critics at the time failed to understand was that women themselves
were embracing change. 
The dramatic changes in women's lives weren't being forced upon them by
the Government or the women's movement, it was the women themselves
who demanded more choices, better opportunities and freedom from
discrimination. But ground breaking legislation always brings out the high emotions in those
who want to remain locked in the closets of the past.
You only have to go back to last year and the racism and fear drummed up
over Mabo.
And we should always remember that when the Native Title Act was returned
to the House of Representatives for final passage the people's house
the Leader of the Opposition branded that day " a day of shame".
If we didn't have the Tories still with us today, it would probably be hard to
believe the Sex Discrimination Act caused the controversy it did just ten years
ago. The Act's underlying purpose was and remains very simple: to end
discrimination on the basis of sex, marital status or pregnancy, and to
promote community respect for the principle of the equality of men and
women. Since the Act's inception, more than 7,000 complaints have been lodged
the overwhelming majority of these employmyiitnf-elated:
And, contrary to predictions that the Act would only benefit an elite group of
women, complaints have come from all spheres of employment.
The Act has been used by young women many complaining of sexual
harassment by older women, Aboriginal women and women from non-
English backgrounds.
The Act has also been used by men.
But numbers of cases or complaints can never fully capture the impact of this
Act. This Act has helped bring about a change in Australia's cultural
infrastructure.
The values, it encapsulates, have found vocal expression in the working lives
of women and men, in all areas of activity and in all workplaces.
One journalist described it well when she referred to the " accidental
feminists" those women who do not consciously identify with the feminist
movement but who articulate feminist expectations and aspirations. 
These women, who tend to shy away from the " IF word", ardently support
equal pay and equal opportunity.
So, despite a remark from a member of the Liberal Party ten years ago that
" this Bill means nothing at all", the women of Australia know that this Act
means a great deal.
But this Act can't be effective in isolation it must co-exist with other social,
economic and political strategies for improving the status of women.
That's why the Government has consistently supported strategies such as the
provision of affordable, quality child care; the payment of family assistance
directly to women caring for children; greater access to superannuation;
affirmative action for women in employment; and better access to training and
education. On this tenth anniversary, I think it's appropriate that we pay tribute to the
many women and men who fought hard for the sex discrimination legislation
and who, in the ten years since, have supported the Act and continued the
fight for equality.
But I'm sure no one will mind if I signal out for special attention the pivotal
role played by the trio of Susan Ryan, then the Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister for the Status of Women, Anne Summers, Head of the Office of the
Status of Women at the time the Bill was debated, and Chris Ronalds who
was the legal consultant to the Office of the Status of Women.
Their work in conceiving, drafting and guiding the Bill through Parliament
earned them the label " Ryan's ruthless juggernaut".
At the time, I suspect it was meant to be an insult, but it soon became a
badge of pride, an apt description of the fierce and unrelenting determination
and energy of three women who wanted to make a difference, to change the
social order for the better.
In all this, it is important to emphasise that their battle for the rights of women
is part of a broader vision for a more egalitarian and socially just Australia
a vision this Labor Government shares.
This is a crucial point: by arguing for equal rights and equal opportunity,
women are not pleading for special favours, they are fighting for a better
Australia for both women and men.
The Sex Discrimination Act is often portrayed as radical and ground breaking
legislation.
And so it is. 
' p 4
But it is also a very pragmatic document.
Ten years ago, the Government had to concede a number of issues to get the
legislation passed.
The strategic victory at the time was to enact the legislation, to ensure we
had in place a solid foundation on which we could build.
And that's what we have done.
In 1992, in responding to the Lavarche Report Halfway to Equal, the
Government made a number of significant amendments to the Sex
Discrimination Act. We also foreshadowed other amendments.
Today, I am pleased to announce a further five proposals to improve the
effectiveness of the Act. I
First, the Government believes it is necessary to make a strong legislative
statement that clearly expresses our commitment that sex discrimination and
sexual harassment will not be tolerated in our society.
To this end, a Preamble will be inserted into the Act incorporating a general
prohibition on discrimination and a statement proclaiming the equality before
the law of women and men.
Second, to combat discrimination on the grounds of pregnancy, potential
pregnancy will be explicitly proscribed as a ground of discrimination and the
reasonableness defence in relation to direct discrimination on the grounds of
pregnancy will be removed.
These amendments will afford better protection to women in public life and
send a clear message that this type of discrimination will not be tolerated.
Third, we will extend the definition of the proscribed ground of marital status
to cover the identity or occupation of the complainant's spouse.
Discrimination on the grounds of spousal identity predominantly affects
women and is unjustifiable except in very narrow circumstances.
Fourth, we will simplify the definition of indirect discrimination and place the
onus on the respondent to justify the reasonablenes -s of tii-discriminatory
requirement. Tackling indirect discrimination is a key element in the elimination of
discrimination because the barriers to equality are often the result of
apparently neutral practices. 
However, due to the complexity of the Act's test for indirect discrimination and
the lack of public understanding on this issue, there have been only 11 such
complaints in the Act's ten year operation. I hope that these amendments will
raise awareness of this provision.
Fifth, the exemption extended to the Australian Defence Force for the
employment of women will be narrowed so as to only apply to combat duty.
In making this amendment, I'm happy to say the Government is' sirnply
reflecting the change which has already occurred in the Australian Defence
Force.
Women can now serve in all Defence Force positions except those involving
direct physical combat.
This has opened up many employment and career opportunities. Back in
1984, around 10 per cent of Defence Force positions were open to women.
Today, women can be employed in over 65 per cent of the positions in the
Army and over 90 per cent of those in the Navy and Air Force.
The sixth and final amendment concerns the special measures provision.
This provision recognises that there are situations where exact parity of
treatment between men and women cannot eradicate discrimination and that
extra steps are often required to facilitate equality.
Unfortunately, the rationale for this provision has often been misunderstood
by the community and narrowly interpreted by courts and tribunals.
To remedy this, the amendment moves the ' special measures' provision out
of the " Exemptions" Division of the Act and relocates it in Part 1 dealing with
definitions of discrimination.
It is hoped that this shift will foster recognition that such special measures do
not constitute discrimination but are a key part of the process of ensuring
equality.
The Sex Discrimination Act was a landmark piece of legislation when it was
passed. But like most laws, it needs to be scrutinised to ensure it is in tune
with current realities. It is good law, but we want to make it better.
The amendments I have announced today have the dual purpose of attacking
the structural inequalities that continue to exist and making the Act more
accessible. No doubt these proposals will encounter opposition as the original act did.
We must resist that opposition as we did then. 
I 6
I congratulate the thousands of women and the many men who fought
for the introduction of this Act.
I congratulate the thousands of women who have used the Act to redress
discrimination.
And I urge all Australians to support the Act in our stand for the full equality of
women and men.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE GRADUATE SCHOOL, INAUGURAL DEAN'S
LECTURE, 5 AUGUST 1994
1 am very pleased to have been asked to give this, the first of the Dean's
lectures, at the new University of Melbourne Graduate School.
This new school is a very good idea. It is bound to raise both the quality and the
quantity of research at a great University.
Because it is multi-disciplinary, it should be the scene of creative dialogues: who
knows what social and scientific benefits might flow when research into art or
history or literature crosses currents with engineers, mathematicians and
architects? The new school will create a much more pronounced research focus at the
University of Melbourne. It will of course make life easier and more rewarding
for the University's 7,500 post-graduate students. It will boost the general profile
of what is already a renowned institution both at home and abroad.
I would not like to be seen encouraging vulgar competition, but I should imagine
it will help Melbourne claw back some ground from Monash.
The School is an idea for the times we are in our future depends so much
upon knowledge and the use we make of it; our ability to secure a rewarding
place in the world depends upon it; our standard of living and quality of life
depends upon it; the sort of material, intellectual and aesthetic environment we
leave to our children depends upon it.
In fact this new Graduate School is so obviously a good idea we might wonder
why it took so long.
Not that I would pass judgement. When you have been in politics for as long as
I have you are no stranger to the phenomenon of good ideas passing by
ungrasped. Politics is a contest of ideas and for ideas. It is a contest between the ideas of
the rival parties between the greatest of all Australian political ideas, the Labor
Movement, and its opponents. And there is no greater contest of ideas than the
one which occurs within the Labor Movement itself. 
But politics is more than a contest of views. It is at times a contest between
those with ideas and those without them.
And in turn between those with the wit and persistence necessary to see ideas
made into reality, and those who are content to merely spout them and argue
about them. It is a contest between the pragmatists and posturers; the doers
and the talkers.
It is between those who want to go to the heart of things and those who forever
tinker at the margins.
Ultimately it is between those who are excited by the challenge of change and
those who recoil from it.
We should never underestimate the do-nothings and the think-nothings. They
are a formidable foe. For substantial periods of our history they have held
sway. Against obscurantists victory is never assured.
For myself, I find it difficult to comprehend any purpose for a political life other
than reform. I remain genuinely puzzled by those familiar parliamentary figures
who seem dedicated to no better cause than improving their smiles or perfecting
their rendition of the two-fingered sloth.
It pains me a little to say it, but I have been in Federal politics for a quarter of a
century. That is half my life and it doesn't take a mathematician to tell me that
the longer I stay the worse the ratio will get.
But a mathematician will not be able to explain why it is that the longer I stay the
greater grows my conviction why the experience of 25 years in the Federal
Parliament has turned a belief in reform into a thirst for it.
For instance, after twenty five years, I ask myself if I could not be forgiven
sidestepping the Hilmer Report on competition policy. Those States can be so
perverse. It would be so much easier to roll over to them.
How many Australians would notice if we did not insist that the State authorities
accept the same competitive disciplines as those borne by Australian business
and Australian unions.
The Commonwealth will get no credit for success, and all the blame for failure.
In political terms the States have nothing to lose either way.
So why take it on? For the same reason that we take APEC on. Or vocational
education and training. Or Mabo. Or Regional Development. Or the Republic.
Because the times demand it, the next century demands it and you can't do
justice to one without the others.
.-nI any -event,-4udge-the-job-n ow-and posterity will catch up with you. After twenty
five years in the Federal Parliament I cannot think of a single item of reforming
legislation not even the most flawed which has damaged the fabric and the
future of Australia in a dimension comparable to that caused by inaction or
regression. 
And what is true of this last quarter century is even more true of the one before it
it was not what they did, it was what they failed to do.
In a perverse way I thank them for it whenever I feel a bit run down I think of all
those years through the fifties, sixties and seventies when good ideas passed
Australia by. When the world passed us by. And it stirs me into action again.
In a healthy democracy you can defend to the death the right of governments to
do things you disagree with. But you can never defend their inaction they have
no right to slough off that responsibility.
You cannot defend a government which continually fails to see what's coming or
what's begging to be done.
If I have one hope for posterity it is that the Government in which I have played a
part since 1983 will be judged to have recognised and confronted the huge
challenges Australia has faced, and continues to face, in the last decades of the
century.
The politics of reform is a gruelling business and I confess to wondering
sometimes why we do it.
I also confess, entirely without apology, that power has a fair bit to do with it. I
never met a good politician who didn't like using it wrestling with it.
On the other hand I have met a lot of bad ones who shrank from it. And never
trust the ones who say they are not politicians would you trust a dentist who
told you he was really a boilermaker?
The best politicians make no bones about it. The best politicians want power
because they know that, for all its imperfections, as a vehicle for turning ideas
into reality a political career has no equal.
How you could get hold of power and just sit on it is beyond me.
In the end it is probably a matter of instinct. I mean in the end good politicians
and good governments are obliged to obey the human instinct to provide
security for succeeding generations.
In a very real sense politics boils down to a contest between ideas about how
that is best done.
In an ideal world, this would be too obvious a point to make. In the real world
the truth of it is pretty thoroughly obscured.
In the real world, all sorts of media and other imperatives combine with a
perfectly natural scepticism to create a climate in which the political system is
generally deemed at best a deeply qualified success, and politicians sometimes
strugU3Acz-rnatajn the! r-status as -normalVmembers of the species.
It is not a particularly bad thing it manifestly can't be. For the truth is that even
through the mists of cynicism you can see the contrary indications: by and large,
our political system serves us very well; by and large, our traditions serve us
well; by and large, as a nation and a people we have succeeded. 
And, in my view, we have never succeeded so well as we are succeeding now.
It is true we have the best conjunction of economic circumstances in memory.
It is true that we are now a competitive and outwardly-oriented economy.
It is true that we think differently about the world and our place in it.
It is also true that we have sophisticated and effective social policies and
programs with few equals in the world.
These are all measures of success. But there seems to me an even more
profound measure I mean the cultural shift, the shift in attitudes.
We are proving that as a nation we can live with change. We can adapt. We
can initiate change.
Who would have thought a decade ago that we would number universities
among our leading export earners?
Just as I am painfully aware of how rapidly my twenty five years in Parliament
have passed, I am conscious that many of you those of you who are still in your
twenties will have no memory of the things which used to plague Australia.
I mean things like one of the world's worst strike rates. Notoriously inefficient
work practices in key industries. Inflation dragging us down. Financial
regulations gumming up the works. A weak and uncompetitive manufacturing
sector. You need only go back another decade to find the White Australia Policy still in
existence. The great task of the eighties was to make Australia an international player in its
own right. To make it competitive, outward-looking, phobia free.
It is very useful to be reminded that within half a generation such things fade
from the public memory.
It comes as a bit of shock, for instance, to think that the great majority of this
year's first year university students were not born when John Kerr dismissed the
Whitlam Government.
It is a reminder of how quickly generations pass, and of why one generation
cannot waste time in getting the ground prepared for the one to follow.
And why governments must not sit on their hands. Why governments must
provide for this generation and the next. Why they must, therefore, be prepared
to embrace change and encourage the people to embrace it.
The pace of change quickened in the eighties. It is moving even faster now.
But we can keep up. A decade ago we couldn't. 
A decade ago you wouldn't see, up the back of The Economist where they keep
the economic indicators, Australia leading the world not just in growth at
present, but in the international forecasts for growth and for inflation.
In December 1983, Australia's growth was the lowest in the industrial world.
Australia's inflation was among the highest. Today it is among the lowest.
Quite unthinkable a decade ago. And no less unthinkable was a manufacturing
sector with exports to rival those in agriculture and mining let me tell those of
you who were not present at the time, in the 1970s the orthodoxy was that
Australia could never succeed as an exporter of manufactures.
We could never be sufficiently competitive, it was said, at least not without
adopting the wage rates of the developing world.
No one then imagined that a decade later Australia's fastest growing exports
would be elaborately transformed manufactures. Or that overall exports would
represent 20 per cent of GDP.
Or that, whereas in the early eighties about 3% of our GDP was invested
abroad, today it is 20%. Or universities and colleges would become principal
players and principal earners in the new export culture, the new era of
internationally traded services.
I could go on for a long time about these remarkable changes, including those in
education and training. I could point out that whereas 4 in 10 young Australians
completed secondary school in the early eighties, 8 in 10 do now. And I could
point out that we are about to expand vocational education on the same scale.
But the most important lesson to be drawn from these changes is not their
individual dimensions but the general revolution they imply. It is not just what
they have won for us so far it is what they assure us of winning in the future.
For they have meant that we are competitive. They have meant that we are
players. That we now have a presence where we didn't before. That, as markets
became global, we have adjusted quickly enough and dramatically enough to get
into them.
As Asia became the most dynamic economic region in the world we have
directed our national focus there, and our companies have moved to take
advantage of the extraordinary opportunities. It is no accident that as I visited
Jakarta to talk to President Soeharto about the forthcoming meeting of APEC
leaders in Indonesia, a huge Australian trade exhibition was being held there.
The fact is that we are on the threshold of an unprecedented era of opportunity,
one in which by our own efforts and according to our own lights we can deliver
the great promise of Australia. We are in with a huge chance.
We. have . only. got-to.-this-stageby overcoming our inertia. In an article in the
Australian on June 1 this year, Xavier Pons wrote the following: 
Is there a common point between, say, Mabo, the Industrial Relations
Reform Act, multiculturalism, the push for an Australian republic and the
upgrading of Australia's military cooperation with Indonesia? Could there
be some logic to it all?
Beyond the diversity and specificity of these recent developments, one
can detect the premises of an unprecedented cultural shift as Australia,
somewhat reluctantly, leaves behind the comforts of illusion and braces
itself to face reality on its own terms.
Xavier Pons is right. There has been a cultural shift. There is a common point
between those legislative landmarks. There is a thread of logic binding them.
And it is most definitely about facing reality.
And I would say there is another thread: one which links the Government's
willingness to legislate on these big issues with the willingness of Australians to
make changes of comparable dimensions in their own lives in their workplaces,
in their schools, in the way they go about their enterprises, in accommodating
multiculturalism, in recognising the new realities.
If I might regress for a moment to the matter of the contest between inertia and
reform: we got this cultural shift by exposing ourselves to necessity. That is the
essence of it.
There remain a few people on both sides of politics who disagree, but the fact is
undeniable only by establishing an environment of necessity did we get these
changes. Nothing else would do.
The recognition of necessity has driven change in the past decade and it will
drive it in this one. There is no greater weapon against the tendency to inertia.
No better way to expose and defeat those without ideas and policies or the will
to realise them.
In doing so, it has been essential to maintain the social equation. In fact we are
in the vanguard of progressive social policy.
Compare our health system with other countries; our welfare system; our
legislation protecting womerrand programs to expand their opportunities; our
system of family payments; our recently introduced " jobs compact" and other
measures to assist the long term unemployed announced in the White Paper
compare our social legislation with the advanced countries of the world and you
will see that we have recognised change will not work, and is not worth
attempting, if the social and cultural fabric of the nation cannot be kept intact.
And we have kept it intact. Most importantly we have to make sure the
measures announced in the White Paper are effectively delivered, and the longterm
unemployed are brought back in touch with the labour market.
There. is-a. great-deal more we can do to-make our social system deliver more
opportunity and more security. And there is a great deal we are doing reforms
like the Home Child Care Allowance I launched yesterday. 
7
The important thing is to keep the equation in balance we must maintain the
social safety net and extend equality and opportunity through progressive social
legislation, but the same purposes are also served by measures to make the
economy more dynamic and competitive.
Without them, there would be infinitely less opportunity, infinitely less chance for
the next generation of Australians.
Deregulation taught us not just what was needed, but what we were capable of.
It brought out the creativity in us. Non-restrictive immigration policies and
multiculturalism brought out the tolerance, and the capacity to build a much
richer society.
The new openness of the 1980s exposed us to the world and in so doing, as
never before, exposed us to ourselves. We see ourselves more clearly now, I
think. We have a better understanding of our capabilities.
I think we need to bring the same principles and the confidence we have
developed from exercising them to every significant realm of our national life.
I believe Australians have every right to see their era as one of unparalleled
achievement. Our history is often said to be built on a succession of noble
failures, and our national character is said to reflect this.
Romantic and agreeable as this interpretation is, I think we can now aim to
launch Australia into the next century on a tradition of success.
As a politician I believe in stirring Australia's economic and social broth. I think
we should engage the whole of it. I think it puts more strength in the brew, and
brings out our best, most generous and creative qualities.
I have always thought that there are more of these in the Australian community
than the polls and the media would generally have us believe.
I profoundly believe in Australians belief in themselves their seriousness of
purpose, their capacity to rationalise their way through problems.
That is why I was confident we could pursue the just cause of Mabo and win
and why I remain confident that the legislation we introduced will survive every
petty and mean attempt to undo it.
The Native Title Act will deliver to the Australians of the twenty first century what
we have not enjoyed the foundations of justice in the relationship between
indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. It will be a foundation for greater
confidence and national self-esteem.
The same of course can be said for the Republic.
There. arerany. number. of. reasons why. Australia should become a Republic. The
simplest one and I think a perfectly sufficient one is that an independent
nation with an independent destiny, and with traditions and a way of life which
are uniquely its own, ought not to have a foreign Head of State. 
8
And those who believe this is not the case should tell us why. I have not yet
heard so much as a shred of a good reason other than the weak refrain that the
Queen is irrelevant.
I hear them say " if it ain't broke don't fix it". This of course is a doctrine of
inertia. It is an argument for the perfectly preserved horse and cart.
Or I hear them say there are more important issues. This is true, just as there
were more important issues a century ago when the Federation was designed
and passed by the people.
Or I hear them say as John Hewson said the other day having an Australian
as Australia's Head of State is not important. Yet as recently as the 1950' s
having the Queen of England as our Head of State was considered to be terribly
important " the crown as an abstract notion" united us, Bob Menzies said.
And it is true in the 1950' s that British monarchy constituted a significant element
of Australia's national sentiment and national cohesion. Our Head of State then
commanded great respect, affection and loyalty.
But there is no denying that the British monarchy no longer commands that
respect, affection and loyalty. It is equally true that our interests have grown
increasingly away from those of Great Britain, and that the proportion of our
population who have come from non-English speaking backgrounds has
dramatically increased.
And it is just as true that these trends will continue.
So what do we say to the next generation of Australians? What do we say to the
Australians of the 21 st century?
That, even though the British monarchy has little or no relevance to your lives,
values and aspirations, we will leave it with you?
Or will we say we had the wit and the will to bequeath to you a Head of State
who stands for the things we believe in? Who stands unambiguously for
Australia? An appropriate Head of State, in other words.
So I say it is important that Australia's Head of State be an Australian. I say that
it will be an appropriate mark of our achievements as a nation not least of our
achievements in recent years.
As you will have gathered today, if you have not gathered before, I hold an
emphatic belief that politicians and governments should lead. That is what they
are elected to do and paid to do.
And recent experience leaves me in no doubt that when a lead is given
Australians will respond businesses, unions, communities, institutions like this
one. will -respond..
But governments work within a system which has been determined by the people
and which cannot be changed in any fundamental way without their approval.
The Government has invited the people to change the system and the people
are now responding. 



SPEECH OPENING OF THE ROYAL PERTH HOSPITAL NEW WORK -A
OPPORTUNITY Ladies and gentlemen. I must say its nice to be in a hospital to talk to
healthy people: people here because they are being armed against the ills of
unemployment I am especially delighted to see trainees from the Royal Perth
Hospital Youth Program and from the hospital's Jobskills intake in the guest
list. Today we are here to launch Western Australia's first New Work
Opportunity. In so doing I'd like to reflect on what the White Paper on Employment and
Growth means for the unemployed, for employers, and for the community in
general. Working Nation was released some months ago, yet the press, employers,
and the public have not yet realised the full significance of the White Paper.
The extent of the Government's commitment, and what it means for the
unemployed, has yet to be brought home.
The Job Compact creates for the first time a definite end to the
unemployment experience of individuals. This is a significant extension of
the social safety net for unemployed people.
By giving the long term unemployed a job, through either New Work
Opportunities, Jobstart, or the training wage, we are saying that we will not
let the unemployed stay in unemployment indefinitely.
We will help you. The job offer, the central component of the Job Compact,
will replace drifting and lack of motivation with hope and a real chance of
finding permanent work.
This is not something that has happened before.
Solving unemployment is not easy. While most Job Compact jobs will be in
the private sector, we will not be able to place all Job Compact clients with
private employers. 
New Work Opportunities provide the chance for local communities to develop
solutions to their regional development and employment problems.
New Work Opportunities are designed to provide work and training to
unemployed people placed on them and to produce social benefits as well as
growth in local communities.
New Work Opportunities are one element of the 160,000 jobs that will be
provided to long term unemployed people under the Job Compact each year.
Working Nation will ensure that the unemployed share in the economic
recovery, The Green Paper Restoring Full Emnployment noted that some 80 per cent
of all long term unemployed people who obtained full time jobs in 1992 did
so through their participation in labour market programs.
This tells us a lot.
If long term unemployed people are going to share in the economic recovery
and find jobs then they need active assistance to do so. This is the basis of
Working Nation.
In keeping with our election promise to not turn our backs on the
unemployed, there will be some 645,000 labour market and entry level
training commencements a year by 1995-96.
Over a four year period from 4 July 1994, we will spend a total of $ 10.3
billion on employment and training initiatives. This represents an enormous
extension of training positions and active labour market assistance.
Government commitment and money, however, is not enough.
To achieve the White Paper objectives we need the commitment of the
community, unions, and employers.
Royal Perth Hosvital
The Royal Perth Hospital's commitment to the unemployed is a tremendous
example for employers. 
The Now Work Opportunity is only the latest in a series of employment and
training projects at the Royal Perth Hospital.
It follows the success of the Royal Perth Hospital Youth Program. The youth
program initiative was funded by the hospital. Through it, 20 long term
jobless young people got a foot on the employment ladder.
Most of these young people went on to find permanent employment or to
enrol in full-time study.
This year alone, the hospital has provided 10 unemployed people with
Jobskills, placements. Five of these participants have remained with the
hospital. Royal Perth Hospital has found what many employers find when they hire
long term unemployed: contrary to the myth, the long term unemployed
have a lot to offer to employers.
Of course, we do not expect people who have been unemployed for a long
time to walk straight into a job without any help to make the transition.
We know that long term unemployment affects motivation and health and the
ability to cope with the demands of employment.
Case management will ensure that unemployed people are able to make the
transition from unemployment to work mrid be aii a~ jet to their employer.
Job Compact clients will receive one-to-one assistance with training and
other pre-employment needs prior to placement in a job.
Since case management of Newstart clients began in March this year, over
65,000 unemployed people have entered case management. Success stories
are already emerging. People that have been unemployed for periods of
three, five, and ten years, have been gaining full time employment.
Employers should keep in mind that long term unemployed people they take
on under the Job Compact will be provided with support by case
management before, during, and after their placement.
We are also going to enlist the help of private sector, community, and
industry case managers who know industry and understand unemployed
people. 
The RPH New Work Oogortunity
The New Work Opportunity we are launching today will provide placements
for 100 Job Compact clients over a one year period. That is 100 people who
have been unemployed for over 18 months will receive a job and training for
a period of six months under this project.
The positions will be new job opportunities and will focus on employment and
training, both on and off the job, in a range of occupations.
Positions will be filled as; laboratory assistants; pharmacy assistants;
orderlies; clerical and medical records management assistants; and in stores;
sterilisation and autoclaving9; patient care; and landscape gardening.
Clients participating in the program will be able to apply for permanent
employment at the hospital as positions become available.
And they will receive job search assistance at the conclusion of their New
Work Opportunity placement.
New Work Opportunftie8 Else1where in Australia
The Royal Perth Hospital project is the first New Work Opportunity in
Western Australia. It will be the first of many.
In New South Wales two New Work Opportunity projects have already
begun.
The Parkes and Forbes projects involve the creation of major tourist facilities.
The Parkes project will provide employment opportunities by the creation of
Memorial Gardens to commemorate Australian soldiers who have served
overseas. The Memorial Gardens will be based on overseas battlegrounds and will link
in with other tourist attractions in the area such as the Cowra Japanese
Gardens and the Botanical Gardens in Orange.
The Forbes Local Council will build on the town's profile as Australia's tidiest
town to attract a larger proportion of tourists arnd travellers in the area. 
Other New Work Opportunities in the pipeline include bush tucker farms and
processing plants in outback NSW; landscaping and re-planting of industrial
sites; and expansion of home-based care to people in need.
New Work Opportunities will be concentrated in the growth areas of
environmental repair, eco-tourism, and community services.
Area Consultative Committees are being set up around Australia to align with
local government areas and natural labour markets.
A major aim of Area Consultative Committees is to devolve some ot the
responsibility for DEET programs and services to the regional level. As they
are established they will provide the means for local communities to
participate in the development and selection of New Work Opportunities in
their region.
In short, New Work Opportunities provide a a chance for innovative
approaches towards regional unemployment to be explored. And they
provide local people with the chance to choose, develop, and manage the
project. Conclus2fn So may I encourage everyone, especially employers, to respond to the
Government's challenge in the spirit of the Royal Perth Hospital to start
thinking about how they can help unemployed people in their local region.
There is so much work to be done: we have the workers, we are providing
the funds. All we need now is your commitment and imagination.
I wish the Royal Perth Hospital and the Centrecare SkillShare every success
with this project. 



TEL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF " AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS 1945 1995"
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, CANBERRA, 14 AUGUST 1994
1 am very pleased to be here once more at the Australian War Memorial.
I don't think I have been to any public building more than this one in the
past two and a half years.
This is understandable enough. World War 11 is fifty years away and we
have had a series of commemorations not just here in Canberra, but in
Darwin, Kokoda, the Coral Sea and Thailand. And in Great Britain and
France just a couple of months ago.
But the Memorial has been doing more than merely observing the
passing of these anniversaries. Their Initiative has brought me here for
the inauguration of the Vietnamn Memorial, the Entombment of the
Unknown Soldier and the Children of the Holocaust exhibition.;
I have been deeply honoured to participate in these occasions, and like
everyone else, deeply moved.
This Memorial is one of Australia's great public institutions: a
storehouse of our collective memory and an icon of our faith.
It does its job superbly and for that, obviously, a lot of credit has to go to
the leadership and staff.
Yet I'm sure those same people would agree that there Is something at
work in the Australian community which makes their job easier.
For the fact is the sentiment that emerged from Gallipoli, the Western
Front and the Middle East in the First World War, does live on.
TEL: Huq 4 9 : 21 No .003 F 1 -' 0j 
TEL: 1 u. 94 9 : 2 INO.-003 P'. 02/ 04
2
The nation has no forgotten. In fact, I have grown quite certain that the
tradition of Anzac ' will inspire and unite us through the next century no
less than It has in this.
The national response to the Entombment of the Unknown Soldier alone
suggests that new generations will find in the legend of Anzac powerful
symbols for their own faith. For an enduring Australian faith.
Our celebrations of the fiftieth anniversary of VP Day and VE Day will
express that faith and we hope will significantly strengthen it among
young Australians.
The generation we will commemorate and thank was a heroic one.
They were born of the Australians who had endured World War I and
the Great Depression, and who had been denied so many of life's
opportunities by those tragic events. From where we stand we might be
tempted to think it understandable if they had lost their belief in Australia
and humane and democratic values.
They didn't. They fought a war in defence of the country they loved, and
they bequeathed to their children the opportunities which they had been
denied. They were nation builders.
Our freedom was their legacy: the robust democracy we enjoy, the
security, the marvellous continent which is ours, the unequalled personal
freedoms. But they left us more than that. They passed on a tradition and a faith
for us to live by the Ideals of courage and sacrifice, the principles of
mateshlp, and the conviction that wherever we come from on this vast
continent, whatever divides us, we are Australians. By their example
they taught us about the ties that bind us, and our common cause.
And by the same example they compel us now, not just to remember
them, but to pass on the lesson to our children.
We hope that the commemorative events we plan for next year will do
this. We also hope, of course, that at the end of these celebrations
Australians will have a much more thorough appreciation of the War
itself and the nature and extent of Australia's Involvement.
Today I launch " Australia Remembers 1945-1 995": a program of
activities that will culminate on August 15 next year, the fiftieth
anniversary of the final peace. 
TEL: 15. Au9.94 9: 21 No. 003 P. 03/ 04~
3
It is a substantial program which I hope will engage the attention and
involvement of all Australians, which will honour our veterans and all
those others who served In non-military roles, and which will deepen our
understanding of events which so profoundly shaped the story of
Australia. The focus of the program will be on Australia and Australians: the
veterans of battles like those In the Middle East and Greece and Crete
and In the air war over Europe: and those who fought in the Pacific War,
the war to save Australia from Invasion.
We will remember their service, and the grief of those they left behind.
We will remember all those who lost their lives and those who lost the
ones they loved.
We will remember those who served at home in factories and on farms
that generation of Australians who stoically endured the dislocation of
their lives and the hardships which the War necessitated.
We will remember the great achievements and the great spirit of the
times. We will also remember those who came from war torn Europe to make
their lives here, and who by doing so made all our lives so much richer.
When I opened the Children of the Holocaust Exhibition here at the
Memorial earlier this year, one of the survivors told me that she had
made her home In Australia because it was as far away as possible
from the terrible events she had witnessed.
Over the next year we will celebrate the contribution such people have
made to Australia. And we will re-affirm our faith in Australia as a place
which has opened Its heart and mind to people seeking refuge from
wars in many parts of the world.
I hope " Australia Remembers" will add to our nation's understanding and
confidence about our place In the world and our capacity to play a
creative and humane part in It.
I hope it will encourage us to recognise how important It Is for a nation to
believe in great ideals to have them at the forefront of our ambitions.
And I hope It will help us recognise how important it is to believe in
ourselves. 
I EL 4
We want to involve every Australian community. We want all
Australians to be touched by it.
All who contributed to winning the war and making the peace and all
who benefited from those triumphs.
We want Australian women involved as never before in such a
commemoration. The great sentiment which this Memorial embodies must never be
allowed to drift away from them, or any group of Australians.
If those ideals are to continue to provide inspiration and faith for
Australians in the twenty first century the story must belong to every one
of us as the peace which came in 1945 belonged to us.
Thank you 15. Aug .94 9: 21 No. 003 h. U 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE OPEN LEARNING AGENCY OF AUSTRALIA'S
INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION PRODUCTION " THE GLOBAL
ECONOMY", PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 16 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed Tony ( Pritchard), as Executive Director of Open
Learning, Professor Logan, Vice-Chancellor of Monash and David Hill,
Managing Director of the ABC and other distinguished representatives of the
Embassies that Tony has mentioned and other people who have been
dramatically involved with the Open Learning Initiative and ladies and
gentlemen. Well this, of course, is not the only launch today. But, I'll bet pounds to
peanuts this one has a longer term influence on Australia than the other one.
And, particularly as we are now, I think, as a country so well placed to
understand what multi media combinations can do, what telecommunications
technology is capable of, to understand that in these instruments we have a
device, which fashioned properly, can extend particularly educational
learning opportunities to thousands, indeed millions, of people who wouldn't
otherwise have had these opportunities available to them.
Australia is, I think, at the forefront of technology change in the western
world, particularly in the OECD area, and in my notes there is a reference to
the fact that of a survey done recently of many countries in the region, the
survey showed that Australians felt more comfortable with technological
change than was the case with many of the communities in our region. A
chart in the Far Eastern Economic Review last week showed that Australia
was.-tbe.... ority-regional. country comfortable with the rate of technological
change. By contrast, the people of South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines,
Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Thailand and Japan all thought
the rate of technological change was too fast.
I think this is a very encouraging statistic and, I think, it is particularly as we
are now starting to learn about broad banded services and convergence and
that in not so many years from now we'll work, learn, shop, play and 
communicate in ways most of us can't today imagine. We've already
developed and are developing networks in Australia and, of course, anyone
who goes to automatic teller machines knows that that is so. And, in its
myriad forms the information highway has found its way into Australian
schools and universities already, into libraries and hospitals, into government
departments like DEET, into local governments, and as a consequence, we
are really starting to understand its spread and its opportunity.
It is for that reason, with some substantial pleasure that I established, last
year, the Broad Band Services Expert Group headed by Brian Johns whose
interim report I have now just received. It is a very good report. I think
everybody who wants a window into the future should read it. It is an exciting
report and one which for all the challenges it presents, should give us
confidence that Australia can be at the forefront of change in the global
economy and the information highway, because of the fact that we have
natural skills in content, in software, just as today we are launching the
telecourse " Global Economy". That kind of software product is the sort of
thing that Australians are capable of and the information highway is going to
be very much about content. The debate now is principally about hardware
and whether the cable is going to be rolled out here or there or how many
channels can be put on it, but it is essentially about content and we are a
content strong country and education has been one of our greatest strengths
and one of our primary strengths and it's a matter of exceeding pleasure to
me that our educational institutions are right into the information highway and
the opportunities to advance learning via these particular technologies.
So, it is against that background I am very pleased to be here today to launch
the " Global Economy" and it is, I think, a great example of the quality
intellectual merit and international co-operation rolled into one. Let me at this
point congratulate the three major Australian players in the enterprise. The
ABC whose staff made this co-production with their United States, Swedish
and Dutch partners such a success. Monash University and in particular
Professor Richard Snape and his colleagues for their distinguished academic
contribution and Open Learning for showing that co-operative endeavour and
higher education can produce material equal to any in the world.
So, " Global Economy" I think we can say, is a truly global product produced,
in the main, by Australians and it will earn export dollars for Australia and
more than that it will present to the world the face of Australia in the 1 990s. A
country with a global perspective and a pervasive belief in learning and
innovation. Tony. -Pr4thard-said-An -This-introductory -remarks that the " Global Economy"
and, in a sense, the distance learning movement are heralds of the future.
And, when Peter Baldwin first approached me in 1992 about Open Learning
and the Open Learning Initiative I thought there was a great opportunity here
to establish a facility whereby we could encourage students who may have
not qualified for matriculation, who may not for any number of reasons been
able to go on to university at a particular time, that we could by the Open
Learning Initiative develop curricula where students could join it and, that is, 
anyone could enrol in a course regardless of their background, prior
experience or educational qualifications and having then succeeded in
picking up units in the course, if they wish, stream themselves back into
mainstream campus activities. In other words, they get a second go, a
second shot at education.
You see how the Government is thinking in these terms. First of all the high
participation rates in schools, the additional places in tertiary institutions,
then spreading open learning beyond that as a catchment for people who
may have dropped out of the system and then building beside the universities
the TAFE system so that in vocational education there could also be career
opportunities mapped out. Tomorrow we are speaking about that very thing,
that is, how students in Years 11 and 12 can start to take on units in TAFE, to
start streaming themselves and get TAFE accreditation for their longer run
education. So, there is an exciting panoply of options there and a large part of that, I
think, apart from just the primary strengths of the participation and the higher
commitment to places in tertiary institutions in this country, I think, that the
Open Learning Initiative and Open Learning has a tremendous potential and
particularly for students who don't, because of parental circumstances or
geographical circumstances, can't find it easy for themselves to get
themselves into mainstream tertiary education or tertiary institutions.
Now, the White Paper on employment and growth Working Nation was
also at pains to stress Australia's future depends on ideas, skills and
knowledge of the workforce. And, if we are to be a high value added export
oriented economy, we need to continually upgrade our skills and we will also
need to find new and more effective ways of developing skills into the future.
In all of this, I think, it is incumbent upon us to take responsibility for our own
learning and this is where, I think, distance learning again comes through
with flying colours. Through distance learning programs such as Open
Learning anyone interested can learn about economics through productions
such as this one or learn a language, gain skills in statistics and marketing or
learn more about our own history.
One of distant learning's great strengths is that it can help break down the
artificial barriers between various education and training sectors. It is going
to take a lot of the, if you like, formality and structure out of our educational
structures and institutions. Just as businesses are increasingly making use
of outsourcing and telecommuting, Open Learning is increasingly utilising
information technologies and telecommunication advances to expand
educationraI--services in-the -home and"-, he office. Distance learning
techniques have also important applications for entry level training, for youth
education as I made a point a moment ago, and for the training market in
general. I was very pleased to see the ABC's rivals at SBS offering
vocational oriented training in diverse fields such as health, education and
journalistic ethics. I could make a little contribution to that software package
myself, maybe that's something I can do later. 
Not surprisingly, Open Learning's flexibility and strong client focus, I mean, I
think these words are important flexibility and strong client focus pose
challenge for our more traditional educational institutions. I think that is why,
I mean, I'm not just simply mouthing words here saying, I think, that is why it
is exceedingly encouraging that the main stream institutions are interested in
this challenge. The challenge being posed for flexibility and a stronger client
focus away from formal structures. Students can now study at times which
suit them and they can study in various settings. It doesn't matter if you are
from a rural area or you want to study specialist subjects not taught nearby or
have disabilities that prevent easy access to classroom study Open
Learning comes to you. And, the fact that of course it lets anybody enrol,
makes quality education more accessible to the many groups in society not
well served by traditional forms of education and it gives access to Australia's
best institutions, lecturers and tutors.
Open Learning is inclusive accessible learning, but we want to make it even
more accessible and that is why the second stage of the Government's Open
Learning Initiative is the new Electronic Support Service. This service will
enable students to communicate with tutors and other students through
electronic mail to search library catalogues and to access course and
administrative information.
Eventually, the service will enable educational institutions and industry to
access national and international education and training programs for use in
workplace training. We can already see that with programs such as Internet
where people are already accessing Internet and drawing quite a lot of data
out of it for particular areas of educational research.
Access points will be established in community based centres around
Australia to ensure that all students have access to the service. I mean, I just
think this is a terribly exciting thing that a student can go to a point in a
suburb and then have this communication with a tutor or the institution in the
broad. By putting Australian education and training onto the information super
highways it will put more education and training at the fingertips of more
Australians. And, of course, I think we all know that our future as a country is
going to be more and more in areas of added value, of education, of change,
of continual retraining and, of course, in flexibility and less formalisation in
the way education is delivered.
So, it is about equipping our children with the education, skills and
infrastructure-that-wi l-allowthem-to create a future for themselves. It is about
building a future that is more secure. So, perhaps let me conclude by saying
how gratifying it is that the concept of Open Learning is gaining widespread
acceptance. Its educational advantages are quickly being recognised, but it
doesn't surprise me as I have said many times in recent years, this country is
profoundly capable of change for the better and the embrace of change in
Australia in the last decade or so has, I think, been profound and why should
we not think that we can meet the challenge of the revolution in information 
and in technology when we so successfully have met the challenge of the
global economy? When we are successfully meeting the challenge of the
region. When we have learned that there is nothing to fear and so much to
gain from having the courage to embrace change and the wit to manage it.
So much to lose by retreating from it.
But, providing such a practical and positive answer to these rhetorical
questions, I thank the Open Learning Agency of Australia and all the other
people associated with this production. It is a marvellous, again,
collaborative initiative by the educational institutions, by the ABC, it continues
to demonstrate it's changing its role in this country, by the Government, and
of course, here particularly with collaboration with other production units
abroad and we certainly applaud that kind of collaboration.
Let me congratulate all involved, particularly the three people represented
here on the rostrum for getting out there and catching the wave that is now
with us that lets Australians say that the information highway is a great
opportunity for Australia, that we are strong in education and we are strong
on software and that we will master this technology and be first amongst
equals in getting out there on the highway with the sort of products as we've
seen today. But in doing that, make sure that that highway starts at home
and that the first wave of people to benefit from it are Australians who can
take up thes opportunities that formalised structures in the past have denied
them. Congratulations to one and all. 



At'
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE " AUSTRALIAN STUDENT TRAINEESHIP
FOUNDATION", GOSFORD,
17 AUGUST 1994
Well let me say it's great to be out of Canberra and here in Gosford on the
New South Wales Central Coast.
I hope you don't mind if I begin by referring to another launch that took place
yesterday. Yesterday, I launched the international television production " The Global
Economy" a distance learning production, put together by the ABC,
Monash University and the Open Learning Agency.
One of the great things about that production, and Open Learning in general,
is that it allows anyone who wishes to enrol in a distance learning course to
do so regardless of background, prior experience, or educational
qualifications. What Open Learning does is to bring higher education to those who want it
it's flexible and it's customer-focused.
It's a similar story with the Australian National Traineeship Foundation which
we announced in the Whit6&amp; Paper on Employment and Growth, Working
Nation. But whereas the Open Learning initiative is focused on those Australians in
higher education, this initiative is focused on younger Australians in years 11
and 12.
The whole aim of the Foundation is to get schools and industry together to
combine work experience with high quality vocational training.
It's about equipping our senior schools students with the skills they'll need if
they are to have satisfying and rewarding jobs in an increasingly competitive
global economy. 
We want to see senior school students with recognised vocational skills as
part of their standard school program.
This is a fundamental shift in Australia's approach to vocational education
and training. It's a shift that will benefit the careers and life chances of
thousands of young Australians.
But to make the shift we need leadership in our local communities, and
particularly from industry.
To help chart the way, a number of outstanding Australians, each with a
strong background in the vocational training field, have agreed to serve as
members on the Foundation's Board. And it's a great pleasure to welcome
the Board members who are with us today.
I won't refer to each Board member individually, but let me just mention how
pleased I am that John Goodman will chair the Board.
John has had extensive industry experience as Chairman and Chief
Executive of Baulderstone Hornibrook. He has also had extensive
involvement in promoting education and training for young people through his
Chairmanship of the Dusseldorp Foundation which has pioneered student
traineeships. One of the most important things about this Board is that the majority of its
members are from industry.
This is critical because under the Foundation, it will be industry, and not
government, that has control over the funding for entry level training.
It will be industry, and not government, that has responsibility for selecting
the training to be undertaken.
And it will be industry, not government, that provides the work experience that
will make the training meaningful.
Under the Foundation, local management committees, chaired by industry
and with majority industry membership, will be able to choose the most
appropriate forms of training from a range of public and private sources.
Students will acquire the skills that industry needs because industry will teach
them. So why are we doing this?
In the White Paper, we were at pains to stress that Australia's future depends
on the ideas, skills, and knowledge of our workforce. 
As we said then, if Australia is to be a nation with a high value-added exportoriented
economy generating rewarding jobs for all Australians who want
them, we must find new and more effective ways of equipping the workforce
of tomorrow with the skills they will need.
The fact remains that despite great gains in the last decade that have seen
school retention rates almost double, around 14 per cent of young people still
drop out of school.
The risk is that these people might be left behind as we head towards a new
century. I don't want that to happen. I want us to approach the new century with
confidence, but above all else, with one another, together, as an inclusive
society, as an Australian community.
That's the philosophy that underpinned Working Nation. And that's what we
are giving expression to today through the launch of this Foundation.
Student traineeships must be quality courses that enable young people to
find satisfying and rewarding jobs.
But while the traineeships are important, it's what they lead to that really
counts. So, why come here to Gosford? Why not announce this new initiative in
Sydney, Melbourne, or Canberra?
Well, I suppose we could have travelled to a number of places in Australia
there are many innovative and successful student traineeships already
underway right around the country.
We could have travelled to Alcoa's plant in Geelong, where student trainees
complete their Victorian Certificate of Education at the same time they
complete 16 engineering modules.
But the reason we've decided to come here to Gosford is because the Central
Coast TRAC Program is one of the most successful in Australia and thaimakes
it the best place to launch the Australian Student Traineeship
Foundation. Run from this shopping centre, the Central Coast TRAC is independently
managed and operated by a joint industry, school and TAFE committee.
Not only does industry help develop the TRAC curriculum, it also contributes
towards the running costs for the program both financially and through
assistance in kind many of the businesses represented here today have
trainees working with them. 
But it's a real joint effort: the local newspaper, the Central Coast Express,
plays its part by providing a weekly student profile free of charge and the
local councils and Rotary clubs also chip in with their support for the program.
And the reason why the Central Coast TRAC program succeeds, why all of
the TRAC students who left school last year are in full-time jobs, is because
of the combined efforts of the schools, the students, TAFE, industry and the
wider community.
It's a story of students with initiative and enthusiasm responding to
opportunities created by leaders in the local community.
It's the story of S teven Macarthur who participated in the TRAC program in
1993 and earlier this year beat more than 1,500 other applicants in gaining a
hospitality traineeship at the Sydney Hilton.
And it's also a story with an international profile thanks to Lesley Tobin,
Nichole Ford and Natalie Cruikshank. Last month, these three women the
TRAC coordinator, a TRAC student, and a TRAC workplace supervisor
attended the Second International Conference on Education Business in
Paris. There, they presented the Central Coast TRAC as a best practice
model for school industry partnerships.
That's a great achievement, particularly for someone like Nichole who only a
short time ago was on the verge of quitting school. It's the sort of
achievement that deserves to be celebrated.
What we want to do now with this new Foundation is to have stories like this
one echo right around Australia.
Through the student traineeships we want to encourage more young people
to stay on at school and acquire the skills they need for the jobs of tomorrow.
Let me finish up on the important theme of leadership. By launching the
Foundation what we are hoping to tap into is the vast leadership reserves
that lie within our local communities, in our local schools but primarily in our
local business communities.
As the recent Mcinsey report on regional development pointed out,
leadership within a regional community is often the key reason why one
region prospers while another fails.
It's that sort of leadership that has been exercised here on the New South
Wales Central Coast. 
I congratulate all those associated with the Central Coast TRAC program and
I take great pleasure in formally launching the Australian Student Traineeship
Foundation what I think is a truly major step in vocational training in this
country.'
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FAREWELL TO THE MAIN CONTINGENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
MEDICAL SUPPORT FORCE TO RWANDA, TOWNSVILLE,
AUGUST 1994
Well let me start by saying how pleased I am to be here in Townsville. It is
an occasion for great national pride to farewell the main group of the
Australian Defence Force that will travel to Rwanda as part of the Australian
Medical Support Force.
And it is yet another example of Australia responding to an international
humanitarian emergency.
You see, one of the great things about this nation of ours is that it boasts a
people with a profound generosity of spirit.
And it is a fundamentally Australian generosity of spirit.
It is a generosity of spirit that extends from what we do for our own people
be it fighting floods or bushfires to what we do for those in other parts of the
world who face even more devastating events like the death and violence, the
disease and starvation of Rwanda.
When Australians are faced with a humanitarian crisis, we respond
immediately, instinctively and we do something practical.
We are a nation of doers and helpers, not talkers and watchers.
There are many great stories of individual Australians giving of themselves
for the people of Rwanda from well known artists like John Farnham, to the
Darwin nurse Judith Chappell a veteran of Cyclone Tracey who now, at 59, is
making her own way to help in Rwanda. And, of course, there's the many
other Australians already working with Australian and international aid
agencies on the ground in Rwanda.
i 
2
As a nation, Australia has responded to the crisis in Rwanda: the people of
Australia have given more than $ 12 million in public appeals and the
Government of Australia has given $ 10 million in humanitarian aid.
Worldwide, that easily puts Australia among the top five aid donors to
Rwanda. But it's not merely a question of dollars our assistance will help the
Australian individuals and agencies working under enormously difficult
conditions in the camps. And it will also help the United Nations to repatriate
refugees and rehabilitate Rwanda with projects for its longer-term economic
development. This humanitarian aid is vital. But it can not do the job by itself.
What is needed just as much is the creation of conditions inside Rwanda that
will encourage the refugees to return to their homes.
After what so many of them have seen and experienced, it is not surprising
that they are reluctant to return and suspicious of Rwandan authorities.
This is where the United Nations Assistance Mission In Rwanda ( UNAMIR)
comes in, and it's whe6reyou come in.
You are part of a group of around 300 men and women of the Australian
Defence Force who will serve in Rwanda some of you in the medical group,
some of you as infantry and support personnel or in headquarters and liaison
positions.
Those of you who are leaving today will join the 76 members of the Australian
advance party who arrived in Kigali on 8 August and who are already at work
preparing the Kigali Central Hospital for your arrival.
Your main job will be to provide medical support which will keep UNAMIR
effective. Elements of your team will provide support to UNAMIR forces deployed
outside Kigali through the provision of mobile casualty collection posts.
And any of your excess capacity will be directed to helping ordinary
Rwandans.
The next six months will be tough. Your experiences may be unpleasant.
They may be dangerous.
They will certainly be different from anything most of you have encountered
before. 
But I know that you will rise to these challenges and draw great fulfilment and
satisfaction from your work because that's what the members of the
Australian Defence Force do.
You are well trained and well prepared for your operation.
And you follow in a fine tradition of outstanding Australian service to many
United Nations operations, in places like Cambodia, the Middle East,
Mozambique, Somalia, Cyprus and the Sinai.
In all of these places, Australian service men and women have been known
for the practical way they get on with their job with discipline, good humour
and innovation.
Each of you will be changed by what lies ahead of you. But more important
than what what we do for ourselves is what we do for others what you do
will help change the lives of many people in Rwanda, it will help build a future
for Rwanda.
It's as simple and as powerful as that.
And what you do is also part of a broader national effort.
At the end of the day, yours is a very practical contribution, and, for mine, that
makes it a distinctly Australian contribution.
On behalf of the Government and on behalf of all Australians, I want to say
how proud we are of you.
I want to thank you and wish you every success in the tasks before you. And
a safe return to your families and loved ones when your tour of duty is over. 



Kr
PRIME MINISTER
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING THE JUSTICE FORUM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
22 AUGUST 1994
Last October, the Government commissioned a major report on reform of our
legal system.
We did that because the Australian public was losing confidence in our legal
system.
We have in place a system of government that gives Australians access to
universal health care, quality education, improved training opportunities,
affordable child care, and a safety net of benefits and pensions.
But if we are to count ourselves as one of the world's truly great social
democracies we need to ensure Australians have appropriate access to their
legal system.
We asked the Access To Justice Committee, chaired by Ronald Sackville,
how to enhance access to justice and make the legal system fairer, more
efficient and more effective.
And that's just what the committee's done. It's an excellent report and for that
our thanks go to Ronald and his fellow committee members.
This Justice Forum is a very important part of the consultative process arising
out of the Access to Justice Report. And I very much see your attendance
here today as evidence that, like the Government, you want to see
Australians regain confidence in their legal system.
Later this year, we will take another important step down the reform path
when I deliver the Government's Justice Statement. 
We are committed to access to justice and equality before the law. The
Statement will ensure that we put in place the sort of justice system
Australians expect and deserve.
One area where we can make a start is with the criminal law.
Over the course of this Labor Government, Australia has led the world in
designing laws to combat organised crime. But we have been let down by the
provisions of our criminal laws, which are fragmented and vary between the
States and Territories.
If we are to reduce the chances of criminals escaping justice by exploiting
technicalities in the law, if we are to ensure fairness and consistency, if we
are to reduce legal costs, we need a uniform, simplified and reformed criminal
law a Model Criminal Code that all Australians can understand.
I want to see the Commonwealth implement the Model Criminal Code well
before 2001 so that the States can have ample opportunity to have the Code
up and running on a national basis by the target date of 2001.
1 think it's also time to supplement traditional, reactive enforcement strategies
with a more sophisticated emphasis on prevention, and to deal more
effectively with the underlying causes of criminal behaviour.
And I applaud the recently announced intention of Premiers and Chief
Ministers to meet later this year to discuss a concerted approach to
combating crime.
Clearly, the Commonwealth is ideally placed to accept a leadership and
coordinating role in issues of such importance for all Australians.
That's why we have been directly involved with the States and Territories in
developing new policies on issues such as firearms and domestic violence,
which deal with anti-social activity at the community level.
Co-operation between governments, law enforcement agencies and the
community is the key to controlling crime.
The Commonwealth will continue to support consultative arrangements that
lead to effective national crime prevention programs. We will sponsor
research into the causes of crime and the development of appropriate
preventive strategies.
The aim is to build a safer Australia.
We will work in partnership with the States and Territories, the profession and
the judiciary to facilitate reform. 
With my firm support, the Attorney-General and the Minister for Justice are
identifying the barriers to accessible justice and developing a major legal
reform package to make access to justice a reality for all Australians.
Let me say a few words about those areas where I think we can really make a
difference.
A major barrier to justice is its cost.
The cost of justice excludes most Australians from using a lawyer or the
courts to enforce or defend their rights.
That's not acceptable.
Freeing up the legal market is one way to reduce costs.
We are working with the States and Territories to reform the legal profession.
We want it to become more competitive, more accountable, and geared to the
needs of the people it serves.
Extending the Trade Practices Act to the professions under a national
competition policy would ensure that consumers and competitors in the legal
market enjoy the same protection available to people in other sectors.
Other reforms would make the legal services market more flexible.
Lifting restrictions on advertising would allow consumers the best possible
information on the services they need.
Improving regulations for the disclosure of fees and for the independent
assessment of costs would protect consumers.
The ability to opt for contingency fees would extend access to the legal
system. More difficult areas, such as opening up areas of work reserved to lawyers,
also need further examination.
The Council of Australian Governments will consider in February 1995 reform
proposals to make the profession more accountable and accessible than ever
before.
We are not talking about leaving the cost of justice purely to market forces.
Legal aid is another important factor in the cost equation.
An effective national legal aid scheme remains central to the Government's
social justice strategy. 
As the major provider of legal aid funding, the Commonwealth has a clear
leadership role to play. We can and should influence the way legal aid
funding is directed.
Of course, it is vital that legal aid reform is achieved in a true partnership with
the other key players the States and the legal profession. Successful
reform depends as much on their contribution as on ours.
Proposals for contingency fee arrangements with private lawyers could meet
some of the need of middle Australia for legal assistance.
And litigation lending funds and legal expenses insurance also have a place
in giving Australians a fair go when they need legal assistance.
How we spend our legal aid dollars must also reflect our commitment to
equality before the law. We must ensure that, in practice, the legal system
delivers justice evenhandedly and does not enshrine inequality.
This means making concrete commitments to fix the inherent biases in the
system. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and people from non-English
speaking backgrounds face particular difficulties and fears when dealing with
our legal system.
They should have access to interpreters and information in a language they
understand and they should be dealt with in a culturally sensitive manner.
Cultural sensitivity also requires knowledge and training. The Government is
supporting cross-cultural training initiatives by the Australian Institutes of
Judicial Administration to promote this.
Women should have greater access to appropriate and affordable advice and
support about the legal problems that affect them.
And the specific problems faced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
women in gaining access to legal aid must also be addressed.
These reforms are fundamental if we are to ensure all Australians have
access to justice.
Every day in our courts people test their rights under the law. Matters that
have the potential to touch us all are often under dispute.
The establishment of important legal precedents, for example, in human
rights, consumer protection and environmental law must be supported.
Improving access to justice must also include reforms to the means we have
available for resolving disputes in short, more choice is needed. 
While access to our courts must, of course, remain available to all, it is clear
that many cases would be better resolved without resort to expensive and
adversarial court action.
In family law, for example, the Government has begun a fundamental shift
away from litigation towards a simple and more affordable process of
mediation and counselling in appropriate cases.
We must work to expand alternatives to litigation, while ensuring that dispute
resolution remains just and fair.
Of course, reforms should also continue to be achieved in the courts. I am
very interested in proposals for the development of court charters which
would set out the courts' commitments to ' user-friendliness' and the delivery
of accessible justice.
Clearly, we all support the need for reform. And I think I can safely say that
we are all committed to rebuilding Australians' faith in their legal system.
I wish you well in your deliberations over the next two days and am pleased
to declare the Justice Forum open. 



TEL PRIME INIST.
* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INDONESIAN MINISTERIAL FORUM, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 23 AUGUST 1994
Well, it's a great pleasure to welcome our Indonesian guests to Canberra for
this Ministerial Forum.
As you know, in 1992, President Soeharto and I agreed that it would be to our
nations' mutual benefit if our Ministers from across the whole range of
government activity got together on a regular and formal basis.
We agreed on the Ministerial Forum because we both had a very strong
sense that, by being a bit more creative and enterprising across a wider
range of Ministerial portfolios, we would find new avenues for cooperation.
Back in 1992, President Soeharto and I realised that the relationship was
moving beyond the single purview of even the most activist Foreign Ministers
and they don't make them much more activist than Gareth and All.
I should mention that the outstanding work that Gareth and All have put into
this relationship over a long time their intelligent and persistent efforts
have been critical in constructing the foundation on which we now build and
our thanks go to them for that.
But Gareth and All would be the first to agree that the A, ustralia-indonesia
relationship is growing richer and deeper by the close engagement of their
colleagues from other portfolios.
Nothing brought this home to me more clearly than the Australia Today
promotion, which I and a large number of my cabinet colleagues attended in
Jakarta in June this year.
And let me again thank Coordinating Minister Hartarto for his great support
as patron of the promotion. E24 Aug .94$' 05 N0 .001 F. 01,-04 
TEL 2
The business forum and the trade exhibition, which together formed a key
part of the Australia Today promotion, showed an Australian business
community eager to expand its commercial links with Indonesia.
More than 200 Australian business people made their way to Jakarta in what
was the largest business mission ever to leave Australia.
But in many ways we shouldn't be surprised by this level of interest after
all, our two way trade has grown at a trend rate of 22 per cent for the past five
years to reach $ 3 billion in 1993. And Australia is one of the top ten investors
in Indonesia with investments of over $ 2.5 billion.
Maintaining that strong growth in the commercial relationship is one of the
key aims of this Ministerial Forum. And even in its short life, the Forum has
been a catalyst for growth in new areas.
Let me briefly touch upon just some of those areas because they show us all
just how much is actually being done.
Through the Forum we have developed bilateral agreements on copyright
protection, education and training, customs and health.
We have also set up a program of training and technical assistance to
strengthen Indonesia's intellectual property regime.
The Forum's Working Group on trade, industry and investment has helped to
resolve a number of impediments on the trade and investment front while also
promoting industry collaboration in sectors as diverse as shipbuilding,
aerospace, automotive components, medical and scientific equipment, and
textiles, clothing and footwear.
The Working Group on agriculture and food cooperation has already
facilitated three joint ventures in meat and livestock and two potential joint
ventures in horticulture. And the joint venture in cattle breeding involving the
Australian Heytesbury Pastoral Group should be operational this year.
The Working Group on education and training has promoted cooperation in
areas ranging from university management to training in tourism.
And under the Memorandum of Understanding on Education and Training, we
have identified legal education as a priority area for cooperation.
As part of the reform of its legal system, Indonesia has identified a need to
build its legal teaching profession.
So I am very pleased to announce tonight that the Australian Government will
establish an Austral ia-Indonesia Legal Education Fellowship. 4 i u 9 4 C5, N0 0 C1I R 0 0 -4 
TEL 3
This fellowship will enable an eminent Indonesian nominee to undertake a
period of study in Australia which will contribute to legal teaching in
Indonesia, Of course, the things that are happening in the Austral ia-Indonesia
relationship are not confined to the Forum and its Working Groups.
Our Transport Ministers who met here in Canberra last month have laid the
ground work for greater cooperation on transport links between northern
Australia and eastern Indonesia.
In the science and technology fields, we have had an active program of
collaboration and I am delighted that Foreign Minister Alatas and Senator
Cook will tomorrow sign an umbrella agreement on science and technology.
My colleague Brian Howe and his Indonesian counterparts have also been
exploring opportunities for cooperation in housing and urban development.
In the past two years, we have exchanged ministerial-led tripartite industrial
relations missions with Australia supporting trade union training and
occupational health and safety projects in Indonesia.
Following Senator Ray's recent successful visit, our Defence Ministers have
agreed to hold annual meetings.
As you can see, there are few areas of government activity where we're not
doing something new. The relationship is growing in all directions.
For Australia's part at least, it's hard to think of any single bilateral
relationship where so much is going on.
But, of course, our cooperation is by no means confined to the bilateral
agenda. We are working together on many multilateral issues. Links between AFTA
andCER, the ASEAN Regional Forum, regional issues such as Cambodia,
and global issues lke the World trade Organisation, are all areas where
I ndonesi! an -Australi! an cooperation has helped shape productive outcomes.
We are, of course, particularly looking forward to cooperating with Indonesia
and our other APEC partners in ensuring the success of the very important
APEC leaders' meeting which President Soeharto will chair in Bogor in
November.
As I have said before no country is more important to Australia than
Indonesia. The relations between us have never been better or more broadly
based than they are now. T24. Aug. 94 : C0 5 No 01 F . C1 1'. 
TEL 4
That's not to say that we won't encounter problems from time to time, or that
we don't have to work hard to make the relationship work. Nor is it to
understate the differences between our societies.
But it is to say that the compelling logic of our geography and our economic
development will continue to open up more and more areas for cooperation.
I have no doubt that this Forum will be fruitful. What we are learning from
each such meeting, from every new contact, is that this relationship between
Australia and Indonesia has much more to give us than we have yet taken
from it that the more things we do together, the more we discover what new
and exciting opportunities lie within our grasp. 24. Hu9.94 6 Ut) No . UU I F U4/ 11 4 



' 2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT " GENAREN", NARROMINE NSW
LAUNCH OF THE NATIONAL LANDCARE PROGRAM GRANTS 1994-95
24 AUGUST 1994
Well thanks very much, Michael and Kylie. Don and Megan Sutherland, the
Shire President, Robert Wilson. Robert, thank you for coming out today. The
other 12 neighbours who have supported this project, and the volunteers, the
LEAP volunteers and the Australian Trust for Conservation volunteers, and
ladies and gentlemen.
Well, it's a great pleasure to be involved with a project like this as the
occasion for announcing the grants for 1994-95, that is the community grants
component of the National Landcare. Progra m of $ 5 million to fund 711 new
community environment projects around the country. And there needs, with
any such announcement, some indication of what these funds are for, and
how they are spent, to communicate what they mean and to enthuse the
country and the community with the need to be doing these things. And I'm
delighted to be at " Genaren" today to see the preservation of this remnant
bush, which has been in some respects, preserved by the fact that the
Sutherland family have farmed this area for so long, and where they have
very low stocking levels, and the consequence of all this has meant that there
is something here that we can draw from and build upon in seeing this project
some to. fruition. And it's a great thing, I think, that Australians are so
committed and to see volunteers as we are seeing them, help in erecting this
fence which, already five kilometres of which is built, and it's going to be, I
think, six, around 400 hectares, or if you still speak in acres as I do, 1000
acres, which is a large lump of country. To see what can happen when we
allow nature to prevail and the natural species to live in harmony with the
property. I suppose it's a commentary on where we've come as a country in rural terms,
that we are celebrating the preservation of 1000 acres of remnant bush. One
would have thought that with a country so large as this that there would have
been many areas so preserved. But this has not been so, with land clearing
and with the practices over the last century, and particularly with the 
introduced species the foxes and the rabbits and the feral cats which have
done so much damage to the native species, and that effects of course the
flora, and that changes the whole balance of the area. And I'm very
interested in Michael saying that they intend now to introduce wallabies back
into the area, which have an impact upon the flora which itself will then set up
other balances in the area. It's such a large piece of land, it's going to be a
very interesting experiment, I think, to see what exactly can be done and what
can be achieved in something so representative as this.
Now, in announcing these projects for 1994-95, it means that we'll be doing
similar things across the country. The important thing, I think, is the
awareness of the land and the respect for the land which the Landcare
program is, in a sense, inducing. But of course the program is one thing it
means nothing without the people. And leadership always matters it matters
everywhere, and it matters in this as in everything else.
And I think that the leadership which Michael and Kylie are showing here is
going to be important to this district because there is a view that the city
slickers have sort of got hold of this issue and we people on the land
shouldn't really be, basically, pushed around by these sort of programs. But
when you see people who have farmed areas for so long, as is the case of
this family for a century or so, showing that leadership and also beyond
simply the Landcare project itself into enhanced conservation of the property,
of the sensible management of water, of care and protection against erosion,
care about stocking levels, balancing that part of the property which is~ a6detJ
pasture and that which is not, this is the sort of leadership that Australia
needs in rural Australia. And that, I think, is going to make the difference
across the country. The Commonwealth can help, with it's programs, but this
is essentially a community thing.
And it's where, I think, rural Australia and people in the countryside of this
nation of ours are saying that the community alone can do this, we need
some financial assistance from the government but it is not a claim or a call
on the government to go and do something. It is, essentially, a call to an
enhanced understanding and appreciation for the land which is ours. So, I
am absolutely delighted with the level of commitment and the leadership
particularly by young people such as Michael and Kylie and the interest in
the species of flora and fauna which is so evident in Michael's remarks. This
is the sort of, if you like, educated enthusiasm which is going to make this
program and this sort of thing, work.
I hope that as we grow and prosper, as we learn more, that we come to know
that the indiscriminate clearing of land is a danger to us, that it threatens the
ground, that we have developed ourselves now as a major producer of wool
in the world, that the country has actually made the transition to hard hoofed
animals, from the native soft ones. And yet, we can do that and survive the
experience of that change if we are careful about how we do it. And, it is that,
I think, engendering that sort of spirit that is going to make the difference.
I 
Now, I know that it is hard to engender spirit in difficult times. And,
particularly with the drought. Drought coming and going in some areas, in
one year, off the next, back the following year... It is very dispiriting,
destroying farm incomes, creating a lot of rural poverty. And, the point I was
trying to make a week or two ago is, I think, that we have to regard the
drought as something that is around, in places, most of the time, coming and
going. And, we need programs to deal with it as well as the funding which the
Commonwealth announced my colleague, Bob Collins, announced a week
or so ago $ 13.89 million for exceptional circumstances funding for the
drought where it hits an area particularly hard. And, as you know, we are
adjusting the Rural Adjustment Scheme -( RAS) seeing where you have viable
farms but they take a knock in some particular year, that there is some
financial assistance to be able to meet some of those costs to keep the bank
happy and to keep the business on the road. That, I think, is the challenge.
It is probably true, though I'm not the one to say, that weather patterns have
changed, that we are in a cycle we may have been in at other times in this
century where drought is around quite often. And, I think, we owe it to the
rural community of this country, to those people who are in very viable
country, particularly, and even those at the margins who can generally
survive from one season to another, to help them through with assistance.
That's why we're keeping the RAS scheme and its application under review,
and why we are seeking to get some sort of uniformity in its application
across the states so that in one state, and not another, people are being
treated more generously than somewhere else.
So, there are a few bright spots on the horizon. Wool prices have picked up
and that is going to make a difference to rural incomes. We've been seeing
prices around 700 cents for certain categories of wool which is a substantial
improvement on what we've seen. We're still living, of course, and have
been, with the overhang of the wool stockpile but that is being managed and
we've got, after all, the premium fibre in the world. We produce it in this
country and we're the best at it. So, that is a strong thing for us and, of
course, the grain markets of the world are essentially insatiable and that
depends, of course on good seasons and some innovation in the way we
crop this country. At any rate, one has to be, despite the problems, an
optimist about the future in terms of rural industry with an improvement in the
general understanding of the marketing of our various major commodities.
And, a willingness certainly on the part of the federal government and I am
sure the state governments too to help farmers where help can be really
valuable in getting them through a difficult period where drought has been
about. So, today, I think, we have some things to celebrate and this project here at
' Genaren', the preservation of this remnant vegetation of what it would have
been like... We're seeing here what we might have seen right across this
region of NSW, in various ways, the natural bushland, which has, because of
enlightened management been preserved enough of it preserved to let it
regenerate back. And, I certainly congratulate Michael and Kylie, all those 
4
owners nearby who are committed to this and to the volunteers who have
their heart and their faith in Australia, in the value of the land and our respect
for it and wanting to put something back. It is your leadership that is going to
make the difference. And, congratulations to you, one and all.
ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL CAPITAL APPEAL
THURSDAY, 25 AUGUST 1994
When I launched the ' Australia Remembers' program here only last week I
expressed my affection for this place and my high regard for the work that is
done here.
For a long time now the Memorial has been the most visited museum or
gallery in Australia. Attendances this year are booming. I understand that
more than 900,000 people will visit this year. They come, I think, as Manning
Clark once put it, ' to understand what it means to be Australian'.
This Memorial is a great national institution which touches the lives of millions
of Australians and we want to see it continue to grow.
It must never get out of touch with the times, or grow inward looking and
parochial. The message of the Memorial must remain powerful and persuasive from one
generation to the next. Therefore its galleries are bound to need regular
renovation and renewal.
I am pleased to say that over the last decade the Commonwealth government
has played its part in seeing that we meet this responsibility.
The Memorial has a professional and well-qualified staff and a collection that
is well-housed, well-documented and secure.
But a much greater challenge now presents itself. Over the next decade all
of the Memorial's major galleries will be renewed in order to tell their stories
coherently and comprehensively in a language that today's visitors and
tomorrow's will understand.
The Memorial has embarked on an exciting and ambitious program and today
I announce the launch of a Capital Appeal which aims to raise the necessary
million over the next three to five years.
The Commonwealth Government has given the lead gift of $ 2.5 million to
renew the Pacific War Gallery. We announced this in the May Budget. 
2
In addition the Budget also allowed for an increase of $ 2 million annually to
the Memorial's base funding.
This injection of funds will guarantee that the building is sound, that there is
an adequate and qualified staff for the tasks ahead, and that the collection is
properly managed and developed.
A great deal of work has gone into the preparations for the launch of this
appeal. In each state and territory the Memorial has established advisory groups
made up of business and community leaders. These men and women are
giving their time freely and generously and I thank them for that.
The first stage of the appeal is aimed at corporate Australia. Only in the
second stage will the general public be called on for donations. I have no
doubt that both stages will meet with a generous response.
In launching the appeal today I also invite state governments to demonstrate
their support perhaps by collectively matching the Commonwealth's gift of
million.
While we cherish what has been achieved at the Memorial, we cannot fail to
see what needs to be done.
This Pacific War Gallery is a perfect example of the story half told.
It was at Milne Bay and on the Kokoda Track that Australian troops turned
back the Japanese. It was in the Pacific War that the battle for Australia was
won. The story of those battles and the spirit of the Australians who were engaged
in them must be told here at the Australian War Memorial and with
government and public support it will be.
I congratulate the Council, the Director and his staff for deciding to embark
upon the challenge of renewal, and all those who have worked so hard to
establish this Capital Appeal.
I sincerely hope that state governments, business and the community at large
, will respond: and I am confident that they will because each year, by coming
here in such numbers, they prove their affection for the Memorial and their
respect for the Australian men and women whose great sacrifice is honoured
here. It is a great national cause, and it is with pleasure that I now launch it.
CANBERRA August 1994 



PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH TO THE TOURISM TASK FORCE, PARK GRAND HOTEL SYDNEY
FRIDAY 26 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
This program has already brought about the splendid restoration of the Old Treasury
Building in Melbourne, a great example of what can be achieved when We get cool~
e-rtion from State Governments. I know that Jeffrey Is going to do his best to
claim all that for himself, but that's par for the course.
The Customs House here In Sydney, which Is now I'm happy to say, part of a very
important public debate, is one of the city's oldest and best loved buildings, is another
heritage building receiving assistance. Under the program the Federal Government
Is providing $ 24 million towards its restoration so It can serve as an important tourist
and ' cultural c-entre, and I'm very pleased can I say, that with the debate that we have
had on this building, that It's engendered the debate about East Circular Quay and I'm
delighted that we are able to work with the Lord Mayor who has shown a tremendous
amount of leadership In this, and the various authorities and the owners, to get a
really first-class result on the buildings that abut the Opera House, which Is arguably
the most Important building easily the most Important building in the country anid
arguably the most important building built In the 1960s anywhere in the world.
And I think It Is you know that the debate now about Circular Quay and the
government of New South Wales has Invited public comment about how it might be
developed but I will be seeing the Premier next week and I think it should be
possible for the NSW and Commonwealth Governments to agree on a regime which
gives some focus to Circular Quay, and makes the Customs House the central focus
as the central civic building of the Quayside, and hopefully develops a square In front
of it that lets all the people of this country come to the Quay not to view it, if you like,
at the margin from the overseas terminal, or on the way around the Opera House, but
centrally, In the central part of a central site of the city. 
And this Is going to take some... think it~ s a proposition that can really come to life,
but it does mean removing the Cahill Expressway and I think we can remove it at a
very acceptable cost. At any rate, the Commonwealth is prepared to do this. And I
think the Important thing about it Is that with the Olympics coming in the year 2000,
it's Important that when the Olympics come and go~ that we leave things behind for
the city and for the country, and this key tourism site in Australia Circular Quay, the
Opera House I think getting that focus now and the opportunity of the Games, is
something that we shouldn't let pass. There are other things that I'm speaking to
NSW about, which are about the city of Sydney the Expressway as it leaves that
part of the city and goes down towards Woolloomooloo Bay, as you know divides the
Domain from the Gardens, which were once one single area, and there's a discussion
going about burying that roadway so that it no longer divides that green space in the
city. All these things, I think, are going to be important. But as well as East Circular
Quay, we've got the GPO and Martin Place, and the Commonwealth has been
involved I've been involved myself to see that It Is sympathetically developed, and
that again, in this key precinct of the city and Martin Place, in what is one of the most
important heritage buildings, the uses not yet defined, probably a hotel, but one that
will sit with some sympathy and comfort with the site. And again, I'm indebted to the
Lord Mayor and the Sydney City Planning Authority, in dealing with this and of course
Austr-alia Post which has cooperated in trying to -get a decent development.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
Please check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCH, PARK GRAND HOTEL SYDNEY
FRIDAY 26 AUGUST 1994
When I first entered Parliament you would have been hard pressed to find a reference
to the Australian tourism industry in any of our newspapcrs.
If people wanted to visit Australia and find thcmselves a spot on the beach, that was
fine by us, but we didn't go out of our way to sell our country as a tourist destination.
And once thc visitors arrived, well it was up to them to make their own way around
Australia, It was, at best, marketing by osmosis.
Back in 1973, the main reason international visitors made the trip to Australia was to
visit friends and relatives.
Three in every four visitors made their way from either Europe, North Amierica or
New Zealand while only one in eight came from Asia.
It was a case of visiting the safe and failiar with just a twist of the exotic.
Of course, that's all changed now.
And, in so mnany ways, what's happened to our tourism industry reflects the wider
internationalisation of Australia and its economy.
As Australia has opencd up to embrace the world, and particularly Asia, so too has our
tourism industry.
It's clearly one of our great success stories and it holds great hope for the future.
A decade ago we welcomed I million visitors, today it is 3 milion and by the centenary
of Federation it should be more than 7 million. 
The image we now present to the world is of an extraordinary array of natural beauty and
charm backed up by a sophisticated and diverse multicultural society.
It's a niche shopper's holiday paradise.
The World Travel and Tourism Council has forecast that between now and the year 2005
travel and tourism combined will create 112 million jobs in the Asia Pacific alone.
Obviously, Australia is very well placed to capture a slice of that action we have one of the
most competitive tourist industries in the world.
And as the focus of world economic activity has shifted to Asia, so too has our tourist
promotion. Today, one in every two visitors comes here from Asia.
Obviously, globalisation is driving the tourism boom.
As global communications and information highways increase our exposure to other cultures,
languages, and landscapes, so grows our desire to experience these things first hand.
The more time we spend at home with our televisions and computers, the more we want to
travel and experience the world.
That goes some way to explaining why tourism is, and will remain, one of the world's fastest
growing industries.
But what is particularly exciting for us is the rate of growth in Australia -in 1993 our tourism
market grew at three times the world average.
Tourism now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earnings and is, without doubt,
central to Australia's economnic prosperity.
But I don't need to remind anyone here that many others are in the race, with a good number
of them just as desperate to capture the global tourist dollar.
So what can the Government do to facilitate the continued expansion of the industry?
Well, let me touch today on just four areas where I think the Government can make a
difference. And they are training, regional tourism promotion, infrastnructure development and the
preservation of our heritage buildings.
Let's start with training because this decade tourism should create around a quarter of a milion
new jobs in Australia. 
If our tourism workers display world class service standards, there's no doubt we'll secure a
place in the front rank of tourist destinations.
As we demonstrated in the White Paper on Employment and Growth, Working Nation,
training more highly skilled workers and delivering a more flexible and productive workplace is
a Government priority.
Indeed, we have no higher priority.
In Working Nation, We suspended the training guarantee, introduced a training wage,
increased fuinding for the Australian National Training Authority, doubled the number of labour
market and vocational training places and increased the number of entry level training places by
50,000. And let me take this opportunity to congratulate the tourism industry and the Tourism Task
Force for their role in leading the way in workplace reform.
It was, after all, the Tourism Task Force that brought together some of Australia's leading
hotels to draw up new workplace agreements that should come into place later this year.
These new agreements will benefit staff, management, and tourists.
I should also mention that in May this year, under a new Workplace Bargaining Program, we
decided to provide an additional $ 27 million to further promote productive and cooperative
bargaining in Australian workplaces.
This should lead to a range of agreements across the tourism industry from high profile 5 star
hotels to smaller properties in the hotel-motel sector, both unionised and non-unionised.
In Working Nation we also paid particular attention to the regions of Australia. We did that
for the fuindamental reason that forms the basic philosophy of Working Nation. that is, we want
all Australians to share in the recovery.
And that means we make sure we bring the people of regional Australia along with us.
Clearly tourism provides regions with an excellent opportunity to create jobs and diversify their
economic base.
And Australia offers a host of diverse and unique holiday experiences away from our capital
cities and major tourist gateways.
Through responsible planning and management, regions can develop tourism opportunities that
guarantee sustainable tourismn enterprises and long term employment.
To this end, we included a $ 42 milion regional tourism package in the Federal Budget, eight
million dollars of which has already made its way to some 89 projects right around Australia.
And the cornerstone of this package, the Regional Tourism Development Program will help
regions develop integrated tourism plans. 
Extension of the EMDG scheme to tourism operators, which we also announced in Working
Naion, should also make a difference in the regions.
But if more regions of Australia are to benefit from the tourism explosion then we need to
ensure we have a world class infrastructure.
That's why, in Working Nation, we allocated $ 70 million dollars to a Regional Strategic
Infrastructure Fund and freed up the arrangements governing infrastructure bonds.
It's also why we introduced greater competition to our aviation industry.
Several years ago now, this Governuent recognised the need to restructure our aviation
industry. We amalgamnated Australian Airlines and Qantas and opened international services to
competition from Ansett so as to increase the range of marketing opportunities for the tourism
industry. And I might mention that I'll be back here in Sydney on Monday to attend the acceptance
ceremony for Ansett's first Boeing 747 aircraft.
These reforms to the aviation industry have already delivered major benefits to Australian
consumers and our international visitors.
Since 1990, the number of domestic passengers has more than doubled, air fares have
decreased by 25 per cent in real terms, and flights have increased on our 50 busiest routes.
But the reform must continue.
And that's why the Government has announced its intention to sell all the Federal airports and
the airport at Badgerys Creek, subject to the outcome of a scoping study.
The in-principle decision to sell the Federal airports is directed primarily to improving the
efficiency of airport investments and operations.
This should result in Australia's airport system developing into one of the most innovative
private airport industries in the world.
But to those of you here who are concerned that the benefits from the sale of the ' big' airports
may be outweighed by the impact on some of the so called ' loss makers', let me say I am
confident that we can adequately address the issue of loss making airports without
disadvantaging local commiunities.
The final area that I want to touch upon is the importance of heritage buildings to our tourism
industry. 
By preserving the best of our heritage buildings, by looking after those things that give our
cities their special character, we give to future generations a sense of place, a sense of our
urban heritage, and a sense of our unique national culture.
At the same time, we make Australia an even more attractive place to visit.
This was the thinking that lay behind the Historic Properties Restoration Program which we
announced in Onte Nation,
Importantly, this was the first Federal initiative specifically directed to the preservation and
restoration of significant heritage buildings.
This program has already brought about the splendid restoration of the Old Treasury Buildinig
in Melbourne, a great example of what we can achieve when we get co-operation from State
Governments. The Customs House here in Sydney, which is one of the city's oldest and best-loved buildings,
is another heritage building receiving assistance.
Under the program, the Federal Government is providing $ 24 million towards its restoration so
that it can serve as an important tourist and cultural centre.
Through programs like this one, we're giving Australians, and international visitors, a better
appreciation of our history and culture.
At the same time, we're providing jobs and investing further in our cultural and tourism
industries. The Government initiatives that I have touched upon today are all designed to build on the
hard work of the industry to ensure that tourism continues to be a driving force in Austaa'
economi~ c and cultural development.
And while the Government has played an important role in all this, it has been largely a
facilitating role.
The credit for the current strength and the potential of tourism in Australia must go in the
main, to you, the industry, who have worked so hard to establish Australian tourism as a
dynamic, prosperous and internationally competitive industry.
Irm very excited by the prospects for our tourism industry and I have a very strong sense that if
we can build on our many great competitive strengths, we can go a long way to passing on a
much better Australia to those who come after us.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
Please check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCH, PARK GRAND HOTEL SYDNEY
FRIDAY 26 AUGUST 1994
When I first entered Parliament you would have been hard pressed to find a reference
to the Australian tourism industry in any of our newspapers.
If people wanted to visit Australia and find themselves a spot on the beach, that was
fine by us, but we didn't go out of our way to sell our country as a tourist destination.
And once the visitors arrived, well it was up to them to make their own way around
Australia. It was, at best, marketing by osmosis.
Back in 1973, the main reason international visitors made the trip to Australia was to
visit friends and relatives.
Three in every four visitors made their way from either Europe, North America or
New Zealand while only one in eight came from Asia.
It was a case of visiting the safe and familiar with just a twist of the exotic.
Of course, that's all changed now.
And, in so many ways, what's happened to our tourism industry reflects the wider
internationalisation of Australia and its economy.
As Australia has opened up to embrace the world, and particularly Asia, so too has our
tourism industry.
It's clearly one of our great success stories and it holds great hope for the future.
A decade ago we welcomed 1 million visitors, today it is 3 million and by the centenary
of Federation it should be more than 7 million. 
The image we now present to the world is of an extraordinary array of natural beauty and
charm backed up by a sophisticated and diverse multicultural society.
It's a niche shopper's holiday paradise.
The World Travel and Tourism Council has forecast that between now and the year 2005
travel and tourism combined will create 112 million jobs in the Asia Pacific alone.
Obviously, Australia is very well placed to capture a slice of that action we have one of the
most competitive tourist industries in the world.
And as the focus of world economic activity has shifted to Asia, so too has our tourist
promotion. Today, one in every two visitors comes here from Asia.
Obviously, globalisation is driving the tourism boom.
As global comm-unications and information highways increase our exposure to other cultures,
languages, and landscapes, so grows our desire to experience these things first hand.
The more time we spend at home with our televisions and computers, the more we want to
travel and experience the world.
That goes some way to explaining why tourism is, and will remain, one of the world's fastest
growing industries.
But what is particularly exciting for us is the rate of growth in Australia in 1993 our tourism
market grew at three times the world average.
Tourism now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earniings and is, without doubt,
central to Australia's economric prosperity.
But I don't need to remind anyone here that many others are in the race, with a good number
of them just as desperate to capture the global tourist dollar.
So what can the Government do to facilitate the continued expansion of the industry?
Well, let me touch today on just four areas where I think the Government can make a
difference. And they are training, regional tourism promotion, infrastructure development and the
preservation of our heritage buildings.
Let's start with training because this decade tourism should create around a quarter of a million
new jobs in Australia. 
If our tourism workers display world class service standards, there's no doubt we'll secure a
place in the front rank of tourist destinations.
As we demonstrated in the White Paper on Employment and Growth, Working Nation,
training more highly skilled workers and delivering a more flexible and productive workplace is
a Government priority.
Indeed, we have no higher priority.
In Working Nation, We suspended the training guarantee, introduced a training wage,
increased funding for the Australian National Training Authority, doubled the number of labour
market and vocational training places and increased the'number of entry level training places by
50,000. And let me take this opportunity to congratulate the tourism industry and the Tourism Task
Force for their role in leading the way in workplace reform.
It was, after all, the Tourism Task Force that brought together some of Australia's leading
hotels to draw up new workplace agreements that should come into place later this year.
These new agreements will benefit staff, management, and tourists.
I should also mention that in May this year, under a new Workplace Bargaining Program, we
decided to provide an additional $ 27 million to further promote productive and cooperative
bargaining in Australian workplaces.
This should lead to a range of agreements across the tourism industry from high profile 5 star
hotels to smaller properties in the hotel-motel sector, both unionised and non-unionised.
In Working Nation we also paid particular attention to the regions of Australia. We did that
for the fundamental reason that forms the basic philosophy of Working Nation: that is, we want
al] Australians to share in the recovery.
And that means we make sure we bring the people of regional Australia along with us.
Clearly tourism provides regions with an excellent opportunity to create jobs and diversify their
economic base.
And Australia offers a host of diverse and unique holiday experiences away from our capital
cities and major tourist gateways.
Through responsible planning and management, regions can develop tourism opportunities that
guarantee sustainable tourism enterprises and long term employment.
To this end, we included a $ 42 million regional tourism package in the Federal Budget, eight
million dollars of which has already made its way to some 89 projects right around Australia.
And the cornerstone of this package, the Regional Tourism Development Program wili help
regions develop integrated tourism plans.-
Extension of the EMDG scheme to tourism operators, which we also announced in Working
Nation, should also make a difference in the regions.
But if more regions of Australia are to benefit from the tourism explosion then we need to
ensure we have a world class infrastructure.
That's why, in Working Nation, we allocated $ 70 million dollars to a Regional Strategic
Infrastructure Fund and freed up the arrangements governing infrastructure bonds.
It's also why we introduced greater competition to our aviation industry.
Several years ago now, this Government recognised the need to restructure our aviation
industry.
We amalgamated Australian Airlines and Qantas and opened international services to
competition from Ansett so as to increase the range of marketing opportunities for the tourism
industry. And I might mention that I'll be back here in Sydney on Monday to attend the acceptance
ceremony for Ansett's first Boeing 747 aircraft.
These reforms to the aviation industry have already delivered major benefits to Australian
consumers and our international visitors.
Since 1990, the number of domestic passengers has more than doubled, air fares have
decreased by 25 per cent in real terms, and flights have increased on our 50 busiest routes.
But the reform must continue.
And that's why the Government has announced its intention to sell all the Federal airports and
the airport at Badgerys Creek, subject to the outcome of a scoping study.
The in-principle decision to sell the Federal airports is directed primarily to improving the
efficiency of airport investments and operations.
This should result in Australia's airport system developing into one of the most innovative
private airport industries in the world.
But to those of you here who are concerned that the benefits from the sale of the ' big' airports
may be outweighed by the impact on some of the so called ' loss makers', let me say I am
confident that we can adequately address the issue of loss makcing airports without
disadvantaging local communities.
The final area that I want to touch upon is the importance of heritage buildings to our tourism
industry. 
By preserving the best of our heritage buildings, by looking after those things that give our
cities their special character, we give to future generations a sense of place, a sense of our
urban heritage, and a sense of our unique national culture.
At the same time, we make Australia an even more attractive place to visit.
This was the thinking that lay behind the Historic Properties Restoration Program which we
announced in One Nation.
Importantly, this was the first Federal initiative specifically directed to the preservation and
restoration of significant heritage buildings.
This program has already brought about the splendid restoration of the Old Treasury Building
in Melbourne, a great example of what we can achieve when we get co-operation from State
Governments. The Customs House here in Sydney, which is one of the city's oldest and best-loved buildings,
is anbther heritage building receiving assistance.
Under the program, the Federal Government is providing $ 24 million towards its restoration so
that it can serve as an important tourist and cultural centre.
Through programs like this one, we're giving Australians, and international visitors, a better
appreciation of our history and culture.
At the same time, we're providing jobs and investing fiirther in our cultural and tourism
industries. The Government initiatives that I have touched upon today are all designed to build on the
hard work of the industry to ensure that tourism continues to be a driving force in Australia's
economic and cultural development.
And while the Government has played an important role in all this, it has been largely a
facilitating role.
The credit for the current strength and the potential of tourism in Australia must go in the
main, to you, the industry, who have worked so hard to establish Australian tourism as a
dynamic, prosperous and internationally competitive industry.
I'm very excited by the prospects for our tourism industry and I have a very strong sense that if
we can build on our many great competitive strengths, we can go a long way to passing on a
much better Australia to those who come after us.
Thank you. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ACCEPTANCE CEREMONY FOR ANSETT AUSTRALIA'S FIRST BOEING
747 AIRCRAFT, MASCOT, 29 AUGUST 1994
Well, I think today's a great day for the Australian aviation industry.
It's also a great day for Australia.
Ansett Australia's acceptance of this, its first, Boeing 747 shows that we have
truly broken the traditional distinction between domestic and international
services, It also shows we have a robust internationally competitive aviation industry
that delivers a quality service at a competitive price.
And we've reached this milestone for two main reasons.
The first derives from the Government's decision to deregul ate the aviation
industry and the second derives from the way the industry, and its people,
have responded.
Some time ago, the Government took the view that we needed to restructure
our aviation industry.
We wanted competitive arrangements that would deliver significant benefits
to both Australian and foreign consumers.
We wanted competitive arrangements that would enable Australia to realise
Its enormous tourist potential.
We wanted an aviation industry ready for a new century.
And that's what we've got.
Since 1990, the number of domestic passengers has doubled.
T2E9L:. Fluy. 94 10: 34 No. 001 P. 01/ 03 
TEL: 29. Rug. 94 10: 34 No. 0) 01 P. 02/ 03
2
Domestic airfares are now 25 per cent lower in real terms.
And, on a comparable basis, that makes them among the lowest in the world.
There are now more carriers offering services Into and out of Australia, on
more routes and city pairs, and with greater frequency, than ever before.
These achievements have gone a long way to driving the growth of the
Australian tourist industry an industry that last year grew at three times the
world average and now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earnings.
Clearly, Ansett Australia has embraced the commercial opportunities
provided by deregulation.
It has expanded its services to Bali to six a week.
This week, with its new 747 Spaceship, it will commence five 747 services a
week to Osaka.
And next week, It will commence three 747 services a week to Hong Kong.
But the reform that has occurred in the industry can't just be measured in the
number of new flights.
Change in the industry has been anything less than " micro" for those
organisations and people most directly involved.
And it is individual people in organisations such as Ansett and Qantas that
have given us a world class aviation service at a competitive price.
You will excuse me, of course, if I make the observation how impressed I am
by Ansett's new livery.
The Southern Cross incorporated into the gold and set against the blue
background will give the airline an unambiguously Australian face in both
Australia and Asia.
For mine, that's a smart move.
I'm also pleased to know that the service offered to Asian consumers, who
now account for one in every two of our international visitors, will be tailored
specifically to their needs.
After all, you can't expect to gain a good slice of the world's fastest growing
market without a strong customer focus.
And that's exactly what Ansett offers with its specially trained and multilingual
flight attendants. 
TEL: 29. Aug. 94 10: 34 No. 001 P. 03/ 03
3
All up, it's a very impressive performance.
It shows an Australia serious about doing business in Asia.
And it shows an Ansett Australia very much an integral part of our robust
internationally competitive aviation industry.
Congratulations to one and all, and long may she fly. 



PRIINMISET E
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF NETTFORCE SYDNEY, THURSDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER
1994. 1 am very glad to be here.
And giad to see so many Australian companies represented here.
The CEOs outnumber the trainees and, in a way, that is appropriate, because
the driving force In vocational training is going to be private industry.
Government can provide Initiative, funds, strategies and structures.
The ommunity at large has a responsibility as I have said many times, as
the Government Employment White Paper says every Australian has a
responsibility, every Australian has an Interest In the outcome of the national
effort. But for all that government and communities and unions must do, the engine of
success will be the private sector of the economy.
For once at least, the acronym is appropriate NEiTT~ FOCE.
When we created It In Working Nation, we had force In mind.
Not brute force.
We had in a mind a body with enough skill and finesse and worldliness about it
to get results.
I think that is what we have.
The National Employment and Training Taskforce is designed for effect.
For practice rather than theory. 
In the White Paper we decided in advance of all but a very few comparable
countries that we could not leave the long-term unemployed behind.
We couldn't leave them behind and still keep faith with our human and social
values our national values.
And we couldn't leave them behind and still claim that we observed principles
of rudimentary common sense.
If for rio other reason than the waste of human energy, ambition and potential, it
make-s no economic or social sense to leave the long term unemployed behind.
In the White Paper we also recognised somewhat in advance of many
comparable countries, somewhat behind others that vocational training Is not
an oprtIon for a nation In the nineties, but an Imperative.
Not a might do, or a should do but a must do.
We have set out to build a vocational training system to rank with the best in
the world.
Quite simply, we don't have a future, and the next generation will not have a
future without a first class system of vocational education not, at least, the
sort of future we want, the sort of future we have it In our power to earn.
The people who make up NETTFOROE Bert Evans, Bill Kelty, Lindsay Fox,
Ivan Deveson, Ted Wright, Joan Kimer are nothing if not practical people
with practical experience.
They are not people one associates with bureaucratic bottlenecks, or
ideological strait-jackets.
They have that In common and I know they also share a passion for their
country and faith in its future.
Bill Kelty and Lindsay Fox, of course, have recently re-affirmed that in their
extensive study of Australia's regions a landmark study whose influence can
be seen in the Regional Development policy in the White Paper.
Ted Wright, of course is the Director and General Manager of the Regent Hotel
which in part explains why this launch Is occurring in what otherwise might be
considered a somewhat incongruous place.
But the venue might be considered appropriate for another symbolic
reason. 
The Regent Is an element a very successful element in the vast mosaic of
Australia's most successful growth industry.
Tourism and hospitality.
Tourism now employs nearly half a million Australians.
No industry of the last decade has grown on such a scale. None has more
potential for further growth.
And none provides more dramatic evidence of the fact that in a highly
competitive environment success depends on the quality of our human
resources on trained, skilled r~ oil
It is one of my duties today to announce the formation of a number of new
industry training companies under the umbrella of NEiTTFORCE and Tourism
Training Australia will be among the first of these.
To some extent tourism is a model of the direction Australian industry is going
towards the exploitation of our natural advantages, towards International
markets, towards ever greater levels of service and efficiency, and, I am
pleased to say, towards vocational training.
Today I think it Is worth reminding people of the size of the task we have set
ourselves. No one should underestimate the dimensions of the White Paper it is the
princi pal vehicle by which the Govemment intends to reform and invigorate the
Australian labour market.
It is the principal means by which we intend to make this an economic recovery
which reaches all Australians.
I doubt if any other country has yet produced a program as comprehensive and
ambitious as Working Nation.
Whle a number of other countries have introduced, or are considering
introducing, reforms to their labour market and training programs similar to
those in the White Paper, none has integrated them into a major reform
strategy. In thol plainest terms, the White Paper announced that the Government would
provide funding to create 50,000 new entry level training positions by 1995-96,
and find jobs under the Job Compact for over 160,000 long term unemployed
people a year. 
When they do, it would be as well to understand that training is not a welfare
issue. It Is not a particularly selfless or charitable enterprise though if employers
come to it with these motives no one will complain.
Nor will anyone complain if they engage with this national effort out of a sense
of national duty or concern for the future of our children.
Success will serve those interests admirably.
But the essential truth about it Is that vocational training Is a mainstream
econoi issue.
And it is in the interests of all us government, business, unions, communities
to ongage with it.
We do know that employers' reservations about hiring the long term
unemployed can be overcome.
Last year, of the 150,000 people who gained lobs under the JobStart program,
around 70 per cent were long term unemployed.
Through the JobStart program the Government is picking up a substantial
proportion of an employer's wage bill while new employees prove themselves.
Of NETTFORCE's various roles, the most important relates to the training
wage. The training wage aims at giving the unemployed opportunities to break the
cycle of their unemployment.
The wiage has been set at between $ 125 and $ 333, depending on the workers
experience and the skill level of the job.
And we will reduce the cost to the employer further through subsidies.
For employers the training wage offers labour paid at a rate which genuinely
reflects productivity levels.
For employees, it means avoiding being trapped in low-paid jobs forever.
I cannot let pass this opportunity to urge employers to get behind the scheme.
No less, I call on the unions to recognise that our intention is not the creation of
a pool of cheap labour, but a pool of opportunities a vast and lasting pool
for their fellow Australians. 
Unions and employers alike must recognise that what we are doing must be
done in a modem economy.
If we don't do it, we will fail not just ourselves but the next generation.
I know Undsay Fox and Bill Kelty have been passing on this message to their
respective constituencies.
I hope everyone else here today will follow suit.
NElTIFORCE has been created to ensure that the training system is
respornsive to industry demands and that industry is mobilised in support of this
training initiative.
NETTFORCE Is promoting the speedy recognition of training and will give
interim authorisation of training packages to underpin the new award where
there are delays.
For thea vocational training to succeed, there needs to be industry involvement
at all levels.
NETTFORCE's new training companies can help make this happen.
For those who have not heard the term before, a training company is an
" Industry company", meaning it is drawn primarily from employers and employer
groups and unions in various industries.
Each of these training companies will meet the specific needs of their industry.
They -will develop new traineeships and adapt existing traineeships to meet the
NETTFORCE requirements for implementation under the National Training
Wage. They will provide employers with one-stop shops to put together training and
industrial packages.
Among others, these companies will be established in the automotive industry,
in building and construction, manufacturing and engineering, the timber
Industry, retail, warehousing, electrical and electronic, media, arts and
enterltainment and of course tourism and hospitality.
Obviously, there are a great many people here who deserve our
congratulations for the progress that has been made so far.
From the Governments viewpoint, it is very gratifying. The indications are that
the confidence in Australian employers and unions on which these programs
have been built will be vindicated. 
But none of us should be in any doubt that the story has just begun.
As I said at the beginning, so much depends on employers.
In a sense, the programs now in place provide a measure of compensation for
this. But in any event, it is in employers' own interests to take steps now to avoid
skill shortages which will Increase their costs and hold back their growth.
Equally, as a nation, if we are to improve our standard of living and maintain
our economic growth without inflation, we need to continually improve
productivity and pivotal to that is an investment in skills.
All of us here today have taken up that challenge the members of
NETTFORCE, the employers, the union representatives and not least the
young trainees.
For that I want to thank you all.
You have engaged with a great national undertaking and future generations of
Australians will have reason to thank you for it.
So It is with great pleasure and pride that I now officially launch NETTFORCE.
ENDS 



PRIIMNIES 2E
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE STUDY INTELLIGENT EXPORTS AND THE SILENT
REVOLUTION IN SERWICES, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 2 SEPTEMBER 1994
For too long now, we've tended to think of exports purely as things that are
transported to our wharves, put in the holds of ships and sent overseas.
In the same way, we've tended to underestimate the critical importance of
services to our national economy.
Services are our economic oxygen.
But because they're all around us because they account for 70 per cent of
our GDP and 80 per cent of our employment we often forget just how
important they are.
I am very pleased, therefore, to launch this report Intelligent Exports and the
Silent Revolution in Services because it goes a long way to putting our
services trade in the national spotlight.
It goes a long way to redressing what I think has been a failure to appreciate
the importance of our services trade.
And it gives us a new platform from which we can move forward.
Services directly account for 20 per cent of all our exports.
And when you look at the services input into our manufactures, mining and
agricultural exports, you see that services contribute up to another 20 per
cent of our exports.
All up, that means services account for around 40 per cent of the total value
of our exports, that's two in every five export dollars.
But, as this study points out, you wouldn't know about it from our media
only one in ten articles about exports relates to services. 
When last Tuesday's Financial Review ran a piece on the balance of
payments figures, it used the images of ships and mineral conveyor belts as
backdrops for its charts on the current account and export figures.
These images, while not inaccurate, do nonetheless reinforce the perception
that trade, and more particularly export, is only about physical goods, the
things you put in the holds of ships.
What they miss out on is the importance of the services side to our exports
either as exports in their own right or as vital components in our traditional
exports.
They miss out on the intelligent side to our exports, that part of our exports
whose value has been added by the skills, creativity and ingenuity of
individual Australians.
And this goes some way to explaining why the revolution in services has
been a silent revolution.
The silence is a concern because services are going to play an increasingly
important role in our trade.
The information superhighway will see to that.
As we pointed out in the White Paper on Employment and Growth, Working
Nation, Australia's future depends upon the ideas, skills and knowledge of
our workforce.
With services the fastest growing category of world trade, and with Australia
producing highly-skilled, well-educated workers, we are ideally placed to gain
a greater share of the expanding services cake, particularly in the Asia
Pacific region.
When Indonesia's Foreign Minister Ali Alatas needed vital heart surgery
recently, he didn't fly to the United States to find one of the world's most
sophisticated medical centres, he came here to Australia, to the Austin
Hospital in Melbourne.
The service Ali Alatas received was an Australian export, an Australian
services export.
When IKEA put out a world wide tender for a stock management system for
its operations in Singapore, it was won by Price Waterhouse's Australian
consulting arm. 
And the reason the Australian team won the right to lead the project was
because it was multi-disciplined, it had the necessary expertise in software,
retailing, marketing and distribution as well as the experience in doing
business in Asia.
Importantly, it's a project that should lead to many others in the region.
When I visited Thailand and Laos earlier this year, I formally handed over the
Friendship Bridge which spans the Mekong River and links Thailand and
Laos by land for the first time.
This Bridge stands as a testament to the quality and capability of Australian
engineering and construction services it was designed, built and funded by
Australians. Already two companies associated with the bridge, John Holland Engineering
and Construction, and Maunsell Sinclair Knight have won flow-on work in
Laos.
They will join the likes of other Australian exporters like Transfield which
recently secured the development rights for the $ 1.2 billion Nam Theun
hydro-electric dam project.
Engineering and construction companies have won major international
tenders to design hospitals in several countries and a Melbourne based
healthcare consultancy company has undertaken a host of joint ventures
managing hospitals in the Middle East, India and Malaysia.
Our education exports are now running at $ 1.3 billion a twenty six fold
increase since 1986.
And tourism now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earnings.
This report contains many more impressive statistics like these and countless
stories of Australian services companies out there winning against the best in
the world.
Let me then turn to the report and congratulate its authors, the LEK
Partnership, and the ten organisations which funded the project.
In particular, I want to acknowledge the role Ralph and his steering
committee played in overseeing the study.
Let me also acknowledge the role that the Australian Coalition of Service
Industries ( ACSI) has played over the past few years in upping the profile of
the services industry and also for its work with the Government on the two
vitally important areas of the Uruguay Round and APEC. 
With the publication of this report, I think ACSI has gone from a fledgling
organisation to one now on a par with its international counterparts.
One of the great things about this report is that it's an international first for the
services industry.
And it builds on the McKinsey report on our emerging manufacturing exports.
It shows that services exporters are typically small, innovative and flexible,
that they rely heavily on exports to survive.
In the six years to 1991, Australia bettered both the world and regional growth
rates for the export of services.
Australian exports grew by 17 per cent per annum while the Asian average
was 14.6 per cent and the world average 13.6 per cent.
This is impressive when you consider that over the same period services
exports increased their share of total global exports from 18 to 21 per cent.
As the report points out, the competitive domestic economy that is, this
Government's opening up of the Australian economy was a big contributing
factor in the growth of our services exports, with most services exporters
pointing to our great strengths in our workforce skills, telecommunications,
education system and information technology levels.
And once the Hilmer reforms are in place this will give us an even more
competitive services sector.
Add to this economic prospects about as good as you could ever hope to get,
and the future looks very bright indeed.
Not surprising then that the companies which participated in the study expect
their export revenues to double in the five years to 1998 to reach $ 33 billion.
Not surprising also that total services exports are forecast to generate an
additional $ 18 billion and 109,000 jobs by 1998.
And as the economies of Asia continue their high growth, as APEC continues
to grow as a force for trade liberalisation in the region, we can expect to see
many more opportunities opening up.
In fact, the report predicts that by 1998, Indonesia and China will become our
most important services markets.
Japan, of course, will remain one of the most significant destinations for our
services exports.
And as you know on Sunday, I'll be heading to Japan for a short visit. 
And let me emphasise it will be very much a working visit without formality or
ceremonial trappings.
I will be meeting with Prime Minister Murayama and his senior colleagues to
discuss the forthcoming APEC Leaders meeting which President Soeharto
will chair in Bogor in November.
I want to make sure that the Japanese Government understands what
aspirations Australia holds for APEC and I also want to make sure that we
understand Japan's views.
I'm particularly looking forward to renewing my contacts with senior Japanese
business people, Japan is, after all, our largest trading partner and our
largest export market.
Clearly, as this report shows, the growth in our services exports is very good
but it could be great.
Only 5 per cent of Australian service sector production is exported.
The report suggests that an export share of 8 to 10 per cent of production
could add an additional $ 10 to $ 15 billion to Australian service exports each
year. The way we're going I'd say that the 10 per cent is well within our reach by
the turn of the century.
We have an economic recovery well and truly underway.
It's a strong recovery.
With business investment now coming through and inflation locked in low, it's
a very sustainable recovery.
As we move ahead down the growth path, we can't afford to sit back and
coast along.
That would be to waste the opportunities now before us.
That would be to deny future generations of Australians.
But I don't think that will happen because competition is now well and truly
locked into our national economic psyche.
More and more potential exporters are coming to realise that if they're
competitive in Australia, odds are they're competitive internationally. 
What this report has shown is that there is enormous scope for Australian
service companies to lift their export game.
It's difficult to see how the circumstances could be much better.
And that makes the export imperative greater than ever.
The world economy is growing and it's looking for the sort of high tech, high
value adding services the intelligent services that Australia can provide.
Government can help by creating the right environment and encouraging
firms. We've got the right macroeconomic settings in place and as the report
notes, in the White Paper we took additional measures to build more
competitive services firms.
We're putting in place major training initiatives to lift our skill levels and
improve productivity.
We're introducing tax initiatives to encourage investment in small to medium
sized enterprises and bring more regional headquarters to Australia.
We're making it easier to get access to finance.
We're encouraging innovation through a more generous research and
development tax concession, through assistance for the commercial isation of
new technology and through a national technology diffusion network.
We're giving industry better access to the government purchasing market
while also extending the operation of the EMDG scheme to include tourist
operators. But, as important as these measures are, at the end of the day, it's really up
to business to show vision and leadership by getting into the export game.
As I see it, it's simply a question of more Australian business people in the
services industry saying " Well, let's look at this export game. Let's give it a
go1 I don't for a moment preten~ d that it's easy. It's not.
But there are a hell of a lot of service exporters already out there making it
happen. I commend this report to anyone who's interested in our services industry and
I urge the business community to lend its support to the series of national
seminars commencing next week. 


9 September 1994
&nbsp;Every so often we come across an opportunity to celebrate an important national achievement one that has played a defining role in our national life.
&nbsp;The 20th anniversary of the establishment of the Office of the Status of Women marks one such achievement.
&nbsp;I think it's important that we celebrate it for two reasons.
&nbsp;First, it's important to celebrate what has been, without doubt a fundamental shift in the way that Governments, the community at large, and women themselves regard their role in society.
&nbsp;I that way, we celebrate a profound shift for the better.
&nbsp;Second, I think it's important to take stock of what we've done and to draw strength from what we've achieved.
&nbsp;And we do that, not to congratulate ourselves, but to remind us of what we are capable of doing, to give us more confidence on which to build the better, fairer Australia we, on this side of politics, are always pursuing.
&nbsp;Twenty years ago, Australia was a very different place.
&nbsp;Women's lives were very different.
&nbsp;But change was in the air.
Women were breaking down barriers and demanding equality in their lives.
Gough Whitlam had already appointed Elizabeth Reid as a special adviser on matters -relating to women, the first such position in the world.
The Federal Government had just begun its involvement in child care, but there were virtually no child care centres for working parents.
&nbsp;It was still legal to discriminate on the grounds of sex and marital status the Sex Discrimination Act was ten years away.
&nbsp;Equal pay for work of equal value remained a contentious issue.
And those seeking to escape violence in the home had almost nowhere to go in Sydney, Anne Summers, Katrina Harrison and Jen Levy had just set up Elsie, the first Women's Refuge in Australia.
No woman had ever headed a Commonwealth Department or an Australian political party or a State or Territory Government.
Deborah Wardley, Helen Williams, Janine Haines, Rosemary Follett, Carmen Lawrence and Joan Kirner were unknown along with countless others I could name.
We've come a long way since then.
It's a tribute to all the women and men who have worked for equality for women.
And it's also a tribute to the work of those associated with the Office of the Status of Women.
I think the progress we've made in elevating the status of women over the last twenty years is a hallmark of our political development.
There is scarcely a better measure of how far we have come.
The changes are here to stay.
And, as a nation, we're all the better for it.
A firm and practical Government commitment to women's equality now lies at the heart of our policy and program development.
Australia is now recognised as an international leader in integrating status of women issues into the ongoing business of government.
I rank these achievements with those with which the Labor Government is more generally associated.
I mean the processes by which we have now an economy that is one of the most open and competitive in the world, an economy that leads the world in economic growth and low inflation, and an economy that offers a great deal of hope for future generations of Australians.
I also mean our dramatically expanded secondary and higher education systems.
And, with the Employment White Paper, we will do the same with vocational training.
The fact is Australia is in the vanguard of progressive social policy with our health system, aged care services, child care provisions and social security system.
We are at ease with multiculturalism.
We are a nation mature enough to find a just reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
And confident enough to want an Australian Head of State for an Australian Republic.
Among the many threads which together make up the great tapestry that is Australia today, none has been more critical to the overall picture than the contribution of women.
This country could not have advanced to where we are today, could not have achieved so much, nor hold so much promise for the future, if women had not been in there driving the debate and shaping the change.
&nbsp;From its beginning, as a five person group in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Office of the Status of Women had great ambitions.
It set its sights on two things: making sure that Commonwealth policies and programs took account of over fifty percent of the population; and giving women a powerful voice in government decision-making.
Over the years, 0SW has been central to making real change and delivering real reform: whether it was bringing the 1984 Sex Discrimination Act and the 1986 Affirmative Action Act to fruition; or taking up the national challenge to end violence against women; or making child care more affordable and accessible; or pushing for a national strategic approach to fighting breast cancer.
OSW has brought real change to women's lives.
I hope you will allow me to single out Ann Sherry, who leaves OSW today.
Ann has been the force behind a major shift in the focus and direction of the Office over the last twelve months.
Thank you, Ann, for your contribution, and we all wish you well.
But I also want to say that the Office is not, and never has been, a one-woman show. It is a team of talented people and the momentum of their work will continue.
And it will continue because this Government is committed to achieving equality for women.
This Labor Government has already made great advances in women's employment, in women's education and in women's health.
We've also made great advances in assisting women caring for children. But, of course, women's equality is not yet a reality.
And one of our greatest challenges is to ensure that women become full participants in making the government and private sector decisions that affect us all.
For a country with such democratic traditions as ours, I think it is incongruous that we have a national house of parliament with ten times as many men as women.
It's an unacceptable waste of talent.
For the same good reasons that we require affirmative action of the bureaucracy and corporate Australia, it should be required of the Labor Party.
And I'm delighted that, in future, it will be.
Last year, I called on the Labor Party to begin a process of reinvigoration.
We needed to broaden the base of our membership, open our forums to more ideas, make sure we selected the best candidates for office, and make the changes " necessary to increase the number of women in State and Federal caucuses.
Last Friday, we took a significant step in that process when the National Executive recommended to National Conference the adoption of mechanisms which will substantially increase the number of Labor women in our Parliaments.
It was a just and wise decision.
It will be passed by National Conference at the end of this month and we will have more women in our Parliaments.
We need women shaping and sharing our future.
As someone who relishes the challenge of policy making and making real change stick, I am delighted to celebrate this twentieth birthday with you today.
I look forward to the next twenty years of 0SW though, who knows, twenty years from now, we might have got it right.
Twenty years from now, the need for an Office of the Status of Women might have passed.
In the meantime, congratulations to everyone associated with OSW for twenty years of leading the way.
Thank you.
&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LUNCH IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER GON OF SINGAPORE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 13 SEPTEMBER 1994
Prime Minister Goh and Madam Goh, it's a great pleasure to welcome you
both to Australia.
And let me say at the outset how much I personally value the very close
working relatiorlship that I have enjoyed with you, Prime Minister, since my
visit to Singapore In September 1992.
I also welcome our other distinguished guests from Singapore for what is
indeed a propitious visit.
You are visiting at a time when relations between Australia and Singapore
have never been better.
We have strong historical links, shared economic and trade interests, an
excellent defence relationship and, perhaps most important of all, a similar
vision for the future.
I see Singapore and Australia as two very forward-looking and optimistic
nations with many reasons for moving forward together, in partnership.
One of the reasons for my confidence lies in our shared history which
stretches back to before World War Two when Australia's first overseas
representation in Asia was established in Singapore.
I think It's important to remember that our friendship is an old friendship that
predates the birth of modem Singapore.
The content of the relationship has changed, but its closeness hasn't.
just on fifty years ago, Australia participated in the defence of Singapore. 
Today, the defence links still lie at the heart of the relationship, but tey're
much more geared to the future.
This morning, Prime Minister Goh and I discussed the excellent In some
ways remarkable progress our defence relationship has made over the
past few years.
We announced a number of Important new areas of defence cooperation.
And later this year In November, our Ministers will open the Royal Singapore
Air Force flying school at Pearce In Western Australia.
But, as critical as these defence links are, they are only part of the picture
for ours is indeed a broadly based relationship.
More than 6,000 Singaporeans are studying in Australia today while others
who come here to holiday have made Singapore our fifth largest tourist
market.
Singapore is our most Important investment partner in ASEAN.
Singapore is our most important trading partner In ASEAN.
With two-way trade at more than $ 5 billion a year, Singapore is our fifth
largest export market worldwide and our eight largest trading partner overall.
And what is important about this trade, from an Australian perspective at
least, is that a great deal of our exports are high value added manufactures
and services.
In fact, Singapore is our third largest export market for sophisticated
manufactures and a growing market for our services.
But we each want to do better.
And as we look to the future, we look to joint opportunities in third markets.
We share an understanding that strategic alliances can be critical to winning
contracts In the world's fastest growing region.
This is the thinking that lay behind the Strategic Linkages Initiative which we
launched during my visit to Singapore in 1992.
By com bining the respective strengths of Australian and Singaporean
companies, we are better placed to take advantage of major business
opportunities In the region.
Today, I'm pleased to say we have moved this initiative Into an important new
phase with the decision to focus our collaboration on Infrastructure projects. 
And here were looking at a potential market in the order of hundreds of
billions of dollars.
In thie five years to 1997, Infrastructure spending in East Asia is estimated to
exceed $ 730 billion.
While we are searching out joint opportunities in third countries, our wider
regional interests are also converging.
In this regard, Prime Minister Goh and I share a similar vision for the Asia
Pacific region.
It is a vision of optimism and abundance.
And APEC is part of that vision.
We are both looking forward to supporting President Soeharto in bringing
about an historic outcome at the APEC Leaders Meeting in Bogor in
November. Clearly, there have been enormous changes in our region over the past
decade, but I suspect they are nothing compared with what Is to come.
In the run up to a new century, I think it is critical that optimists be they
individuals or nations form partnerships.
I say this because it is optimists who can imagine a better future.
And it is optimists who are thereby more likely to create that future.
Obviously, the best optimists are also pragmatists they are the ones who
bring about positive change.
In this regard, I think Singapore and Australia have much in common.
Both our countries have undergone enormous and positive change in recent
times. And, In this regard, it's vital that we guard against the sort of familiarity that
prevents us from clearly seeing how much both our countries have changed.
You represent, Prime Minister, a country that is one of Asia's pre-eminent
success stories.
Singapore has achieved remarkable economic growth accompanied by a real
social concern for its people for good housing, for education and training,
for high standards of health care. 
Singapore will continue to make a vital contribution to the region.
Prime Minister, I'm sure that during your visit here to Australia you will see
how much Australia has changed how we have transformed our economy
into one of the most open and competitive in the world, how we have
refocussed our attention to the Asia Pacific region.
I believe our two countries share a real optimism for the region and our
respective roles in it.
For my part, I want to see Australia make its contribution wherever it can in
partnership with Singapore.
I wish you all well for what I hope is a very enjoyable and constructive visit to
Australia. Thank you. 



L L
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT " TIMBAROO", DUARINGA. QUEENSLAND, THURSDAY,
16 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
. John and Thelma, Ian ( McFarlane), Don ( McGauchle) President of the
National Farmers Federation and my colleague the Premier, Wayne Goss,
Marjorie H-enzell my federal parliamentary colleague, John Purcell from the
Cattleman's' Union and distinguished representatives of rural organisations
and ladies and gentlemen.
Well, let me at first, on behalf of the Premier and myself, thank John and
Thelma for this opportunity to see the drought as It affects them and for the
reception they have given us, which Ian has said, is one given on behalf of
the rural communities of this country and of Queensland. So, we thank you
most sincerely for that, to be able to come here and see It.
A century ago we had the worst drought end the worst of depression In
Australia's history. And, It was also the century where the nation was born
with the Federation of the Australian States and where much of the Australian
legend was created. A large part of the Australian legend Is the legend of the
bush and the fortunes of rural Australia and the bush have been very much
tied up with the fortunes of the country. Each time we have faced adversity
we have invaribly weathered It and over come It. We are now, I think,
experiencing whether it is for the moment, this is for these last three or four
years or whether it is actually a sea change in climate at least a substantial
change in the weather patterns In this country. And, it means that large parts
of our rural communities and our farm and grazing communities have been
devastated by it. Their lives have been hurt. Their Incomes have been
slashed. Our national Income has been reduced and now we are facing not
simply'an economic matter In the bush, but a social matter where families
have been under pressure, where children have been withdrawn from school,
where genuine hardship and sustained hardship Is a part of daily life.
During the election campaign or at the end of it in 1993 I said that we would
never leave the unemployed behind. Well, let me also say In the same terms,
. L D Ic k J UUQ r Ui 
L L 1 o, qu uuU
2
we won't leave the country people of this nation behind the farmers and the
graziers and their families who have been beset by this drought and have
faced difficult conditions after a prolonged period of bad seasons. And, I
think, that that can be said and should be said because the country
notwithstanding this epoch is wealthy enough to say that we will help people
through. That we won't forget them. That we will put Into place Some
systematic support for them.
I think, one of the real worries about this drought Is the Impact it Is having on
the psychology of the bush, on the psychology of farming and on families and
on family breakdown. I was telling Jan Darlington the other day a parish
priest who used to give sermons where I went to mass as a boy, used to say
when poverty flits In love flits out the door. It is very true, I think, that when
families are put under financial pressure you see a lot of marital breakdown
and a lot of stress and it Is particularly, I think, sad when you see It starting to
Impact on children and on their education.
So, there Is a real worry here, I think, about the vaibility of the farming family,
the rural family and, of course, the people In the towns who live from this sort
of generated wealth from the land. And, it is the holding of those family units
together, I think, which becomes our principal concern and seeing people
able to work through their financial problems and stay In the business of
' farming and grazing when the drought breaks and to see them ease through
It and back Into better times in the future is what we have to do.
So, I have taken this opportunity to look at first hand, at the impact of the
drought. I have been In drought affected areas before, but each area tends
to be different, In this case it is so prolonged, it followed a period of high
Interest rates ( inaudible) knocked cash flows around. So, each epoch is
different. This one is different and I am pleased to have the opportunity to
hear what farmers and graziers and farm and grazing organisations have to
say about this and to try and take that In and to think about some way we can
have some sort of tiered support. Be it In Income support or Interest
subsidies to deal with debts taken on In carry through periods or the funding
that is necessary to actually kick off after a drought, restocking and what
have you. And, It is that, I think, that the Federal Government is now
considering. We have already, under the RAS scheme, seen In a joint
arrangement with the States funding for rural adjustment assistance needed
to carry on finance. And, I think, already since 1992 the Commonwealth
spent about $ 100 million there. The Premier was telling me yesterday, I
think, In Queensland between the Commonwealth and the State
Governments we spent about $ 130 million in Queensland for that period.
So, It Is not as if there isn't funding going in. It is a matter of whether it Is
targeted well enough, whether it's of the kind that is actually helping people
out with income support, where their own financial capacity is simply run out
with the prolongation of these conditions.
So, this is, I think, a first rate opportunity for me to come. As I said I very
much appreciated the hospitality which John and Thelma have given us this 
LL~ 3
morning and their friends who have come around and those of you who
represent rural communities and the towns, the Mayor, I appreciate seeing
him here and the businesses who rely upon the growth of incomes off the
land. It gives us a chance to get a handle on ( inaudible) to see It at first
hand and to listen to what people say. You have got to be a good listener In
public life and let me assure you I am and to always listen to those ideas, the
odd jewel that comes through, that you can build upon or marry up with
something else, to end up with a better ( inaudible) policy.
I think in this country, because drought has now become somewhat endemic
to the country, that areas are drought declared for six months, out of it for a
year, then back In for six months. We really need, I think, a long term policy
in place. ( inaudible drought or a flood is ( inaudible) it is an easy
enough thing to do. Taken by some to mean that one has a heart. Well..
( Inaudible) I think It is better to have a head about it and a heart, that Is,
put the two things together and perhaps a consistency in policies and a
proper and appropriate funding.
That Is what we will try and do, but thank you all very much indeed to give us
a chance to try and to it better.
ends -4 uuu r
ILL 



4. f-Emarrgoevd'l~ j~
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER FOR MR ALBERT REYNOLDS, TAQISEACH OF IRELAND
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, TUESDAY 20 SEPTEMBER 1994
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to Australia.
Our two countries share so much history, so much
tradition and culture, so many attitudes.
There is a sentiment we share.
We Australians feel it when we go there.
Prime Minister, we hope you feel it on your visit here.
I have fond, indelible memories of my visit to Ireland
last year.
The day I spent in Tynagh, the place from which my
forebears migrated to Australia, was quite simply one of
the great days of my life.
Addressing the Irish National Parliament was one of the
great honours of my life.
I have been to Ireland before and been enchanted.
Nowhere outside Australia have I felt more at home.
I suppose this is not surprising.
The tragedy of Ireland in the nineteenth century was in
some way's Australia's blessing.
The mass migration of Irish to Australia in the 19th
century and the preservation of their values in the
institutions of the church, politics, the law, academia
and many other other realms of our national life, mean
that Irish tradition has fed and will go on feeding our
own and that the friendship and affection between our
two countries will always endure.
Yet it would be a mistake to think that the regard in
which we hold Ireland is built entirely on the past, or
is nourished entirely by the past. 
These are not dead traditions great ideas whether they
are legal, political, religious or literary live do not
readily die.
Traditions adapt to circumstances. They find new shapes
and new expressions in new places and new eras.
Irish songs become Australian folksongs. Irish football
becomes Australian football. The Irish St Leger becomes
a practice race for the Melbourne Cup.
Prime Minister
Down the years Ireland and the Irish have contrived a
powerful place in the international landscape.
They have contrived it from literature from their love
of the creative and the life of the mind.
They have contrived it from their energy and genius at
home and abroad.
We are not talking only about past glories. Irish
literature continues to flourish. Films and music
emerge from modern Ireland with the power to charm and
excite people all over the world.
The essential point is that the Irish are still creating
this place in the world. on cultural and economic fronts
in the European Community and beyond they are
consolidating and expanding their place as never before.
Ireland is becoming a modern nation a sophisticated,
competitive and dynamic economy, an outward looking
economy to serve the aspirations and rights of the Irish
people in the next century. To bring new opportunities
and prosperity to Ireland.
And, what is to be celebrated most, Prime Minister, we
are now seeing the creation of that on which the future
of Ireland most critically depends the foundations of
peace. For so long the Irish place in the world has been defined
by tragedy as well as genius by inhumanity as well as
humanity.
For so long to think of Ireland has meant to think of
violence of the violence done to the Irish and the
violence the Irish have done to themselves.
We now have cause to hope that those days may have ended
that we might see economic modernity and integration
with the world married to peace at a home, to a triumph
of the Irish passion for fraternity over ancient
animosities, to the Irish genius for humanity over
inhumanity. 
Prime Minister I know what a pivotal role you have played
in the peace process in Northern Ireland.
Your determination to succeed in this great endeavour,
allied to your understanding of the human and political
issues, your skills as a mediator, your courage, and the
trust in which you are held, has been crucial to the
progress which has been made so far.
We congratulate you for this.
And we also congratulate Prime Minister Major and the
British Government for the constructive role they have
played. The Australian Government welcomed the IRA's announcement
on September 1 that military operations would cease. The
Australian people welcomed it.
You have said that the opportunity now exists to take the
gun out of Irish politics forever.
All Australians hope that the opportunity can be seized,
and that peace comes to Ireland.
They hope as people throughout the world would hope
that the parties on whom peace depends understand that
because Australians love Ireland they hate the war that
goes on there.
Unionists and Nationalists now have an opportunity to
build relationships of trust, to pursue the goals of
cooperation and reconciliation.
To help this process I am very pleased to announce
tonight that, following my discussions with Prime
Minister Reynolds, the Australian Government will
contribute $ 7 million over five years to the
International Fund for Ireland.
Not everyone here tonight will know about the Fund.
The Fund was set up in December 1986 following an
agreement between the British and Irish governments to
promote in its own words " economic and social advance
and to encourage contact, dialogue and reconciliation
between nationalists and unionists throughout Ireland".
The Fund does this by stimulating private investment and
enterprise, supplementing public programs and supporting
voluntary effort, including self-help schemes.
The Fund's role in economic development, particularly in
disadvantaged areas, will help to underpin progress
towards peace and reconciliation in Ireland. 
It is the most valuable material assistance we can give,
and we are very pleased to join the United States, Canada
the European Union and New Zealand among other
countries in giving it.
Prime Minister
We have a great deal of shared history and shared
traditions upon which to build our relationship.
It is essential that to the warmth of our relationship we
continue to add the threads which join our common
interests and ambition.
We need to build on those people to people relationships,
especially tourism.
We need more of the kind of institutional cooperation
which saw that great exhibition of European Masters from
the National Gallery of Ireland come to the National
Gallery of Australia.
We want to see the two way flow of investment grow. We
are each of us primarily concerned with our own regionsbut
that does not mean we turn our backs either on old
friends, or on new opportunities.
We hope that Irish business people will increasingly use
Australia as a base for doing business in Asia and that
Australia will use Ireland as a springboard to Europe.
We need the sorts of exhanges which will help our young
people get to know each other.
And we need, Prime Minister, visits like this one.
Visits which strengthen the bonds between us and remind
us that we share not only an extraordinary past, but a
future which really has never been so promising.
I began by saying that we share so much history. It
might be appropriate to this occasion and to the times we
live in if I close by saying that nothing in our history
is so important as the future.
on behalf of the Government and people of Australia I
welcome you and wish you a most enjoyable and rewarding
stay. ends 


22 September 1994
&nbsp;I am pleased to be able to open this 1994 National Seminar of the Australian Royal United Services Institute of Australia.
I am particularly pleased that Vice-President Sutrisno is here.
As I have said before, it is difficult to exaggerate how much Australia's security interests have benefited from Indonesia's stability and economic growth over the past 30 years.
It is very appropriate, Mr Vice-President, that you should be at this seminar.
Indonesia and Australia share strategic interests.
The security of each benefits the other.
That is why our defence relationship is an active one.
Moreover, cooperation between us benefits the security of the region as a whole.
I would like to thank Brigadier Grant for his warm welcome, and the Royal United Services Institute for their continuing contributions to an informed defence and strategic debate in Australia.
I am also pleased to welcome Admiral Richard Macke. Commander in Chief, US Pacific Command, among the other distinguished guests.
We stand at the edge of history.
The strategic structure of our region and Australia's strategic circumstances are changing fundamentally.
Asia is a formidable powerhouse.
Its economic potential is enormous.
By the year 2000, some 400 million Asian consumers three times as many as today will have disposable incomes at least equal to the current OECD average. Asia will continue to change the global economic balance. Global structures and institutions have to respond.
This has profound consequences for our region.
It's why the Australian Government prepared its Strategic Review 1993.
And it's also why we shall soon release a Defence White Paper which will draw the consequences for the future nature of our defence capability.
The essence of our defence policy is that increasingly Australia has to find its security with Asia.
As Asia's growing economic power makes it more important to our prosperity, so Asia's growing strategic weight makes it more important to our security.
The decisions Australia and other regional countries take now will shape the future of our region.
Looking ahead five years, we can say with reasonable confidence that despite the magnitude of change our region has every prospect of remaining stable.
That presents us with an important opportunity to shape our defence forces, to build regional structures and to develop cooperative linkages which will create a framework within which strategic change can be managed beneficially.
Economic growth, stronger political institutions, greater self-confidence, and nations' increased stake in regional harmony all represent positive forces for the future stability of the region.
Still, there are uncertainties.
Economic growth is uneven.
The Chinese economy, for example, is expanding by the size of Vietnam's economy every three and a half months.
But that explosive growth is localised, straining the low level of Chinese infrastructure and its institutions.
Many regional countries, some of which have been experiencing fast growth for close to 30 years, are now encountering economic bottlenecks caused by infrastructural weaknesses, inadequate capital flows and labour imbalances.
History has left a range of territorial disputes which, should they be left to smoulder. may flare into regional confrontations.
Separatism and ethnic aspirations. like fundamentalism. may find fertile ground in unfulfilled promises of political freedom and economic wealth.
So we can't exclude tensions or frictions arising, perhaps even tempestuously. Increasing economic prosperity is also leading many nations to modernise their defence forces.
That can enhance security.
If nations are better prepared to resist and punish an attack, potential aggressors are deterred.
The Gulf War demonstrated the potency of high technology weapons.
The technology, expertise and data once available only to the superpowers are now readily accessible to a wide range of countries.
Next-to-cutting edge technology is available to those willing to pay, and there are many willing suppliers.
Such modernisation can strengthen, arcurit1i and stability, but it can also increase the intensity of any conflict.
Still, we are not facing any regional arms race.
Growth in regional defence expenditures remains below rates of economic growth.
More worrying, however, is the potential proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The Chemical Weapons Convention, in which Australia played an important role, and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty have proved useful.
But international regimes need to be strengthened and tightened.
All of us in the region have good reason to help make these regimes more effective.
The risks of proliferation threaten not only the security of the immediate North Asian region but also that of Southeast Asia and Australia.
That's why Australia supports the efforts of the United States, South Korea, Japan. and China to encourage North Korea to accept its international obligations and account for past nuclear activities.
In many the ways, the evolution of the relationship between Japan and China will determine the future of Asia.
Japan is defining an international role for itself.
The region and, in the first place. Japan's own people must feel comfortable with that role.
A beginning towards that comfort should be a full understanding within Japanese society of the history of the Pacific War.
That will help generate confidence in the region about Japan's ability to play a constructive global role, commensurate with the size of its economy.
In this respect, the recent statements by Japanese prime ministers, and in particular Prime Minister Murayama, have been welcome.
Japan's alliance with. the United States continues to play a pivotal stabilising role.
We welcome Japan's contributions to UN peacekeeping activities and its active participation in regional security discussions.
Inescapably, the extent and nature of China's engagement with the rest of Asia will be a key determinant of regional security.
China's size, population and fast growing economy mean that it is likely to be the strongest country in Asia.
That makes its policies, and other countries' perceptions of its intentions central to the region's security.
As others have said, we have to help China find a place for itself.
China's GATT application and its full involvement in APEC are signs that China is choosing directions congenial to stability and Australia actively supports these moves.
China's increasingly active participation in regional security exchanges provides another important way for China to reassure the region about its policies.
These developments are all the marks of a region changing dramatically.
New forces and powers are emerging from the end of the Cold War an era of tension but also of stability.
Now, more than ever before. the future of the region's security lies in its own hands and not on a balance kept by others.
In meeting this challenge, countries in the region including Australia have come to understand that their security has to be found with their neighbours rather than against them.
New forms of security cooperation are emerging.
The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is one such important example which Australia strongly supports.
In due course it might lead to other initiatives, such as meetings of regional defence ministers, which could tackle common military and security problems.
Regional countries are also building up their bilateral contacts and cooperative defence activities.
&nbsp;This is something that Australia is actively engaged in as I shall mention shortly.
As well, the United Nations can now play a more direct role in improving security in our region as elsewhere in the world.
Australia has made a tremendous effort to support UN peacekeeping activities, and most particularly in Cambodia.
That said, the region has to be more self-reliant in securing strategic stability.
But it will not be entirely self-sufficient nor should it try to be.
I started by mentioning the significance of the powerful engine of economic growth in Asia.
This growth still depends greatly on links with the United States despite the spectacular growth in intra-Asian trade, the United States remains Asia's largest single market.
US technologies and innovative strengths will remain essential to further economic development in the region.
As the United States is critical to the region's economic health, so is its engagement pivotal to the region's strategic stability.
US military power and engagement in Asia provide the necessary deterrence and balance to create confidence during periods of change.
Thus Australia's alliance relationship with the United States is an important component of regional stability.
And we welcomed President Clinton's assurances last year that America was a Pacific nation, and that it would remain an active presence in the region.
But just as Asia needs the United States, the United States needs Asia. US exports to East Asia are growing at three times the rate of East Asian exports to the United States.
This conjunction of economic and strategic interests explains why APEC has an important role to play.
One of the chief values of APEC is its capacity to engage the major economies of the United States, Japan and China.
It does this within a cooperative framework that fosters trade and economic growth and in a way that underpins strategic stability.
President Soeharto will be hosting the APEC leaders meeting at Bogor in a few weeks time.
With his vision, and under his leadership, APEC is poised to take an historic step towards free trade in the region a step which will lock in the trend towards trade liberalisation, impede protectionism, open markets, strengthen commitment to multilateral trade approaches and promote global trade liberalisation.
If we can achieve this, it will be a turning point for the region, and perhaps the world.
It will certainly have beneficial strategic consequences.
How is Australia responding to the challenge of change in our region? In short, with well-founded self-confidence.
For a start. Australia is one of the most naturally secure nations on earth. Our geography is an enormous asset.
We are a one-nation continent, sharing no land borders.
Our long maritime approaches make it easier to ensure that hostile forces can not reach our shores or operate on our territory.
We can increase the cost to any potential aggressor by maintaining a credible capability to defeat any attack on Australia.
And the government is committed to maintaining Australia's military power to do just that.
Crucial to our self-reliant defence capability is our alliance with the United States which gives us access to intelligence, technology and training that would be beyond our capacity to provide independently.
But Australia's national security depends on more than military power.
It is inseparable from our sense of national purpose, our economic vitality, the coherence of our policy-making, our human and natural resources and our infrastructure.
From these we draw a confidence which, combined with our defence capability, gives us the scope to help develop security arrangements and understandings in the region.
Indeed, we have the responsibility to do just that: to engender strategic stability and thereby prevent the emergence of threats to our territory.
In this way, our choices about the sort of society and political and economic structures we want will be based on a sense of opportunity and not fear.
Australia's defence capability and our stability and security as a continent anchoring the southern bounds of Asia ai a tlimsvive3 i important regional asset. The Australian defence industry crucial for our self-reliance is also an important regional asset.
It is always looking for new approaches, employs the most up-to-date technology, and has developed world-class expertise and skills.
Only last week, I attended the launch of the first of ten ANZAC frigates -a collaborative venture between Australia and New Zealand.
And not long before that, I attended the launch of the first Collins-class submarine, the most formidable conventional submarine in the world. 1928
As many of you know, we are currently exploring the scope for cooperation with Malaysia in developing a new patrol vessel and have commissioned a design which we hope will be the basis for such cooperation.
We are also interested in joint ventures with other regional partners, and we are prepared to transfer our technology and invest our capital. Our active participation in a web of alliances, commitments and cooperative activities help to underpin the security of our region and offset any uncertainties.
Our commitments to Papua New Guinea and New Zealand are important to each country's security and that of the region.
Our defence links with the island nations of the South Pacific are an important reassurance to them.
And, as I mentioned at the outset, we have an increasingly close and cooperative defence relationship with Indonesia.
With both Malaysia and Singapore. we have very active defence relationships including through the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
Singapore already trains its pilots and soldiers here in Australia, and last week I discussed with Prime Minister Goh how we might expand our cooperation even further.
This is the sort of activity that the Government labelled " strategic partnerships" in the Strategic Review 1993.
As I said earlier, the Government is committed to maintaining the capability to deter and defeat any attack on Australia.
We must have the ability to defend ourselves without aid from other countries' combat forces.
The Defence White Paper, to be released later this year, will set out a framework for achieving that goal over the next 15 years. The Australian Defence must be versatile.
It must be able to contribute to achieving a stable strategic environment. It must also be able to meet the challenge of a wide variety of tasks above and beyond the territorial security of Australia, often at short notice.
Adaptability is also key.
The Australian Defence Force must be capable of responding quickly to changes in our strategic environment.
That requirement also extends to our industrial, scientific and technological base, and to the skills and capacity of our people.
And its why the White Paper will focus on making defence a national effort by building links between defence and industry and between defence and the community. Let me conclude then.
Looking ahead to the year 2000, we can be reasonably confident the region will be benign and stable.
Economic integration and interdependence will help underpin that stability.
But stability is not guaranteed.
An effective defence force remains vital for our security.
Because, in the final analysis, each nation must be responsible for its capacity to defeat attacks upon its own territory.
At the same time however, all nations in the region must cooperate to help build a stable and secure region in which armed conflict is less likely.
We must all work to secure our future not against our neighbours, but with our neighbours.
We should take the opportunity we now have to put in place assurances against future uncertainties.
For Australia’s part, these assurances are to be found in the three intertwining strands that I have covered today:

the capability and flexibility of our defence force
the broader national effort to strengthen national security in its widest sense
and the efforts we make with our neighbours; to build cooperation and trust in the region

And let me say, I have every confidence that the actions the Australian Government is now taking in each of these three areas will strengthen the security of Australia and the region.
Thank you.
&nbsp;



c'c
jZ
PRIME MINJISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ALP NATIONAL CONFERENCE
HOBART, 26 SEPTEMBER 1994
A century of Australian nationhood has almost passed.
The Australian Labor Party was there at the beginning. It is still here and in 1994,
we can truly say, it is stronger than ever before.
We were born with the Australian nation. We were born of and for the Australian
people. Our tradition is with them both the nation and the people.
Our responsibility is to them both.
Through wars and depression, through triumphs and calamities, through every chapter
in the story of Australia the Labor Party has been there.
We have gone through all manner of travail with Australia and for Australia. And
now, a hundred years after our foundation, we Lk-a Australia.
That is one magnificent fact the fact we should not forget this week.
And I'll tell you one more great fact: if we have the courage the love, the labour and
the imagination we can lead Australia into the twenty-first century.
And I mean lead. I don't mean manage, or re-arrange. ' I don't mean occupy time and
space. I don't mean talk until the people of Australia stop listening.
I mean do the things which need doing. Live up to our ideals of what a good society
is and how great a country this can be.
It is the most extraordinary party, the Australian Labor Party. I am in no doubt it is
one of the very great political parties in the world lumpy, grumpy, difficult thing that
it is, no party in the world of its faith and vintage looks so strong today.
In the 1 890s the men and women of the Labor movement had enough faith in
themselves and their ideals to imagine that they the working people of Australia
could determine the shape of their country in thie twentieth century.
And in the 1 990s this is the remarkable thing, and I might say, for the leader of the
Parry, the humbling thing we are superbly placed to determnine the shape of our
country, according to mn ideals and = jj faith, in the twenty-first century.
Our responsibility is as great now as it was then.
The dimensions of the task are just as great. 
But we could scarcely be better placed to succeed.
In the hundred years of our history the Labor Party has been all but mortally wounded
once or twice. We have been lost. We have stumbled. we have split, we have been
becalmed. But not now.
We are in office. We are doing what we do best which is making the changes,
preparing Australia for the fu~ ture. And we are bringing the people with us.
And let me pause here to recognise and applaud the contribution of the party and the
trade unions those who kept the faith and who made such a mighty effort in 1993 to
see that Labor was returned.
We are doing what we said we would do. We are doing what Labor shu do. With
the unemployed, employment and training. With child care. With Aboriginal
Australians. With industrial relations.
And it is because we are doingz what we do best that we have run the Opposition
ragged. We should not forget that. Modern politics might look like a game of personalities,
but it is really a matter of policies.
What won the last election for Labor?
The things we stood for won it for us.
The social policies, Medicare. the rights of Aboriginal Australians, the rights of
women, the central place of the arts, the republic. We won it with our vision of
Australia. And that's what ultimately brought John Hewson down this year.
Not his personality, or mine, or anyone else's. The Native Title legislation brought
him down. The White Paper on Employment brought him down.
When the Liberals were called on to support legislation to right Australia's oldest
wrong the lie that the continent had been empty before Europeans came nothing in
their hearts and minds could make them do it.
It was beyond their moral reach. They said the passage of the Native Title Bill was " a
day of shame".
When they were confronted with a thoroughgoing package of programs to bring the
long term unemployed back into the mainstream the people on whose backs they had
attempted to ride to power they sneered. They said it was " irresponsible" to reach
back for the unemployed.
The Coalition response to those two initiatives made plain for all to see that the soul
of the Liberal Party is an empty place a vacant lot, a void once filled by the solid
bluestone face of Australian conservatism.
And what has brought our opponents to this sorry state? Putting our convictions on
the line. 
If we have one thin,-to thank John Hewvson for it is that his brand of radical
conservatism created a contest between fundamental beliefs and. even with the
effects of recession all around. ours were stronaer.
Let's not forget what our opponents intended to do. And let's not forget what
defeating them meant.
Ten billion dollars cut from public expenditure one billion from social security,
$ 400 million from public housing, a 25 per cent cut in labour market spending.
Youth wages of $ 3 an hour, a training system under which unemployed people could
have been paid 70 per cent of the award, with no requirement that the employer train
them. Full fees for university, the abolition of bulk-billing under Medicare for most people,
a $ 1I. 3 billion cut in funding for public hospitals.
Never did the Australian people have a clearer reminder of what profound differences
lie at the heart of the political contest.
Our opponents have now poured a blancmange into the hole John Hewson dug for
them. They are trying to soften the debate. They are spouting embarrassingly
juvenile and disingenuous flim flamn.
But pleasurable as it is to defeat our opponents and re-affirm. our political ascendancy,
the real pleasure is in what we have done. And what is now open for us to do.
What we have done in regard to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders is a case in
point. I dare say we have done more of a profound kind than any other Government
since Federation and by doing it we have left the way open to do a great deal more.
1 count the Native Title Act as one of Labor's great achievements. It is legislation of
which every member of tfiis party should be proud.
With the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Land Fund, which will enable
Aboriginals who will not directly benefit from the Act to purchase land, we now. have
the legal and moral foundations of a new era for indigenous Australians.
There is a great deal more to do. The $ 500 million allocated in this year's Budget to
improving the health of Aboriginal Australians will go some way to doing it.
No-one believes that change to the law or the expenditure of vast amounts of money
will get us there alone. But both are essential. What matters between now and the
turn of the century is good will and uncompromising application on both sides.
We have lived with this shame throughout the first century of our nationhood. I don't
believe that any Australian indigenous or non-indigenous should have to live with
it in the next century.
As long as I am Prime Minister, ending that shame wiW be one of the great goals of
the Labor Government.
And so will be ending the blight of unemployment.
When I said on election night that we would not leave the unemployed behind. I have
no doubt that there were people on both sides of politics disinclined to believe me.
Some may have doubted the Government's intent, some the Government's ability. 
The White Paper on Employment which we brought down in M'vay was proof that we
had both.
I am not sure that the dimensions of Working YNation have been properly appreciated.
But it is a document of infinitely more prescriptive detail and sophistication than the
famous White Paper of the 1 940s.
For the Labor Party, jobs have always been the highest priority. For the Labor Party,
unemployment is the greatest pain. So the White Paper is a quintessential Labor Party
Labor Gove~ rmntn document.
No other country has produced an integrated strategy as wide-ranging and ambitious
as Working iMation. No other country has; created such a complete employment
package. And it has already helped thousands of Australians.
The White Paper rests on the basic principle that while economic growth is the best
way of generating new and worthwhile jobs, by itself it is not adequate to the task of
reducing unemployment, particularly long-term unemployment.
That growth is creating jobs is beyond doubt 340.000 new jobs have been created
since April last year.
But what is also beyond doubt is that Government policies are helping to find work
for the long-term unemployed.
In the 1980s only 7 per cent of the 1.6 million jobs created went to the long-term
unemployed, compared to 22 per cent or 76,000 of the 340,000 new jobs since the
last election.
Overall, we've seen the number of long-term unemployed drop to the lowest level in
31 months.
This is not an accident; it's in part a consequence of a better performance from the
CES. and in part a result of the White Paper which has seern 116,000 people enter case
management under the Job Compact.
I want to remind the Conference of just how ambitious this Job Compact is.
Essentially it offers a job guarantee to the most disadvantaged group in the workforce.
It means that all people unemployed for more than 18 months are entitled to a job,
training or individual case management. It means that the Australians worst hit by
restructuring and recession and least able to share in the recovery will be brought into
the mainstream.
It is an argument about both equity and efficiency.
Re-skilling the unemployed means a greater pool of resources with which to fill new
jobs. It means more employment and, therefore, less unemployment benefits and
more tax revenue. And because it means a more effective labour supply, it means the
economy can expand more rapidly without running into wage inflation pressures.
it means, according to one academic analysis, that the annual net production of goods
and services can be increased by around $ 2 billion a year. 
It is one of the distinauishing features of conservative ideology that it will not admit
that there is efficiency in equity.
We say the two go hand in hand. We say that no society can afford to leave large
numbers of people on the margins it cannot be justified on moral grounds or social
grounds or economic grounds.
We say that not to strive to bring the long term unemployed back into the mainstream
is to betray both our own principles and this and future generations of Australians.
The White Paper is not merely a matter of salvaging the unemployed from hardship
and despair, and preventing the development of an underclass.
It is about developing a training system to match any in the world and, eventually, a
workforce as skilled as any in the world.
The measures of the White Paper are the means by which every young Australian will
have a place in education, training or employment.
We often talk about the social safety net. No broad policy commitment so
distinguishes us from our opponents.
We see it as a measure of a sophisticated society. We say sophisticated societies are
cohesive and inclusive. Put another way, we say they are measured by the degree to
which the bonds of care run through the social system.
We say that as we measure families and communities by the degree of effective care
and security they provide, we measure countries.
And we say those who talk about the virtues of families and communities while
advocating a reduction in the size and effectiveness of the social safety net are talkng
humbug. On this side of politics, we believe in the family and in the community. And we say
that the safety net is essential to their well-being.
Medicare is essential to the health of Australian families and communities. It is one
of the world's most successful health systems. Before Medicare, nearly 2 million
Australians had no health cover. With Medicare, every Australian has health cover.
And, with Medicare, health expenditure as a proportion of GDP has been kept well
below most comparable countries.
So is child care essential to Australian families and Australian communities. From
46,000 places in 1982-83, we have grown the national child care system to 242,000
places and we are committed to meeting all demand for work-related care by 2000.
We are providing fee relief for lower to middle income families and assistance for all
working families through the Child Care rebate.
Support for working women is essential to the health of Australian families and
communities. Child care is one major means of support. So is the Superannuation
Guarantee Charge which has increased superannuation coverage for women working
full-time from 47 per cent to 87 per cent, and for those working part-time, from 19 per
cent to 65 per cent.
The Child-Support Scheme is essential to the health of families and communities.
Before the Scheme, only about 30 per cent of non-custodial parents paid child support
now 75 per cent of liabilities are collected. 
The Labor Government's achievements in promoting the rights and status of women
have made Australia a world leader.
It was Labor which introduced the Sex Discrimination Act in 1984. Ten years before
that, a Labor Government established the Office for the Status of Women which is
still going strong in its 20th year.
There is a great deal yet to be done. We must get more women into the parliaments of
Australia and we are now committed to doing that. When half the population is more
strongly represented we will all be stronger for it.
For all our shortcomings, wherever you look for milestones for women in Australia in
the past 20 years it is Labor which has put them there.
Just as it is Labor which has put the vast majority of social programs there.
We have created social policies and programs with few equals in the world. Our
emphases have shifted in many regards, yet the thrust of our thinking today still
echoes the aspirations of those who founded the Labor Party 100 years ago.
What we have delivered is a real. measurable, felt degree of social justice. A tangible
slice of the fair go. And by fostering stability and cohesion, broadening opportunity,
and calling on all the skills and ambition of all our people, that fair go will help
deliver us the future.
The safety net has another function which our opponents seem not to recognise It is
not just a component but a condition of change.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the Accord.
The Accord delivered a truly effective social wage. It enabled us to cut inflation, lift
employment and reduce strikes.
We can measure its value over the past decade in terms of a 30 per cent reduction in
labour costs on the one hand, and a 35 per cent increase in real disposable household
incomes on the other.
Over that same decade we have seen inflation reduced ' from. more than I11 per cent to
less than 2 per cent; the number of working days lost reduced to a figure which last
year was the lowest since the Australian Bureau of Statistics began publishing the
series in 1967; and we have seen the creation of 1.7 million jobs.
The debt which this Labor Government and the Australian nation owes to the modemn
labour movement is immeasurable.
Far from being a matter of discomfort to us, our close relationship with the trade
unions is a matter of great satisfaction. I can think of few relationships which have
delivered Australia so much.
Now as we reform Australian workplaces and develop an industrial relations system
based on enterprise bargalning, the Government's Accord with the unions is providing
the essential transition mechanism.
The Accord is allowing increased Labor market flexibility without the high costs of
strikes or wage breakouts that might be expected to accompany such substantial
change. 
The Accord is also providing the safety net to protect lower paid workers who would
otherwise miss out on wage increases. Enterprise bargaining alone cannot protect
lower paid workers. It will not protect the industrially weak. Only enterprise
bargaining under the Accord will provide both flexibility and a de'cent level of
protection. Last week with the IRC decision to grant a $ 24 a week increase to low-paid workers,
we saw the system working the system which this Government has put into place
since the election.
Yet,* just in case any of us needed reminding, we heard the employers caviling against
the decision. There they were, complaining about a wage increase for the low-paid
which will see wages increase by only half a per cent, while executive salaries have
risen on average more than 4 per cent, and the profit share is at record levels.
And there was John Howard saying that the award system was a terrible thine.
Australia has economic growth the equal of or surpassing any in the OECD.
Employment growth is high. The profit share is high. The inflation rate is low. We
have new flexibility in the labour market.
Yet they are carping about the benefits of this recovery flowing through to the
Australian people. You have to ask what meanness inspires them?
It really could not be more ironic. Working Australians have been made to respond to
competitive pressures. Unions have had to adjust and re-structure. They have had to
accept productivity-related wage adjustments.
Business has had to do these things too.
But those who preach competition loudest, who condemn the safety net and parade up
and down flexing their laissez-faire muscles the Liberal-led states shrink from
implementing competition policy.
Never mind about the rights of the vast majority of Australians who stand to get
cheaper services and more jobs out of the implementation of competition policy. And
never mind about the nation which will be made that much more competitive by it.
The conservatives ask us to believe that the Federation was Qreated for the purpose of
enshrining the unassailable rights of the states.
Wrong. Federation created an Australian nation and the purpose of the nation is to
protect and further the interests of the people the Aiistralin people, not Victorian
people or West Australian people, or Northern Territory people, but th-P people.
It seems to me the difference between the Labor Party and its opponents is that we
draw strength from the past while they seek refuge in it.
It seems to me that our opponents are drifting further and fuirther away from the
direction Australia is going. They are losing touch with contemporary Australia.
My reading may be wrong, but I think there is a new mood emerging a renewed
concern with our national identity and national destiny which reflects the changes in
the social composition and economic structure of Australia, and an awareness of the
opportunities which await us in the next century. 
I think that as a Government and as a Party we have to move with the mood. I believe
it is the mood of younger Australians and that it may well be defining the direction of
our history.
I am sure it is taking us toward a Republic.
In recent times, effectively we have handed the baton of the Republic to the
Australian people and I am in little doubt that they will carry it across the line.
A healthy debate is now underway. We want to see the idea of the republic become
clearer in the public mind. As it becomes clearer the resolve will grow stronger.
So we have the economic fundamentals, the social fundamentals and increasingly, I
believe, we have a spirit at large not dissimilar to the one which 100 years ago created
the Australian nation.
We have as well, for the first time in our history, the world's bliggest and fastestgrowing
markets at our doorstep.
Australia's public policy Labor's public policy is for the first time comprehending
this development by seeing it as part of the national policy reach.
That is why we have so vigorously pursued the development of APEC.
Perhaps APEC does not at first glance sound like a Labor agenda item.
But I assure you it is.
The Australian Labor government has been a driving force in APEC. We have taken
on this role because APEC offers the means by which Australia and other countries in
the region can keep the dynamics of growth going among half the world's population.
To put it simply the great growth in our trade, including our trade in manufactures,
has been in Asia and the Pacific. That is where our future prosperity lies.
It is on growth there that our opportunities substantially depend.
A more liberal regional trading environment will encourage. and sustain that growth.
The APEC leaders' meeting in Bogor in November is therefore of importance to a lot
more people than Paul Keating or Gareth Evans or Bob McMullan it is of profound
importance to Australian exporters, Australian farmers, Australian workers.
The Labor Party should not underestimate these sorts of initiatives from Labor
Governments. Our role as a convener of the Cairns Group of agricultural producers was instrumental
in getting a Uruguay Round result which is likely to add $ 3.7 billion to Australia's
GDP. No one can estimate what even modest success with APEC might be worth. But we
can readily guess what the consequence of not trying would be it would be to live
with the knowledge that we saw necessity and turned away, that we had a chance to
provide opportunities for succeeding generations of Australians and passed it up.
I count it among the Government's most important achievements that we have
established a creative role for Australia in the region; and whether it has been in
APEC, or the ASEAN Regional Forum or the South Pacific Forum, we have built that 
role around promoting prosperity, limiting friction and encouraging cooperation and
stability. If the national interest means the interests of the Australian people. and the interest of
the Australian people is in their future and the future of their children, then there are
two other less traditional Labor subjects the Labor Government must address.
You will be aware that in the last few weeks I have visited some of the drought areas
of Queensland and New South Wales.
You will also be aware that we have delivered a comprehensive drought package to
those farmers in the worst hit areas.
The problems for those farmers and communities are acute they are human and
social problems, as well as financial and economic ones.
Our response. I believe, has been an appropriately comprehensive, compassionate and
intelligent one.
And I might say in passing that for this Bob Collins has received less credit than he
deserves. It is ailways easy for a Minister, when faced with a problem, to turn up with
the hand extended. It is one thing to ask for money, another thing altogether to
develop good, constructive policies.
Drought. of course. is a familiar problem. Generation after generation of rural
Australians have had to endure them, and so have the national balance sheets.
Yet as a nation we may be able to contrive something positive from this drought.
Perhaps it can remind us that the bonds between Australians are much stronger than
the divisions.
Rural Australians may nC~ t always vote for us, but that will not prevent us providing
help when they need it. The unemployed are no less unemployed for living in the
bush. Frustrated ambition is no less painful there than it is in the cities.
What this long drought has put at risk is the future of the family farms which sustain
and in large part define the bush. There is an element of ourculture at stake here, a
way of life, as well as a vital element of our economy.
And perhaps it can be the spur to recognising an even greater problem than the
drought itself.
No one can visit these drought affected regions of Australia or virtually any region
of rural Australia without being struck by the degree of land degradation of one kind
or another.
You do not need expert training to recognise it. Nor do you need to be a particularly
conscientious environmentalist.
You only need an eye and an ear.
The eye will tell you that this is not the way the country used to look, nor how
productive land is meant to look.
The ear will tell you what the farmers say themselves these days: that we are losing
great tracts of land to salinity and erosion. That there has been too much clearing.
That our streams and soils are degraded. That along with the natural environment we 
are losing productivity and that. in some cases. is threatening the foundations of
regional economies.
Through a variety of programs, including the extraordinarifly successful National
Landcare program. the Government has been combating these problems.
In Working Nation we took a major initiative with Australia's regions: we decided to
help regional development organisations find the best way to sustainable. long-term
productive land use.
Through the Rural Adjustment Scheme we will help to create a more rational and
environmentally-sensitive pattern of land use. We will help people to get off land
which is not viable. We will help people use viable land in more sustainable ways.
I am sure that we will be helped in this process by the dramatic change in thinking
which is occuring in rural Australia. We have a new breed of farmers aware that
good environmental practice is good farm practice, and good business practice. And
we want to encourage them.
The drought might just spread the message wider, and it might get the whole country
on a path to sustainable development.
It might be that another generation will look back on this drought and say that it was a
turning point. That it was the drought which made us aware of the need to renovate
and restore the land, to use it sensibly and sustainably that this was the moment
when rural industry and the environment got onto the same track.
The land is a major challenge for our generation. It is a major challenge for the
Government. There are some uncanny parallels between this challenge and that of a century ago: in
this one, as in that one, economic downturns and drought have been accompanied
somewhat paradoxically by themes of national identity and nationhood.
In this decade I hope, as in that earlier one, we have grown more conscious of the
values and interests we share that for all our differenc es and the vast distances which
separate us, our primary loyalty and affection is to this nation and we are remarkably
close. In the 1890s. the spread of telegraph and railway lines gave a material dimension to
the national sentiment.
In the 1990s it is the information highway.
Someone wrote in the American magazine, " Harper's", last month that the information
revolution is " the most transforming technological event since the capture of fire."
We do not know quite what the dimensions of this change will be. But we do know it
is already upon us, that it is going to change our lives profoundly, and that it is all
going to happen very quickly.
Whether we like it or not, it will change the way we communicate with each other, the
way we learn, the way we do business, the way we create the way we lead our daily
lives. 
Perhaps some of us don~ t know. But if we don't. our kids do. We know what a CD is.
but they know what a CD-RONI is. We know what a VCR does, they know how to
program it.
What the Government knows is that we are fast approachingz a moment in our history
where how well we play the information game will determine how well we prosper.
We know that the information superhighway has the potential to create great new
industries and new jobs for Australia. It has the potential to serve us very well.
The important thing is to make sure that we don't become too obsessed with the
highway itself. Building the highway is important, but inventing the things that go on
it is more important.
The production of content is the key for Australia. If we can use the information
highway to find better ways of. say, delivering our Social Security programs, teaching
our children, getting health programs to all Australians, taking art and science beyond
the major cities the information highway will not only improve the quality of our
national life, it will create a whole new industry, a whole new milieu.
And given our natural advantages, that industry can export to the rest of the world.
Those natural advantages include an advanced film and television industry, a highly
educated population. th English language and the many other languages Australians
speak. You will see these sorts of issues addressed in the Government's cultural policy which
will be launched next month.
The immnediate challenges are to find ways of linking our creative and software
communities. We need to get more PCs and CD-ROMs in our schools. We need
more university and TAFE-programs focussed on multimedia.
There is a lot more we need to do. But none of it is beyond us, and if our children are
to have the best possible chance as the information revolution unfolds, we simply
have to do it.
Most crucially, the superhighway the optic fibre highway must be a highway for all
Australians. If we can readily share and disseminate information among ourselves, we will be a far
stronger and more prosperous country. We will avoid becoming a nation of the
information-rich and the information-poor.
That reason the access and equity reason is one of two principal reasons why the
information revolution is a primary concern for a Labor Government.
The other principal reason is that it represents an enormous challenge an inescapable
challenge for any Government which believes its duty is to Australia and the
Australian people.
As I said when I began, the Australian Labor Party was born with the Australian
nation and the Australian people as they were defining themselves.
And those two elements still detine our role.
The people depend on us. We are in Government because a lot of people depend on
our being there: the people who would not have medical cover without us; the people 
who would not get the necessary help to restart tneir ilives after a period orf
unemployment: the people who would not have the protection ot an industrial award:
Aboriginal Australians.
We need to be in office for these people for Australian working men and women.
For those who fall behind.
But that is not the only reason.
We need to be there to lead Australia into the next century. To deliver on the promise
the future holds. To state the common purpose above the parochial. To project our
nationhood. To take uptth e social and economic challenges, the challenge of the
region, the challenges of technology and the environment. To meet the twenty,-first
century with confidence. To do justice to the rightful expectations of our children
and to the memory of those who have brought us through.
It is daunting, but certainly not beyond us.
I think we should delight in the prospect.
The great thing is that at the end of a century we have earned the right to lead
Australia into another.
And our faith is as strong as it ever was.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE 1994 SUPERMARKET SHOW. DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY,
MONDAY, 3 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Jim Fleming. distinguished guests and ladles and gentlemen.
Well, it Is a very groot plooure Indeed to come to the 1004 Supermarkot Show. My
contact with supermarkets Is fairly thin these days, but I occasionally dash in to buy
something mostly something for my children but. one Is always been Impressed with
the competition and the quality of the things which are sold In Australian supermarkets and
the way they are presented, the nature of the stores, and it comes as really no surprise to
me at all that the Australian Supermarket Industry in presentation, in competition, in
pricing, as Jim Fleming remarked in turn-over, ranks up there with the best in the world.
In fact. I'm sure some in Australia would believe better than any in the world. And, this has
been a good thing for the Australian consumer and again, as Jim Fleming remarked, a
good thing In restrainlng the prices In Australia and restraining Inflation because this Is a
very large Industry which turns over something like $ 17 billion a year and it has a decided
Impact on the standard of living of Australians the way they live and the quality of the
things they bury.
So, we have got much in this country to celebrate, I think, in the way in which our retail
sectors have developed over time and its, I think, a wonderful thing that the Australian
Retail Institute has developed this Supermarket Show so that the Industry can get togothor
and look at trends and discuss changes and we can also invite colleagues from around the
world including. of course, the Asia Pacific area where now Australian retailers and
wholesalers are starting to do business, and to try to make those connections and
underwrite some of the things we might do together.
I think that those of you, particularly from abroad, would have some idea of the perhaps
quiet sense of confidence that Australians currently enjoy about themselves, about their
country and about our economy. We were the first western country out of the world
recession. We are now growing somewhere between four and five per cent and as a
consequence we are seeing now a lift in employment and prosperity resuming once more.
By contrast, most of the western economies are growing at the moment on an average of
per cent. So. Australia's growth Is nearly double that of comparable countries and as a
consequence there Is a feeling of confidence about the place and Investment Is starting to
pick up again and wo are ltaiting to sco a long run, low Infltiounary recoveoy ahead of us
through the 1990s. And, I think, this is very encouraging for Australians that this position is 
here because we have changed much about Australia In the last 10 years. Ten years ago
this was a very Inward looking economy with a ring fence, bound by tariffs, with a
managed exchange rate, wilt a scleiowUi; fnancial market, with a government budgetary
policy which was out of sorts with private Investment in this country and as a consequence
we were growing at a very small rate and we had very low omployment growth and high
unemployment Today we have still got high unemployment, but It Is off a massive level of participation In
the work force. If we had the same number of people looking for work today as we had in
1984 we would have unemployment at under 6 per cent. But now, because there are so
many people looking for work, particularly women with an enormous increase In the
participation rate for women we still have relatively high unemployment, but we are now
starting to see tremendous employment growth. In fact. over the last year we have had
employment growth of about four per cent.
This, I think, matters a great deal to greta because evory year the Government has
been in office real household disposable income has risen because there are more people
In households In work. So, while there has been a change in relative wages over the
decade, the relative price of labour tias changed and been reduced. The number of
people in households working has risen so that there was a very strong growth In
household disposable income over the decade and that has driven retail sales and it has
driven consumption which in turn has driven Investment And, I think, if one looks to the
growth of the supermarket Industry through the 1980s and early 1990s one finds that what
is the driving force behind it not simply population growth but the workforce growth and
the rise In household disposable income which has come with It thats resuming again
with, as I say, four per cent employment growth this year. So, we are going to start to scc
again a fairly strong pick up in household disposable Income during the period.
The other thing I think that Is worth saying to our partners from abroad Is that by and large
the Australian economy is in size just under the combined GDP of the ASEAN economies.
A couple of years ago we wore about the somo. I think the AS. economies together
are slightly now ahead of Australia. That Is, In Australian dollars at aboLt $ 410 billion of
product. So. when you get an economy of this sl7a growing at four or five per cent one is
creating thu equivalent of $ 15 to $ 20 billion of extra value, extra wealth every year and that
is driving a tremendous amount of investment and consumption In this counly. ILit lw one
the reasons why there Is no substitute for growth for employment and there is no substitute
for growth for wealth and why, I think, the retail sectors have done very well and why, I
think, it is a good place to do busine. ss. In this country we have a corporate tax rate of 33
per cent about the same as Singapore, but this Is not a city state. This is a nation
continent with a very sophisticated level of public services and to provide that with a
corporate rate of 33 per cent is really at the leading edge of tax rates around the world for
corporations. As well as that, as domestic share holders will know, we have In this country a system of
full dividend Imputation. That is, we don't tax dividends twice, we do not classically tax
company income. So, we give our shareholders a tax credit for the company tax paid
when they rocolvo a dividend In their hands. This, along with vast acceleration and
appreciation makes this just about, In western world terms, the finest corporate tax system 
In the western world and certainly comparabla to any country which is even near
comparable with Australia In the Asia Pacific.
So, all these things, I think, are bull points for growth and for the future and we have, as
Jim Fleming said, been able to provide Australian consumors with high quality goods at
very fine margins. I mean, a few years ago one would have to go to speciality shops to
find sophisticated foods and pay a very high margin on them. Today you would expect to
find these In supermarkets and that Is because, I think, of the ambition, thU aubitiuus
attitude of supermarket proprietors In this country and food wholesalers and retailers, that
they want to stock those Items and deal In them. And this, of course, improves the spico of
life for Australians and the food they consume and, of course, it guarantees them these
products at much finer prices and thinner margins.
So, retailing has done a lot for Australia, but competition here is very Intense and one of
the by-products of that Intonsity is, I think, it has distractcd some of the major companies
from looking at the Asia Pacific in particular or further afield to North American and West
European markets. As a consequence. I think, we are missing opporhinities now in this
part of the world partlcularly. Yuu nutic heur we have had a substantial history of
mergers and acquisitions In retailing now over an extended period of time. In fact we have
the heaviest retailing sector companios In the world. Companies like Colcs-Myer and
Woolw [ ths have unprecedented market shares in world terms. I think Coles-Myer has
something like ten times the size of market penetration as say a comparahln, the first
comparable US corporatiun. So, Lhre Is a very heavy concentration and the Government
has made It fairly clear to the major retailers, competition is one thing, but attempts at sort
of monopolisation of tho market in the end dont do any of us any good.
So, In a sense punching each others eyes out for another one per cent of market share Is
rairly counter productive when one can open themselves up to retailing in China, in
Vietnam, in the established markets like Singapore and Thailand wlere Ausltalian retail
capacity and rotailing skills can really lay down the foundations for the retailing sectors of
countries and regions.
So. I'd say that the Government would be urging Australian retailing and wholesaling
companies to go abroad and to find opportunities and relieve Uteumselvus arnd the Trac
Practices Commission of the burden of reminding them that large market shares are fine,
but to go beyond that essentially establishes a real tyranny for food supplors and clothing
suppliers and others who have to deal with very large quasl-monopoly businesses.
Now, I am delighted we au starting to see this trend. We have seen Davids' Holdings
John David Is here this morning go to the Asia Pacific area into co-operative ventures, in
Singapore in Indonesia and In other places. And, it is this sort of outward view that while
the Australian economy is growing quite fast In western world terms, in terms of population
growth we will still have modest popuilatin and a modest absolute size to our consumer
markeutt copared with the growth in population In some of the countries I have mentioned
and, of course, the absolute size and rise of Incomes in those markets. So, the markut
opportunities abound vory cloce to Australia whore it Is possible to ship food stuffs chilled
not frozen, perishables things which years ago we couldn't consider and where we can
establish the style of retailing or it not establish it certainly amend and change and adapt
the style of retailing In those markets. And. I think, this Is a very important thing and I 
certainly congratulate those companies that have gone out there and have taken those
first steps to establish real market and growth opportunities for themselves, realising that
to stay In Australia and try to take over another wholesaler or another retailer, to have
another argument about competition policy, to fuither cunsrain the options of
manufacturers, to squeezo further wholesalers from the business and in the case of the
retail mergers Is by and large a pretty counter-productive activity.
So, I hope that our retailing sectors will now really understand that they have developod
here something really competitive and really good and that they can lake It out as a
product. That their systems, their warchousing, their retailing, they can take out as a
product to the Asia Pacificare Indeed, they can then buy market share In other countries
or develop buslne. sss in other countries, say in North America and Europe, where
retailing Is no more a developed art than it Is In this country.
So, at any rato, we arc told that there Is $ 160 billion of growth In Asia In food a lot of it
western foods and there is a great opportunity here and a great opportunity exists, not
just to retailers but, for our food Industries In particular the Agri-Foods business and It is
woith, I tliik, noting that growth In Australian high value food exports currently exceed 18
per cent a year and the Industry looks set to pass our Agri-Food Council's target of $ 7
billion of high value food exports by the Year 2000. So, there Is a tremendous, I think,
chance to sell what Australia does best, that Is high quality food, foods with disease free
status which Is fairly unique In this part of the world and to capitalise on tho food
technologies which Australia does well. So, there Is no rason. I think, why we would
leave the growth of these products and the growth of retail to the Sogos or Makros or
Park'n Shops or any of these other people, we have got to be out thera basically doing
these things ourselves.
Now. In terms of our own Industry, retailing acrrmnts for a very great number of
employcos, I think in the orde or hal a million plus people, and it Is continuing to adapt
and change and the Government has now sought to try to change the training agenda so
that retailing can pick up and train young people and actually pick them up from school
and train them while they are at school. A couple of weeks ago at a shopping mall in
Gosford I launched the Australian Student Traineeship Foundation which is letting young
people in years 11 and 12 pick up TAFE training technical and urther education,
vocational training while at school to give them accreditation in a TAFE coursesoey
can also do on-the job training while they are In their school years. So, wo can start to
stream young people In years 11 and 12 into vocational education and Into work and work
experience. And, the kny change In all of this is that In vocational education the
Government wants to see Industry essentially shaping the training agenda. Once it was
true In this country that In our vocational education, In TAFE as we call it. technical and
further education, the product of the system was the product divined by the suppliers or the
education themselves formerly trades people or spoclaliscd people who were thon
teaching what they knew to their student bodies and that was the product which Industry
then took. What we are trying to do is to get industry to decide what product they want and
then change the training profile of thu vocaional educational Instltutns to give them the
kind of trainees and people with the ss they nood and this Is whlum, I think, the
Involvement of let's say In retailing, the rotall sector in vocational education and in the
student foundation traineeships is, I think, going to be a very Important dovelopment in
Australia.
L 
Now. we have now developed a body called NE-XF l and NETTFORCE is to seek
the development of trainltig comrpanles In particular sectors of Australian industry. So. In
the metals Industry there will be a training company. In tie ritail industry there will be a
training company. In other induotrlcs, In the motor car Industry, there will be a training
company. That will mean that any company In that sector can actually go to tho company
which it owns shares In and be advised and directed how It can best train young
Australians for their own purposes, for the purposes of that Industry or that particular
business. This comes as an initiative from the White Paper called ' Wurking NaUton' that I
had the pleasure of Introducing some months ago and, I think, we will see with
NETTFORCE and I know there is already a retail training company establishcd that we
will start to see some real progress In companies seeking then advice and direction for
their own training nueds from their very own Industry training company.
Now, in this you know tho Government has been committed to the long-term unemployed
In the White Paper Working Nation'. And this has two very important things about it. The
first thing IS we are saying as a society we won't have an underclass. If the Americans
want an undeiclass they can have one. If the British want an underclass they can have
one. But, we won't have one. We are not going to have a section of the community drop
off and find thomselves living on charity or living In the streets or on sub-poverty Incomes.
And the other thing about It Is why should just a proportion of the workforco carry the butt
of Structural adjustment or in the past. the recession? Why shouldn't we get them back
Into thU labour market? Why should the new jobs only go to those new entrants to the
workforce? And, we are having a great deal of success. We have got a program here as
many of you know colled JOBSTART which Is a Government subsidised labour maiket
program. Last year 150,000 people got jobs under JOBSTART, 70 per cent of them were
long-term unamployed and the retention rate, that is the rate of retention by businocscs
after the subsidy finishes Is exceptionally high indeed. So, we are s. oing now In this last
year more long-term unemployed people picked up Uhan we have evor seen. certainly In
the last 10 or 15 years.
In the past three years nearly a quarter of a million in this country with a workforco of just
on eight million, this Is a big number nearly a quarter of a million long term unemployed
people have bccn hired by employeis Uthuugh JOBSTART subsidies alone. And, as you
know we have introduced as part of Working Nation' a new training wage which is set
between $ 125 and $ 333 and payable to all unemployed people and new entrants to the
labour force. Together with JOBSTART the training wage means an employer con receive
subsidies ranging from $ 5.000 to for taking on a long-term unemployed person.
So, that Is $ 100-$ 160 a week subsidy If an employer takes on a long-term unemplnyed
person. By doing this, by changing the nature of TAPE, by getting the balance right between
tertiary education and vocational education as we see that four per cent employment
growth we want to be pulling up tho long-term unemployed with it because, I think, the
other thing that people have got to understand In ite Industy, and this Is Including
retailing, and that is skills formation in this recovery Is not going to come from migration. It
Is going to come from our own labour market So, to avoid bottlenecks and wage
pressures as the recovery continues to strengthen we have to have a greater complement
of trained people coming In to the labour market and that has tn come. amongst other 
places, from the body of 300,000 odd of long-term unemployed people. But, the whole
focus or traineeships and training Is there because the Government and it is worth
recalling this ten years ago only three children In ten completed secondary school In this
country. Last year that was eight in ten and the Government has now added 65 per cent
of extra places to univorsities since 1985. So. we now have not just a very high retention
rate In secondary schools, but we have also provided the university places for those
students as they leave. So. our proportion of university places to tha school aged
secondary population Is as high as any In the wurld. The weakness In Australian
education has boon the Cindcrclla status of vocational education TATE. That is why In
' One Nation' in 1992 I announced the formation of the Australian National Training
Authority which has a national system of TAFE and where we are trying to develop TAFE
Into a national system to bring vocational education up to equal status with the universities.
So, a student has a real choice, that is, an accredited nation wide certlficate of status from
TAFE or a tertiary education and a tertiary degree.
In this way, we will be able to meet the training needs of Australia as we continue to
produce elaborately transformed products and elaborately transformed exports be they in
manufacturing or in food or ulucliunics or whereever It Is we will need a trained workforce.
One of Australia's great comparative advantages is education. There is only one other
country In the Asia Pacific with an education systom like Australia and that is Japan and
we should play to our comparative advantage and our comparative strengths by making
certain that the output of our education system kicks along product innovation In this
county and allows us to sell exports competitively to the rest of the world.
So, this, I think, Is an important thing for the country, for the economy, for the workforce
and for retailing because retailing is such a large employer and the skills changos are
going to need to be there to koop it at the forefront of ratailing techniques and abilities
throughout the balance of this decade.
So, perhaps let me wind up on thcoo points. To say firstly thank you very much for inviting
me to come. I think it is a very good thing that the Supermarket Show exists, that people
can actually exchange views, talk about developments In their Industry whore matters of
moment can be discussed, but It Is a particularly Important opportunity, I think, for
International visitors to come to Australia and to get to know our retailers and our
wholosalers and our diotributors in the various sectors and to see what opportunities they
can take and also our manufacturers, to see what products can come from Australia and
go on the shelves of supermarkets in thA region In which we live. This, I think, is very
Important to us.
I'd like to underline again just how competitive our supermarket and retail industry In this
country is and just again make the point, as Jim Fleming did, this Is a bull point for lower
prices and for restraining Inflation. We have got inflation now at somowhore between
and 2 per cent and we want to keep low Inflation very much in the torafrnnt of our mind In
terms of economic policy and prices in relailing Is an Important component and will always
be an important component of that And, the other thing is we will continue to wuik on
training and finally the Government will continue to encourage the development of an
outward looking retail sector as these rapidly growing markets in Asia emerge and where
we can obviously see or see obviously our capacity to participate in thnse markets and not
simply to participate, but In actually slaping them and shaping their fUture. 
7
So. perhaps Ict me finish by congratutadng the Australia ' n S&amp; perrrkt Institute once
again for this veiy Impressive superiuiarkel show and I look torward With some substangal
relish to the exhibits and to meeting somne of you who make this industry tkk.
Thiank you very much Indeed.
ends 


c{ 2~TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPSPEECH AT ALP FUNDRAISING DINNER, TERRACE INTERCONTINENTALHOTEL, ADELAIDE, 7 OCTOBER 1994E OE PROOF COPYMy Cabinet colleagues that I am pleased to have with me tonight, Leader ofthe Opposition Mike . Rann who I am also delighted to have with us tonight,John Hill, Party Secretary, and most particularly you, ladies and gentlemen,thank you for joining us and being with us. It is an occasion to come to aState and to focus upon its problems, and to get to understand it, perhapsbetter than its fortunes being touched in the normal ebb and flow of events, ofnational events, be they in Canberra or elsewhere. And no doubt, theCabinet coming here today as Nick has said has focused us up on SouthAustralia: its strengths and its weaknesses, its capacities and its needs andI think that as a consequence of doing that, and as he said, getting thebuearacracy focussed on it as well, is a good thing for us and a good thing Ihope for South Australia because I think, as he said, in the next day or two,some announcements will come from it. But the real value is probably, whatwe get through gatherings such as these: an idea of what is happening inSouth Australia, and how we can better integrate it into the mainstream of theeconomy and society in this country. So, that is why we're pleased to behere, and I'm sure and know that we will enjoy the opportunity.I think that there are a lot of superlatives thrown around in public lifeadjectives are dreamt up every day of the week but I'm quite sure that onecould say truthfully, almost advisedly, that this is probably going to be themost exciting decade in our history. Because I don't think that there has everbeen a time when we are more, see ourselves more, as a nation with anidentity of our own, I don't think we have ever enjoyed the confidence wecurrently enjoy about our capacity to do things in the world. We have never,ever had markets the size we have, with the proximity we now have them inthe past our markets were always in Europe, and some in North America.Now, the fastest growing part of the world is on our doorstep in Asia. We aremore appreciative, I think, of Australia and what we have been given of theopportunity we have had than perhaps any generation has ever been. Wenow know, because of the mobility our generation enjoys through the 747 andtelevision, we can appreciate what Australia is, and know that not all nationshave been endowed as we have. And it is unique. We are the only nation inthe world that has a continent to itself, and that big moat of the Pacific
2around us gives us that security, that natural security, and of course thetemperate nature and the tolerant society we have bred here makes this I'msure, the best place in the world to live.It's certainly going to be the best place to be living and doing business,particularly in this part of the world. And I don't think you could have saidthese things in the decades past. And I like to think and I was speaking to aLabor audience earlier tonight saying it was a century ago you started tosee some of these things in the 1890' s. The parallels between the 1890' sand the 1990' s are quite striking it was the period of the great drought, itwas the period of our deepest recession, it was a period when Australiannationhood was really brought together, when the threads were boundtogether. When the States and the nation decided to federate to cedepowers to a greater national government. And the social experimentation,and the sense of being an Australian that developed in that decade, and wenton to the First World War. I mean, we have all lived with the consequencesof the First World War it having automatically introduced the Second. Butone of the great consequences sad consequences for us was it snuffed outAustralian nationhood, and we went back into that conservative sort ofcocoon. And even after the British Parliament passed the Statute ofWestminster and said, " look, you can actually have the place and run ityourself', we said " oh, no no thank-you not quite yet". They said " we'reactually going to give it to you." " Oh no, no, no, we don't quite want it." Andwe then went through the torpor what I call the Menzies years. The Rip VanWinkle years, when the place culturally went to sleep, and we regardedBritain as home etc. And, you know, people say there was quite a nice thingon Menzies last week on 565 and they say well, you shouldn't be too hardon Menzies for his time. You know, this was a view that was about that wedidn't assert our Australian identity we didn't assert the notion of being anAustralian, we didn't have that inner confidence about ourselves. We didregard ourselves as a Branch Office and as some sort of derivative place.Well, this may be fair political analysis, but George Washington wouldn'thave had a bar of it, I can assure you. And he had the jump on Menzies byabout 150 or 200 years, and so I don't think it necessarily follows that youhave got to say that but it was a state of mind. And a state of mind not onlythat was one that tied us up, in a sense, to markets in the NorthernHemisphere, as sensible as that was, and as understandable and obvious asthat was at the time, but it sapped our confidence in ourselves. And thereassertion of Australian values and our confidence, we saw a glimpse of itduring the Whitlam Government, and it basically faded again, and that is whyI think that now, with the great changes of the 1980' s behind us the, openingup of Australia, the knocking down of the tariff wall, the removal of exchangecontrols, the free-flow of funds, the free-flow of goods, the competitiveculture, the Accord, the change in relative wages, the lift in the profit share,the strong rates of employment growth, the development of the sophisticatedSocial Security system all of that has put us in a position where now we canactually understand that our identity and our confidence can be not simply anadjunct of what we do, but a central power-house, a central poweringelement, that pulls into it all of those changes, and uses and springs from the
3changes that were made in the 80' s and are still being made. And that's whyI think that you can go back through the decades but there are none whereyou could see Australia in the position where it can be quite as excited aboutthe prospects as now. Because here we are, opened up to the world. Nolonger sitting behind a tariff wall. No longer sitting with double-digit inflation.A competitive country where competitive breezes have been well and trulyflowed through the economy, where people good managers, investors,people with some clever instincts can now do well because when weopened up the financial markets in the 80' s, we gave a freedom to the cleverthat was formerly, under regulation, only enjoyed by the wealthy. This is thegreat levelling up of de-regulation it actually gives the clever a chanceagainst the wealthy who formerly were able to take more than their share ofthe rations supply of savings that came out of this banking system of the day.It is a great irony that it took a Labor Government to give Australia a marketeconomy, but it did. And that is why if there is to be the outwardmanifestation of this change, it is as I said in the last election that is,outward meaning into the growing markets of the Asia-Pacific better to havethe authors of the policy running the policy than the usurpers. That is why itwas important as Nick said to win the 1993 election. Important for Labor,important for the country.Now, I think that if we take stock of where we are and understand thechanges which have been made, a number of important ones come to mind.One, I think, is education. This has been in the past Australia's greatcomparative advantage. There is only one other country in Asia that has aneducation system like us, and that's Japan. But in 1983, only 3 kids incompleted secondary school. This year it's 8 in 10, and it will soon be 9 inAnd we are streaming 40% of those students into universities where wehave added 65% of places since 1985, and we are now building up theCinderella of Australian education Technical and Further Education,vocational education to play the proper role it should have always played inskills formation in this country. This great change which is going to powerproduct innovation and opportunity in this country is also doing one otherthing. And that is this massive participation rate in schools is now beingenjoyed by Australian young women who were not enjoying this before. In mygeneration, young women invariably mostly didn't go on to completesecondary school, and the number of university places granted to them werefew. Now there are more women in universities than there are young men.So, this is a very liberating change as well as one which is innovating andpushing the economy along. And it is, I think, playing to our real strengthsand our comparative advantage, which is not basically the wool we shearfrom the sheep, or the coal we dig from the open-cut mines, or the iron-oremountains we wear down, but rather from the skills which we have, and thecapacity to do innovative and clever things. And we are now seeing that, andwe are seeing it in places like South Australia where smaller companies andeven larger companies are doing things of world class in a worldenvironment, and being competitive. And that is off the back of goodmanagement, which is essentially powered along by innovations andeducation.
4Education is one of these things which gives communities a chance. Wehave, as a party, said that we believe that Australia will be stronger if wemove along together that we believe in the policies of inclusion. That's aword which is now dropped around the political landscape most parties sayit and don't mean it. We say it, and mean it. That is, that we will be strongerif we are together. That is why the Government, in the course of the electioncampaign, said we would not leave the unemployed behind that it isinsufferable for a society to damn around 300,000 people who through nofault of their own find themselves to be long-term unemployed. And why it isalso an economically inefficient thing as well as an inequitable thing to allowpeople to drop off the end of the queue and become an underclass. We aretoo wealthy for that to happen, and when the Government decided and I hadthe pleasure of introducing the White Paper, Working Nation, which devoteda very large parcel of resources to the long-term unemployed we drew a linein the sand which said we will not have an underclass. If America wants anunderclass, it can have one. If Britain wants an underclass, it can have one.But we wont have one. And as a consequence, we are already starting tosee a very high proportion of long-term unemployed people taken up in thelabour market we have had 4% employment growth this year, over 360,000jobs 75,000 of those have gone to the long-term unemployed. If we werelooking at comparable numbers in the 80' s, it would have been only 7 to10,000 jobs that went to long-term unemployed. So these programs areworking they're starting to work now as a large systemic change, and theother important thing from it is that we are going to need skills formation inthis recovery as it burbles along, there is going to be pressure in the labourmarket, and we can't afford to have a block of people unemployed, or theirresources under-employed their skills under-employed. We are not going tosee skills formation from migration as we have done in other recoveries, andthat is why in this one it is important that we bring this category of peoplealong, and bring them back into the mainstream of society, So the WhitePaper is one thing it's an equity issue, it's a social justice issue, but it is'alsoan economic issue.Another is Mabo. Now, some may say well, it doesn't affect us very much.The High Court said that there is a Native Title coming from indigenouscustom title a native title in the common law but that the title is subordinateto the Crown. That is, that the title is subordinate to issues of interest in landby land managers or land ministers of the States. So in other words, afreehold title extinguishes native title. And therefore, one would say, in thecapital cities, well, why should I worry about that? Mabo doesn't mean muchto me. Out in the back blocks, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders canhave access to land if they can establish the traditional connection with it.The important thing is that the principal, perhaps defining feature ofAboriginal culture, is the association that Aboriginal people have with theland. And we cannot, absolutely cannot, go on saying that we are a fairsociety, that we believe in justice, we believe in inclusion, but we don'tbelieve in inclusion for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Youcan't say that, and give meaning to the word inclusion. And you can't go on
in this part of the world holding your head up particularly in Asia saying," well, here we are, the largely European tribe who happened to inherit acontinent, but we're here, but our indiginies aren't. There's no equal place forthem". Now, Mabo was a wrong that needed to be... the whole notion of terranullius, that the continent was basically without people and without a culture,was wrong and needed to be righted. And the High Court made thatdecision, and the Government supported the High Court by putting thelegislative framework to give effect to the decision into place. That is, theCourt didn't say what the title was, how it will be dispensed etc, who shouldhave it all those mechanisms were put into place in the Mabo legislation.To have not done it would have been to have denied Aboriginal peoplejustice. To have not done it would have been to hang the High Court out todry. Now we often hear our conservative opponents talking about the rule of law.They are always interested in the rule of law until it affects them, and when amajority on the High Court found in favour of Mabo, they sailed right into theChief Justice and all the other judges and the former position of respect thatthe Court had was very quickly being assailed by those who basically didn'tbelieve that black people should be given land. Now, it is very hard to createinstitutions in any country, and as you know in our constitution we establishedthe High Court in a position of some substantial pre-eminence underseparation of powers from the legislative branch of the government, and wehave seen for an 1890' s constitution in a period of telecommunications andtelevision and aviation and all these things that were not really around inthose days we have seen a change to the powers of the Commonwealth anddelineation of powers by the Commonwealth and the States through the HighCourt. And so, therefore, I thought, and the Government thought, that theHigh Court having made an historic and courageous decision, that we shouldkeep the institution strong, and in the doing of it, provide justice to Aboriginalpeople. That has happened it's a very great change in our society. It'sanother element of the inclusion that I speak of in saying that if we are to goalong together, it has to be together.So you look at these things Mabo, Aboriginal and Torres Strait IslanderAustralians, long-term unemployed these are all the sorts of things that willbind Australia together. And as we grow as this recovery comes through,this low-inflationary recovery we will be able to hold our head up high, andwe will approach the world we live in and say, " here we are as Australians,we are a unique people with an identity of our own, at peace with each otherin a society where we will not have underclasses. Where we are as one".Not everybody will have an equal distribution, an equal lump of the wealth orthe opportunity, but at least we will be committed truly committed to thenotion of equality, and with it of course, fraternity. This gives us the entryticket to play in the bigger game on the world stage, and this Government hasthought about that, and it has thought about how we can not only createstructures within Australia for Australia, but outside of Australia forAustralians.
f IAnd this is where we have committed ourselves in international forums tothings like the Uruguay Round, and the GATT, in which Australia played avery important role over 7 years putting the Cannes group together andprosecuting the fight against the Europeans on agriculture, and other nationson services and property rights etc, to get a result which will change the worldin terms of free trade and opportunity. Particularly now we are seeing for thefirst time since the First World War, Russia rejoining the world economy,South America rejoining the world economy and for the first time ever, Indiajoining the world economy, China joining the world economy, and providing aback-drop set of rules under GATT which will allow that to happen. That isone thing that this Government has been involved with, and it will mark out fora trading nation like Australia huge opportunities over the longer run.Another is APEC. APEC is the development of an Asia-Pacific economiccommunity. It started off as a fledgling information exchange body we havenow got it up to a Heads Of Government body, and its second Heads OfGovernment meeting is in Bogor in Indonesia next month, and that will beattended by the 18 leaders of the 18 member states of APEC, including ofcourse the President of the United States, the Prime Minister of Japan, thePresident of China, the President of Indonesia of course is the Host, and allof the other Heads of Governments from around the region. Why have weinterested ourselves in this? Basically, to see that Asia, that the big decisionthat is going to be made in Asia in the next 5-7 years, is an Asia-Pacificdecision, and not an Asian decision. In other words, Asia thecomprehension of Asia is a Pan-Pacific view, and not simply a continentalAsian issue where we see largely the world developing into three blocks theEuropean Union, NAFTA travelling through Central and South America, theAmericans extending their dialogue with the Latins and running into SouthAmerica, staying at home, and China becoming the dominant centraleconomic force in an Asian economic union of some kind. It's in our interestto see that the United States economically and strategically engages in Asia.Now one of the ways we can do this is to open up trade and investmentopportunities for all the countries of the Asia-Pacific, and this will mean'thatthe United States will not then be focussing on South America, but will befocussing on the opportunities of the great growth of the Asian markets, andin the doing of it, maintaining that unique strategic relationship it has withJapan, and in the doing of that, keeping the strategic environment in NorthAsia much more passive. This then becomes a very strong point for us interms of the environment in which we live.As APEC goes on and we adopt a trade-liberalising agenda, we then open upin our immediate neighbourhood as we get trading barriers tariff and nontariffbarriers down so we are doing something above the GATT. We gotthe GATT as a back-drop, but we add to that through APEC, so APECbecomes a GATT-plus outcome. Now, it is a very big issue and it's a veryhard thing to do, and it may take us some time. But we are in there trying,and that is why President Soeharto's Chairmanship of this meeting inIndonesia in November of this year is going to be so important. So there isAPEC.
The other issue is the developing of our relations with Indonesia. This is thefourth largest country in the world it's just on 200 million people. It is anarchipelago 8 flying hours across. It has been held together by PresidentSoeharto's new order Government now for over a quarter of a century. In myview, it poses no strategic threat to Australia. We pose no strategic threat toit, therefore we should be friends, and that is what this Government isseeking to do to develop a relationship of trust, understanding and valuewith the Government and the people of Indonesia. This will open uptremendous trading opportunities for Australia, and will develop a relationshipwhich will make us stronger, and them stronger. And then, as perhaps weopen up the opportunities of AFTA the ASEAN free-trade area where wehave a proposal to look at Australasia that's CER, the trade agreementbetween Australia and New Zealand being part of AFTA, an extension ofAFTA, we would then not only see a people to people relationship withIndonesia, but a trading relationship with ASEAN. ASEAN, with Australia it'sworth remembering that the Australian economy is about the same size of allthe ASEAN economies combined -that's Indonesia, Singapore, thePhilippines, Malaysia and Thailand -they are together just larger thanAustralia. Put Australia and New Zealand together, and we are as large asASEAN, put the two together and it is a market of $ 1000 billion and 300million people. When we make that connection, Australia's tradeopportunities will really blossom.And that is why I say, think of any other decade where this was possible, andyou can't think of one. So, the structures inside Australia the opening up,the great social changes like access and opportunity in education,universality of access in health, age care, child care, occupationalsuperannuation for the workforce, strong rates of employment growth,economic policy focussed on employment, wage restraint for economicgrowth and employment growth via the Accord, a change to thecompetitiveness and the competitive culture by low tariffs and the removal ofexchange controls, the inculcation of a competitive culture inside Australiaand the opportunities of that abroad, the opening up of the structures and thedevelopment of the structures outside of Australia for Australia all of thesethings are things which this Labor Party, and this Labor Government havefashioned for this nation. So, when we come to South Australia and we seethe things we are doing here, and people say " where is South Australia'splace in this?" And I say, " in the centre of it". Because the culture here hasalways been one which has been about making do, changing, adapting,finding a role for itself in the country where natural opportunities haven'texisted that's happening today. That is happening in the innovativeproducts we are seeing from this state. We are seeing it in services, we'reseeing it in regions and we say, if we create the environment botheconomically, socially and we get that right, we get that sense oftogetherness, that sense of inclusion right, and we are accepted as a nationwith a culture and an identity of our own in Asia, South Australia will have notrouble at all finding its place in all that. So, when we come here and we talkto you, we try to listen for those little bits of information which have their placein the matrix, but the matrix is the much bigger picture of Australia's place in
8the world. And that is why, when you hear our opponents say the republic isbasically a distraction, you say that's wrong the republic is central to oureconomic fortunes. Because otherwise, you go around Asia with the Queenof Great Britain the Head of State of another country as your Head ofState. That is, for this country, untenable. Untenable. And that is why, overtime, the whole question about identity, inclusion, inclusiveness, social justiceand social democracy rejecting the hard-hearted views of Thatcher orReagan, or the centralised economies of the old Eastern Bloc but going forsomething new and better, a good competitive economy grafted on with anequitable social policy and an enlightened foreign policy, are concurrences ofpolicy events that I don't think Australia has ever had before. This is why Isay, this is the most exciting decade in our nation's history, and why I thinkSouth Australians should think that too. Thank you.ends.


Thank you very much for the invitation to open this&nbsp;International Conference, the centre-piece of the&nbsp;celebration of the Centenary of Women's Suffrage in&nbsp;Australia.
Australia was a pioneer in women's rights. It is&nbsp;surprising, really, that among the facts of Australian&nbsp;history, this one is less yell known than Ned Kelly,&nbsp;who was a horse-thief, and Phar Lap, who was a horse.
I am all for icons like these. But I do think that it&nbsp;would be at least as salutary and uplifting if all&nbsp;Australians knew that their country had pioneered the&nbsp;rights of woman.
It would remind us that one of the defining characteristics of Australia is social progress.
&nbsp;It would signal that our attachment to democracy and fairness is as deep as any attachment, as a nation, we feel.
&nbsp;It might demonstrate to the unknowing and the unconverted that the Australian character, which is said to have been born in the 1890s, was not quite so chauvinistically male as generally believed.
&nbsp;And it would reassure the doubters that the decisions we in the Labor Party have taken in recent years and recent weeks maintain an Australian tradition.
All but obscured for long periods grown over with prejudice and myopia, and with events like two World Wars which tended to create or re-assert male national stereotypes the thread is there.
I hope this conference will uncover more of the thread. I hope it will be seen as a step along the way to an Australia where the rights of women are uncontested, unambiguous, inalienable.
Here in South Australia in 1894, women fought for and von two fundamental rights the right to vote and the right to stand for Parliament.
Here most Australian women were granted right &nbsp;to vote by the new Federal Government in 1902, it was in no small way attributable to the victory in South Australia eight years before.
I say “most Australian women” &nbsp;advisedly. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women were denied the rights they had earlier gained in South Australia and they didn't get these rights back until 1962.
That is one of the more notorious facts of Australian history and it should not be forgotten.
About nine months ago, I opened the Women Power and the 21st Century Conference in Melbourne: many of you here today may have participated in this Conference. I said then that the fact that our national parliament was still overwhelmingly sale was the great flaw in Australian democracy.
I went on to say that in a country renowned for its democrtic spirit, it was a sad fact that the party which has always seon itself as embodying that spirit has a record which is only marginally better than the rest.
Last year, I called an the Labor Party to begin to reinvigorate itself: to widen its membership, to open its form, to find a better process for selecting candidates and, most importantly of all to ensure a much more active participation by many more women.
&nbsp;We know there were barrier to this, and you all know how strong those barriers can be.
&nbsp;I said nine months ago that getting the barriers down required political power and political will.
&nbsp;It is a matter of great pride to ae that the ALP has taken up the challenge not just in word, but in deed.
&nbsp;The ALP has agreed that women will be Labor candidates for at-least 35 per cent of winnable seats by 2002.
&nbsp;And I ' m pleased to add that yesterday Federal Cabinet reaffirmed its commitment to have equal representation of men and women as Government appointments on Commonwealth boards by the year 2000.
&nbsp;To meet this target, Cabinet backed a strong and comprehensive strategy. All Ministers will be looking at the situation in their own portfolios and taxing practical steps to boast women's representation.
We will also be encouraging the other agencies who nominate people to these boards the states, unions, businesses and so on to nominate an equal representation of women.
&nbsp;It is worth looking at the reasons for the changes we are making.
&nbsp;First, it is about leadership and talent.
&nbsp;As a nation and as a democracy, we simply cannot afford to lose the skills, experience, energy and outright talent of half our population. We need women like Carmen Lawrence, Joan Kirner and Rosemary Follett, and many more like them, in our parliaments.
We need than in our businesses, too. I hope corporate Australia has taken note of what is happening. It has been happening in the co ity for a very long time. It has been happening in families, schools and universities, farms, factories and offices. Women have been making an equal very often much more than equal contribution to the economy and society for a very long time. It is now happening in our parliaments.
It really ought to be happening in board-rooms.
We need women to be full participants in the great national debates and in national decision-making.
We need their contribution to economic, social and cultural policy; to information policy, human rights, foreign affairs, to finding a just reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians, to an Australian Republic.
We need women to bring to these forums not simply their experience an women, we need them to bring thei judgements about Australia; their feelings about Australia.
I was struck by what Poppy King had to say in Sydney recently at the seminar “The Australian Republican Movement A Women's Perspective.”
&nbsp;She said: “Women should not become involved in the debate with the one agenda of " women's issues". Women should become involved because we are living, breathing, thinking individuals, an integral part of the population that makes up this country. we have opinions, ideas and solutions that are worthvhile when deciding on issues that affect all Australians and, after all, the republic is not a gander issue it's an Australian one. “
We need women as full participants in decision-makinq, simply because we need to make the right decisions.
&nbsp;We adopted affirmative action in the Labor Party because we believe it is just and right and because we believe in merit and ability.
&nbsp;I think it is time that we challenged the platitude that the existinq system, whatever it is and however discriminatory its outcomes might be, somehow represents decision-makinq on merit.
&nbsp;I don't believe it. And I'm sure many of you don't believe it either.
&nbsp;I don't believe that, on any real assessment of ability, only 10 percent of women have the qualities necessary to be a member of our House of Representatives.
I don't believe that only 22 percent or women have the ability to be Members of the Senate.
&nbsp;And I don't believe that only 3 percent of women have the capacity to be members of this country's private sector boards either.
&nbsp;I think that ability is important. And that is why I called for the affirmative action rule changes in the Australian Labor Party.
&nbsp;We moved to affirmative action for the other good reason that we must demonstrate to young women to those who will come after us that they have a real opportunity to contribute to decision-making.
&nbsp;This country is changing.
&nbsp;By our own efforts and imagination and confidence we are reshaping Australia.
&nbsp;The deepest cynic could not deny that we have made enormous strides in recent times.
&nbsp;We are building a tolerant, cohesive, culturally diverse society.
&nbsp;We are establishing a dynamic role in the region, a creative and rewarding role in the global community. We are more comfortable with our role in the world and, I sincerely believe, more confident and assured about our future.
&nbsp;I vould like to think that a lot of Australians are beginning to share a sense of excitement.
We have dramatically expanded our secondary and higher education systems. The increased participation of women and girls in education is just as dramatic.
&nbsp;We are reforming our labour market programs and our vocational training systems.
&nbsp;We are strengthening our health and social security systems and reforming our aged care services. We are making child care more affordable and more available.
&nbsp;We are making the Sex Discrimination Act even stronger, by tackling such issues as indirect discrimination. I have absolutely no doubt that these changes in Australia are due in significant ways to the ideas and energy floving from the increasingly prominent role and status of vomen.
&nbsp;Nor do I have any doubt that the changes will be more profound and the future more exciting as their role grows. Women have been a major driving force for these changes. And part of the reason for this is that Australia has been able to bring a genuine commitment to vomen's equality into our practical policy and program development.
&nbsp;I am very proud that Australia is internationally recognised as a world leader in integrating status of women issues into the practical business of government. But we realise that this means continuing to work for positive change.
&nbsp;For example, this year we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Sex Discrimination Act with a range of amendments to expand it and strengthen its impact.
&nbsp;The Act was a major milestone for the status of Australian women. But for younger women it is already rather like the vote an everyday fact of life.
&nbsp;Survey research shove that young women think very differently from their mothers and grandmothers.
&nbsp;Ninety-five percent of young women surveyed expect equal pay. Only 6 percent thought their lives were less satisfying than young men of the same age.
&nbsp;Around 83 percent want to have a family of their own AND a paying job interestingly, the younger age groups held this view much more strongly. And 93 percent thought men and women ought to do an equal share of the housework.
&nbsp;But there was another side to the young women's responses.
Just over 60 percent thought they had they had been treated unfairly because of their gender.
&nbsp;The younger age groups ( the 18 to 24 year olds) generally thought that women got a fair go at work, but in the 25 to 30 age group, just under 50 percent thought women at work did not get treated fairly.
&nbsp;It seems that more experience in the workforce can include some sad surprises. Clearly, there is some way to go in ensuring women do not experience discrimination in the workplace.
&nbsp;Most fundamentally, nearly 70 percent thought that their own lives were more satisfying than their mothers' lives and this squares with other research findings.
If the notion of equality is something that young women nov take as a given in their lives, we have come a long way.
And it is exactly the reason why governments cannot sit on their hands. We have a responsibility to respond to this generation and to recognise the place of the next.
&nbsp;We celebrate our history, and we build for the future.
&nbsp;We recognise that woman's gains over the last 100 years have been of profound benefit to all Australians, to the quality of society, to the life of the nation.
&nbsp;The story of the struggle to win those reforms is a rich part of our history.
&nbsp;The first chapter was written here 100 years ago. It is my hope that in the next few years we can write some big chapters of our own and, if the story is still not complete, that at least we will enter the next century agreed on what the ending should be.
&nbsp;I hope that not just the struggle but the reality of women's rights, women's role and women's status are part of our democratic consciousness-a part of our identity.
Your Conference, and the celebrations of the centenary of women's suffrage in Australia, is a step towards that end and I thank you for inviting me to speak.
&nbsp;It is now my privilege to declare this International Conference open.
&nbsp;



* TEL: 1O. Oct. 94 17: 55 ND. 018 P .01,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
RECEPTION FOR COMMONWEALTH GAMES ATHLETES
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF SPORT, CANBERRA
MONDAY 10 OCTOBER, 1994
Thank you very much. It is a very great pleasure to be here in the AIS for this
welcome home. One amongst many, I know, but one nevertheless very
heartfelt. Because, for most of you this has been the place where that extra
bit of tone and interest and commitment has made all the difference. But, it is
a chance for us all to say directly, rather than through newspapers or motions
in parliament, a simple thank you for the dedication and the commitment that
you have shown, each of you, in representing this country with such
distinction. I think all of us understand the enormous personal commitment
an athlete makes to excellence that doggedness, that
sustenance... sustaining power when your body is telling you to stop, when
you're wondering about your life's choice when all those pressures are on
you and you keep on going. And that is, I think, a mark of a champion and
champions, It is, as Jim said, sport is about excellence, and it's about a celebration of
beauty it's about a celebration of spirit and the human form. And it, I think,
in that celebration, transmits so much to this country about what we are and
what we have become. And no doubt, when you stand on the winning
rostrum and you are saluted as Australians, it must run through your mind
that you stand there representing the country and what it is, and I think that is
we are proud of Australia, we're nationalists all of us, but fortunately
nationalism has never got the better of us. And we have it in its proper place,
but pride is always something that Australians deserve to hold dear, and one
I know that if you are an Australian athlete comes by natural instinct by pure
instinct.
I want to say that I think it's a tremendously important thing for the
Government to commit itself to Australian sport, because sport is so much of
the ethos and culture of this country but beyond that it is a celebration of
young Australians, of what most people in their youth are capable of. And
even those not so youthful. But the fact is, I am delighted that we have been
able to build all of us an Institute of this standing because, Jim said earlier, 
TEL: iO. Oct. 94 17: 55 No. O1S-P. O2,
2
that I think the institute is an important body in world terms the fact is, there'
is probably nothing better than this in the world. There may be things its
equal, but there Is certainly nothing better. And it's a great tribute to the
coaches, to the sport scientists, the support staff, arnd to the Director Deek
for the tremendous job which the AIS has done on this occasion. I think
something I've got some statistics here in the sports with an AIS program,
87% of our medal winners were receiving or had received direct
Commonwealth support from the AIS, and an overall two-thirds of the medal
winners received direct AIS support. So, there are statistics, " statistics and
damn statistics" as they say, but I think they are fairly compelling ones, so
much that I think all of us in this room believe that they reflect the value of
this effort. So, they are great results and let me congratulate you all again
the AIS and the individual members of the team. And I know that with the
Olympics coming up and the Olympic athlete program, which I announced on
behalf of the Government, we are going to make just that extra special effort
to bring our athletes... to give them that world competitive edge coming up to
the 2000 Olympics.
Now, I know a lot of you have had since the Games other welcomes home,
other terrific performances around the world with the World Championships in
other events, and while there is no particular welcome homes for that, let's
congratulate you those of you who have been involved, particularly AIS
sports men and women in those world championships, and those other
events for which you have created world records in some cases.
The main thing in all this is that what a great role model you are for young
Australians. Now, I'm sure that everybody says that to you every time that
one of these events are on, but that's true. And I think it's not just because
you can excel at sport, or win a gold medal, but rather for your character and
your personality. Because I think that if one goes back through the great
sports men and women of this country, the thing that stuck by most of them
and to us as a result is what fine people they have been, and what a great
sense of joy their character has been to the country. And I know that when
Lew Hoad died this year, I wrote to his wife saying how proud she must have
been of Lew, and what a fine ambassador for Australia he had been. And I
mentioned how Pete Sampras had said often that he was inspired by, and
modelled himself, on great Australian players such as Lew Hoad and Rod
Layer. He loved their style, their attitude and their manner the aura they
gave, not simply the medal or the win. And I think that is the point. In fact,
Jenny Hoad wrote me a very nice reply, and I'm sure she wouldn't mind me
relating a little story in the letter she sent back. She said, Lew always felt
totally Australian," and she told me a great story, ' When Low and Jenny had
just married and were living in a housing commission flat in Sydney, the man
living opposite approached Lew one night and told him his wife had just had a
daughter, and would like Lew to be the Godfather, but they couldn't decide on
what to call it. And Lew said, ' Well, I have just seen a great movie, and
there's a good name in the film for a baby call it Shane." And she later
became one of Australia's great sporting heroes Shane Gould. So, it just
shows you that these sporting connections weave the most unlikely stories. 
* TEL: 10. Oct. 94 17: 55 No. 018 P. 03,,
3
But the fact of the matter Is that great sports people do become icons for the*
country not simply sporting icons and the Low Hoads of this world and
other great sports men and women obviously are going to do that as many
of you are now doing. So, could I just say thank you most sincerely for your
efforts in Victoria. It's a great pleasure, I'm sure, for Jim Ferguson and Deek,
and all of the people in AIS who are committed to you, to see these efforts
actually be rewarded, but most particularly, that of course would all go to
nought if it weren't for your grit and determination that instinct to press on
when a lot of things are telling you that time is up. And I think it is that
leadership and that strength and courage, and that strength of conviction
which we all salute. As Australians we all owe you a great debt this is our
most successful Commonwealth Games ever and I am sure on behalf not
simply of those in the ACT but on behalf of the nation in general thank you
sincerely one and all for a great effort for Australia.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS AT PRESENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN ARTISTS
CREATIVE FELLOWSHIPS, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
MONDAY, 17 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Michael ( Lynch), my colleague Michael Lee, Hilary
McPhee, Senator Kernot, distinguished ladies and gentlemen and awardees,
fellowship winners. It is a great pleasure to be here on yet another occasion
associated with the fellowships and thank you Hilary indeed for the invitation.
I am so chuffed these days about the Australia Council and the way it has
changed over the years, adapted to the needs of this country, to the arts, to
the community and one doesn't have too many occasions to say nice things
about people, but let me say, I generally try and make them you see. Let me
say though I am delighted with the leadership which Hilary McPhee and
Michael Lynch are providing and to have people of this calibre follow Rodney
Hall and Max Burke and them following after Donald ( Homne) that continuity,
that tremendous commitment which they bring gives the Government, I think,
great confidence that the arts are in very good hands in this country.
So, thank you indeed for your efforts, both of you, and for the Council in,
again, stewarding the change through this year and for bringing these
fellowships on. I am hoping that the coincidence of the awards and the
fellowships and tomorrow's statement on the arts will mean that this is a great
week for the arts in Australia because rarely does a Government have an
opportunity to make a contribution, a renewed contribution to the arts in this
country. We already have this week the Australian National Festival of
Theatre on, so many people connected with the arts are in this city and we
have our distinguished artists this morning and the Tasmanian Symphony
and it should'be, I think, a great occasion tomorrow. I hope it is and I want it
to be because what the statement is about is not some routine announcement
or some routine change, but rather a statement that the arts and the belief of
the Government that the arts are not peripheral to Australian life, but central
to it. And, that is the cause of the statement being made and to redefine and
redirect the way in which the arts are funded by the Commonwealth and how 
we can do co-operative things around the country with the arts community
and with the States to redirect artistic endeavour in this country.
So, I hope when this time tomorrow comes those of you who have been
waiting for it will be pleased with it and that we will truly have an opportunity
to make very clear that the arts are entirely central to Australia and matter to
us economically and socially to our identity et cetera.
When Governments make statements they get a lot of press and, of course,
everyone expects them to be economic statements or mechanical statements,
things about industry policy and the like. Well, there is going to be a lot of
that in there too, but it is about the essence of the defining nature of the arts
in Australia and the definition it brings to this country.
The Fellowships are part of that, of course, as well. And, what they are about
is saying clearly and I hope lucidly that for people who have made a
contribution to the arts and to the culture of this country that they are
important and that the Government wants to continue to support them, to
make a contribution so that their commitment to date can be continued for
them often in mid career. This is essentially a scheme for artists of
accomplishment in mid career and I am delighted that the quality of it, that the
people who have been awarded the fellowships, now 45 of them since its
inception, have been of such a high calibre that the prestige of the scheme
remains as it was on the day it was first announced. As a consequence, we
have seen people develop themselves, to take either the time out from an
active and busy career or to continue as they had been, doing things that
they might not have otherwise been able to do, but needing to worry about
funds and money and how they can keep their life together.
These are for two years, three years, up to five years, they are now at
$ 66,000 a year which is an income which will encourage, we hope, those
artists who have already, as I said, made a substantial contribution and who
already are noteworthy for their work to continue on.
So, it is a great pleasure to me that there has been so much interest in the
Fellowships by the artistic and cultural community in this country and that
they remain, in a sense, the prestige and important awards that they are.
I hope that we will see these grow in the future, we are even saying
something about them tomorrow and as I say, at this time tomorrow I think
these awards and that which they stand for, but the arts in this country in
general will have been seen by the community as being supported by the
Government because of their innately important role in our society. Thank
you very much for having me along.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MIPCOMMONWEALTH
CULTURAL POLICY LAUNCH
TUESDAY 18 OCTOBER
This is a very great pleasure.
No government has ever delivered a national cultural
policy for Australia on anything like these dimensions.
I'm not sure many national governments in other countries
have delivered cultural statements.
The Americans are in the process of formulating one at
the moment for delivery towards the end of the century,
I understand.
We need this statement.
As the document says, it is long overdue.
We have had a cultural debate running in this country for
a very long time.
our post-colonial status guaranteed that there would be a
lot of questions asked about who we are, what level ofculture
we might reasonably aspire to, whether we should
be transplanting European culture or fostering an
indigenous one, what the worth of such a strange hybrid
would be.
These arguments run right through our history in this
century.
At the extremes it was " evening dress and the opera"
versus the " wattle and bottle".
Anglophilia and Anglophobia.
The debate tended to lurch between the cultural cringe
and cultural swagger.
It has taken us a long while to find what Robert Hughes
recently called " a relaxed uprightness of carriage."
The two extremes don't make much sense. 
Both are narrow, both inclined to xenophobia.
And both fatally missed the point that our development
was bound to reflect the accumulation of cultures which
of necessity an immigrant society creates and that from
such variety great riches flow.
The simplest truths can be the hardest to grasp.
The idea that a cosmopolitan Australia might be a
worthwhile aspiration and not a nightmare was a long time
coming. To imagine a culturally diverse Australia and enjoy the
idea meant overturning a lot of received wisdom.
The notion that we were a country without history, for
instance. It meant recognising that, far from lacking history and
culture, we were the beneficiaries of an extraordinary
heritage: that settlers in Australia, whether they
arrived from Great Britain and Ireland in the nineteenth
century, or Europe, or the Middle East or Asia in the
twentieth century no settlers in this country ever
entirely left their culture behind.
To recognise that was to recognise the depth of our
history and heritage.
And in the last twenty years we have recognised it.
Essentially, I think that is what multiculturalism means.
We have recognised that from new settlers we can derive
more than raw energy, skills and ambition there is a
cultural dividend.
In recent years we have also come to the realisation that
it is our great good fortune to share in the magnificent
heritage of the oldest civilisation on earth.
These are watersheds in our cultural development.
It has been truly a sea change the tide of our national
consciousness has turned.
And nothing, it seems to me, has done more to free us
from our insecurities.
Yet recognising the great wealth of culture we have
inherited cannot obscure or deny the fact that culture is
built in large part on the experience of the last two
hundred years of living in this continent.
Our traditions are still firmly fixed in that experience,
and they remain alive in our art and literature and film. 
3
That is a heritage which we must preserve, a set of
recognisably Australian values which must continue to
inform the creative life of the nation.
That these intangible things are powerful forces in the
national life might be measured by the inclination of
Australians to watch Australian television shows, or read
Australian books.
You might see it in the huge success of the Golden
Summers exhibition a few years ago, or films like
Strictly Ballroom, or at another level the impact
which the Entombment of the Unknown Australian Soldier
had on the nation last year.
Australians do still read Henry Lawson and Banjo
Paterson.
They do still look at Streeton and Roberts.
They still love them.
But these days they know there is so much more in the
cupboard.
And what is so encouraging these days is the new
confidence the unashamed enthusiasm.
It distinguishes some of those recent films.
It was there in some of the acts I have seen yesterday
and today.
It is there in the reviews the Australian Ballet just
received in Washington.
I wouldn't want to pretend to argue the finer points of
dance technique with Clive Barnes.
I am very pleased that he finds them technically in the
forefront of the world's ballet companies.
I like that, but I love it when he says that they have " a
very real spirit, an individuality that is fresh and open
and quite original.
It is the sort of energy and open freshness that people
associate with Australia itself."
I find myself pleased to hear Clive Barnes approving of
our dancers and absolutely delighted to think that our
dancers might convey to the world the message that there
is a great optimistic spirit at large in Australia.
The first is satisfying, the second is moving. 
4
Creative Nation does not attempt to impose a cultural
landscape on Australia but to respond to one which is
already in bloom.
I hope that in time this statement will be seen as the
day we drew a line under our post-colonial era and said
good-bye to it.
I don't think we should look back in anger to the
generations who conducted the cultural debate in that
era.
We've come by stages to where we are and a lot of
cultural wealth has come with us.
We may even be a lot wiser for having been through the
cringe, and even censorship.
Just the same, as the statement says, today I hope we are
also saying a final goodbye to all those manifestations
of cultural insecurity including cultural jingoism.
And goodbye forever to the days when our best talents
left Australia because there was not enough here to
persuade them to stay.
The statement is not about looking back.
It is very much an attempt to lay the foundations of a
new era: to pull the threads of our national life
together, so that we can ride the waves of global change
and create our own.
I've said elsewhere that as a government our great
ambition has been to bring cultural issues into the
mainstream of our national life, and national decisionmaking.
That's why, for instance, we brought the arts into the
Cabinet, and subsequently combined the arts with the
Department of Communications.
We emphatically believe that cultural issues should be at
the core.
on the one hand, this is because no economic or social
decision is without a cultural consequence.
The quality of our lives, the opportunities for self
expression, the integrity of our heritage cannot be left
to chance.
They can no longer be the last consideration.
That, it seems to me, is one of the responsibilities of a
mature country and one of the imperatives in this era
of globalisation and the information revolution. 
On the other hand, we are putting cultural issues at the
centre because the more we succeed in encouraging a
creative spirit and the flow of creative ideas, the more
we will succeed as an economy and society.
There are huge economic benefits to flow from a confident
and secure, innovative and imaginative culture.
And direct social benefits direct national benefits.
There are still a few people who believe that culture
belongs on the margins.
We take this opportunity to say that they are wrong.
This statement does not cover every element in our
national life.
It does not go to every city and every community.
But we hope it signals our intention.
It is a national policy.
It will have a national effect a national benefit.
The statement aims at excellence at creating the
conditions in which Australian talent can reach the
highest standards and Australians can ejy the highest
standards.
No cultural policy could aim at anything less.
The statement is also concerned with access at making
our arts and heritage accessible to everyone.
We aim to do this through partnerships with State and
other levels of government and through private
benefaction wherever possible.
As an example of the pursuit of excellence we are
creating with the Victorian Government a National Academy
of Music in Melbourne.
A school of music of the highest standards for students
from Australia and overseas.
With the Queensland Government we are establishing the
National Indigenous Performing Arts Institute, a centre
of excellence to preserve and foster Australia's unique
indigenous art forms and heritage.
Here in Canberra, in association with the ACT government,
the Gallery of Aboriginal Australia will be established
on the Acton Peninsula on the shores of Lake Burley
Griffin. 
6
The Gallery will be co-located with new premises for the
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Studies.
I should here pay tribute to Rosemary Follett for her
initiative and vision, and not just so far as the Gallery
of Aboriginal Australia is concerned.
Here at the NGA, the ACT governent will partner the
Commonwealth in the construction of a purpose-built
exhibition space to house major national and
international exhibitions.
In the pursuit of both excellence and access to it, we
will continue to develop the National Museum in ways
which will enable maximum public access to the nation's
cultural heritage, through a combination of touring and
use of new multimedia.
New museum gateways are being developed at Old Parliament
House Canberra, and Sydney Customs House.
In time I hope the National Museum will be an umbrella
organisation which provides access to the holdings of all
our national collecting institutions.
The National Sound and Film Archive is the repository for
much of Australia's audio visual history and therefore a
unique and valuable history of the evolvement of
century Australia.
The premises which the Archives currently occupies do not
provide an adequate facility from which these treasures
can be viewed or heard by large numbers of visitors.
We will rectify the difficulty that the archives
presently faces of a shortage of exhibition, display and
laboratory space.
In Melbourne the Australian Cultural Foundation will be
established to gather more effectively into the cultural
development of Australia the humanities and social
sciences.
To give the Foundation a firm base from which to start it
will operate as part of the Australia Council, at the
same time providing the Council with a Melbourne
presence. The Australia Council continues to be pivotal in the
nation's artistic life and cultural development.
It has played a crucial role in our reaching the levels
of excellence and wide participation in the arts we
currently enjoy.
Important though it is, it cannot however continue to be
merely a grant giving body. 
7
The Commonwealth believes that the Australia Council must
now spend more of its resources in audience development,
creating linkages with new broadcasting technologies,
market development here and abroad and in stimulating
more participation in the arts from the private sector.
The Government is confident the Council is determined to
take up the challenge but recognises it cannot hope to
succeed without additional funds.
We want a Council which continues to do the things it
presently does so well: so we are providing an increase
in base Council funding of $ 18 million over four years,
particularly to assist individual artists.
This will also help to meet the cost of increased wage
obligations caused by a recent arbitrated wage increase
for actors and dancers.
But we want it to do more and that is why, among other
things, we are introducing triennial funding, and a new
major organisations board.
We have long recognised the need for the Council and its
clients to operate in an atmosphere of stability and
predictability so that they may undertake better forward
planning in the same way as any other business enterprise
does. The Council has already done some preliminary work to
identify organisations which will be funded through the
new board, and I expect that they will be announced
shortly. The Government continues to believe adamantly in the
principles of peer assessment and arms length funding-so
it will not be intervening in the selection process,
though the Minister will be consulted.
However, it is reasonable to expect that two
organisations which will become part of the MOB are the
Australian Chamber Orchestra and the Sydney Symphony
Orchestra. The ACO is an orchestra of international quality, and a
world leader in its field.
The Sydney Symphony Orchestra, we also believe has the
potential to be one of the great international
orchestras. In keeping with other truly great orchestras, the SSO
will be allowed to operate under its own local control
allowed to draw on the resources, enthusiasm and
character of Sydney. 
8
The Commonwealth will maintain its funding in real terms,
but through the Major Organisations Board of the
Australia Council, rather than the ABC.
The Government will also be providing additional
assistance to augment the Orchestra to full international
size and enable it to enhance its current touring and
recording program.
By agreement, the Orchestra will also maintain
facilitational and media linkages with the ABC.
We have begun with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra.
The way is open, however, for the other orchestras to
follow if they wish.
If these initiatives are taken in the pursuit of
excellence, several others announced in this policy will
create access to excellence in music for many thousands
of Australians.
There are extra funds provided for Musica Viva's schools
program enabling it to tour Australia wide.
We are also providing extra funds for opera on tour.
In another initiative, calculated to join music to our
national life, I am pleased to announce today the
Commonwealth will provide a prize of $ 100,000 for an
original symphony to commemorate the centenary of our
nationhood in the year 2001.
Film and television production constitute another great
success story of our recent history.
No other medium, perhaps, offers ordinary Australians
such insights and access to the national character,
heritage and identity.
And no other medium carries the image of Australia so
pervasively abroad.
The film and television industry is a vital resource, an
essential element of the national culture.
Australians have demonstrated their desire to see more
Australian product on screen, and Australian producers
have amply demonstrated their capacity to deliver quality
programs, provided funds are available.
Therefore, the Government will establish a special
Television Production Fund providing $ 20 million per
annum for three years from the next financial year. 
The Fund, which will be located in Melbourne, will
support the production of Australian drama, children's
programs, documentaries and the developing and marketing
and multimedia applications.
It is aimed expressly at the quality end of the film and
television market.
At least 50 per cent of the Fund will be available to
independent producers, the balance will go to the
networks for in-house productions.
And productions financed from this Fund will not count
towards existing Australian content quota requirements.
SBS too has suffered from a shortage of production funds
and has had to rely increasingly on overseas material
which does not of itself reflect the Australian
multicultural community.
The Government, therefore, will provide $ 13 million over
four years to SBS to commission high quality Australian
programs. This will enable SBS to utilise the language skills base
of contemporary Australian society and make programs for
sale into Asian and European markets.
I am also pleased to announce today that after
negotiations with the Commonwealth Government and subject
to the settlement of some final details, The News
Corporation Limited and its film production company,
Century Fox, have agreed to establish a movie studio in
Australia to produce major international length feature
films. The establishment of the studio offers large potential
benefits to Australia.
With distributional links through Fox and other world
distributors, Australia can become a larger part of the
world trade in entertainment, while establishing itself
as a hub for content in the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific
markets. Linkages with internationally integrated multimedia
companies will also help Australia become a greater
participant in the burgeoning markets for content that
will be carried over the world's information highways.
The planned facility will include three sophisticated
sound stages equal to any in the world, with all the
associated pre and post production facilities.
The studios will be available to independent Australian
film makers and are expected to attract independent
production companies from overseas. 
S-*
The Commonwealth Goverrnent and 20th Century Fox have
discussed locations for the studio in Sydney and believe
the Showground site to be the most suitable this, of
course, is a matter for discussion with the
government. The Commonwealth will assist with site preparation and
development. Our cultural policy directly addresses the challenges
which confront Australia in realms of information
technology and multimedia.
It was in recognition of these challenges that the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts were combined.
The move was made to deal with the convergence of
broadcasting, telecommunications, computing and creative
industries and technologies.
It is true that we have in Australia one of the more
advanced telecommunications networks in the world, and
there has been substantial investment in our information
highway. Australians will have access to the interactive
multimedia which is already changing our lives and
creating extraordinary new possibilities in education,
the arts and information; the way we learn; the way we do
business. In 1993 the Commonwealth established the Broadband
Services Expert Group to report on the implications for
Australia of developments in multimedia and broadband
services.
The group nominated content as the critical issue for-
Australia. Indeed Australia has the opportunity to become a world
leader in the production of content.
We can, for instance, if we move rapidly, gain a
significant share of the CD-ROM market.
In the longer term though not very much longer we can
create a dynamic multimedia industry in Australia.
our strengths in film and television, literature, music
and art, in combination with our highly educated
population, give us an excellent platform on which to
build.
Multimedia thus creates the potential for expanding our
cultural industries.
It provides new opportunities for people especially
young people with creative talent. 
So that we can take full advantage of the opportunities
open to us, and guarantee that we enter the 21st century
in the front rank of nations, the Government has
announced in the cultural policy five specific and
complementary measures costing $ 84 million over a five
year period.
We will establish a coordinating body known as the
Australian Multimedia Enterprise; several Multimedia
Development Centres; and a series of national Multimedia
Forums.
We will also be commissioning CD-ROMS involving material
from our major cultural institutions for Australian
schools.
And we will provide specific assistance to foster our
film agencies move into multimedia.
If we are to rely on talented Australians using their
imagination and creativity to provide us with the content
for new media, we have to ensure that they get a fair
return for their efforts.
You will find in the document a range of measures that
we've taken to protect the intellectual property of our
content providers.
As this launch is taking place in the National Gallery,
it is particularly appropriate to mention one of them
the Government will be providing $ 1 million to assist
with the setting up of Viscopy a copyright collecting
agency for the visual arts.
This copyright society will ensure that artists,
including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artist&amp;,
whose work is particularly prone to unauthorised use,
will obtain a proper financial return for the use of
their work.
With the growing ability to reproduce visual images
through digitised technology, an increasing source of
income for our artists will be the fees collected from
such reproduction.
This policy has taken some time to formulate.
That is no bad thing.
We think it will boost the quality of Australian life now
and in the future.
It will boost the creative element in our national life.
It will create new cultural industries.
It will mean more work and opportunities for Australian
artists, writers and other creative people. 
12
It will make us a more cohesive country.
It will enrich us for years to come.
I hope it will be seen as a landmark a moment which we
confirmed our faith in the life we have built here, and
our ability to meet the challenges which the future
holds. In the preparation, many people deserve our thanks.
Not least among them was the Cultural Advisory Panel we
appointed and who provided, in a sense, the kernel of the
Statement. It has grown like Topsy since but their report was an
essential starting point, and I thank them for their
efforts and wisdom.
I must also thank the three Ministers who preceded
Michael Lee David Simmons, Wendy Fatin and Bob
McMullan.
And I must thank Michael for his contribution.
Many Australians contributed to the formulation of the
policy through the submissions they made to the
Government, and through their attendance at public
forums.
There are many others.
Most of all I want to thank the creative artists of
Australia and I mean all of them, from the stars and
the major organisations to the people in communities all
over Australia who engage in works which enrich theirlives
and countless others.
This cultural policy of necessity has addressed some of
the great questions now facing Australia.
And, by and large, that is what I have addressed in this
speech today.
But you will find there is a good deal in this policy for
all those engaged in the creative life of the country a
good deal I truly believe for all Australians.
With this policy we have set out to devise a better
creative climate in Australia.
With it we recognise the value of creative effort and
what it means to our future.
We are spending $ 252 million to build the infrastructure,
boost the funds, create the industries which will employ
and reward creative effort. 
This statement goes a long way towards bringing culture
and creativity into the mainstream.
The opportunities will be there in the future. The
openings will be there for talent and industry.
It will be a new environment, and one in which success
will depend less on governments and more on the creative
initiatives of Australians.
We will all be richer for the effort all so much more
aware of what it means to be Australian.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPCOMMON
WEALTH CULTURAL POLICY LAUNCH
TUESDAY 18 OCTOBER
This is a very great pleasure.
No government has ever delivered a national cultural
policy for Australia on anything like these dimensions.
I'm not sure many national governments in other countries
have delivered cultural statements.
The Americans are in the process of formulating one at
the moment for delivery towards the end of the century,
I understand.
We need this statement.
As the document says, it is long overdue.
We have had a cultural debate running in this country for
a very long time.
Our post-colonial status guaranteed that there would be a
lot of questions asked about who we are, what level of
culture we might reasonably aspire to, whether we should
be transplanting European culture or fostering an
indigenous one, what the worth of such a strange hybrid
would be.
These arguments run right through our history in this
century.
At the extremes it was " evening dress and the opera,,
versus the " wattle and bottle".
Anglophilia and Anglophobia.
The debate tended to lurch between the cultural cringe
and cultural swagger.
It has taken us a long while to find what Robert Hughes
recently called " a relaxed uprightness of carriage."
The two extremes don't make much sense. 
Both are narrow, both inclined to xenophobia.
And both fatally missed the point that our development
was bound to reflect the accumulation of cultures which
of necessity an immigrant society creates and that from
such variety great riches flow.
The simplest truths can be the hardest to grasp.
The idea that a cosmopolitan Australia might be a
worthwhile aspiration and not a nightmare was a long time
coming. To imagine a culturally diverse Australia and enjoy the
idea meant overturning a lot of received wisdom.
The notion that we were a country without history, for
instance. It meant recognising that, far from lacking history and
culture, we were the beneficiaries of an extraordinary
heritage: that settlers in Australia, whether they
arrived from Great Britain and Ireland in the nineteenth
century, or Europe, or the Middle East or Asia in the
twentieth century no settlers in this country ever
entirely left their culture behind.
To recognise that was to recognise the depth of our
history and heritage.
And in the last twenty years we have recognised it.
Essentially, I think that is what multiculturalism means.
We have recognised that from new settlers we can derive
more than raw energy, skills and ambition there is a
cultural dividend.
In recent years we have also come to the realisation that
it is our great good fortune to share in the magnificent
heritage of the oldest civilisation on earth.
These are watersheds in our cultural development.
It has been truly a sea change the tide of our national
consciousness has turned.
And nothing, it seems to me, has done more to free us
from our insecurities.
Yet recognising the great wealth of culture we have
inherited cannot obscure or deny the fact that culture is
built in large part on the experience of the last two
hundred years of living in this continent.
Our traditions are still firmly fixed in that experience,
and they remain alive in our art and literature and film. 
That is a heritage which we must preserve, a set of
recognisably Australian values which must continue to
inform the creative life of the nation.
That these intangible things are powerful forces in the
national life might be measured by the inclination of
Australians to watch Australian television shows, or read
Australian books.
You might see it in the huge success of the Golden
Summers exhibition a few years ago, or films like
Strictly Ballroom, or at another level the impact
which the Entombment of the Unknown Australian Soldier
had on the nation last year.
Australians do still read Henry Lawson and Banjo
Paterson.
They do still look at Streeton and Roberts.
They still love them.
But these days they know there is so much more in the
cupboard. And what is so encouraging these days is the new
confidence the unashamed enthusiasm.
It distinguishes some of those recent films.
It was there in some of the acts I have seen yesterday
and today.
It is there in the reviews the Australian Ballet just
received in Washington.
I wouldn't want to pretend to argue the finer points ofdance
technique with Clive Barnes.
I am very pleased that he finds them technically in the
forefront of the world's ballet companies.
I like that, but I love it when he says that they have " a
very real spirit, an individuality that is fresh and open
and quite original.
It is the sort of energy and open freshness that people
associate with Australia itself."
I find myself pleased to hear Clive Barnes approving of
our dancers and absolutely delighted to think that our
dancers might convey to the world the message that there
is a great optimistic spirit at large in Australia.
The first is satisfying, the second is moving. 
4
Creative Nation does not attempt to impose a cultural
landscape on Australia but to respond to one which is
already in bloom.
I hope that in time this statement will be seen as the
day we drew a line under our post-colonial era and said
good-bye to it.
I don't think we should look back in anger to the
generations who conducted the cultural debate in that
era. We've come by stages to where we are and a lot of
cultural wealth has come with us.
We may even be a lot wiser for having been through the
cringe, and even censorship.
Just the same, as the statement says, today I hope we are
also saying a final goodbye to all those manifestations
of cultural insecurity including cultural jingoism.
And goodbye forever to the days when our best talents
left Australia because there was not enough here to
persuade them to stay.
The statement is not about looking back.
It is very much an attempt to lay the foundations of a
new era: to pull the threads of our national life
together, so that we can ride the waves of global change
and create our own.
I've said elsewhere that as a government our great
ambition has been to bring cultural issues into the
mainstream of our national life, and national decisionmaking.
That's why, for instance, we brought the arts into the
Cabinet, and subsequently combined the arts with the
Department of Communications.
We emphatically believe that cultural issues should be at
the core.
On the one hand, this is because no economic or social
decision is without a cultural consequence.
The quality of our lives, the opportunities for self
expression, the integrity of our heritage cannot be left
to chance.
They can no longer be the last consideration.
That, it seems to me, is one of the responsibilities of a
mature country and one of the imperatives in this era
of globalisation and the information revolution. 
On the other hand, we are putting cultural issues at the
centre because the more we succeed in encouraging a
creative spirit and the flow of creative ideas, the more
we will succeed as an economy and society.
There are huge economic benefits to flow from a confident
and secure, innovative and imaginative culture.
And direct social benefits direct national benefits.
There are still a few people who believe that culture
belongs on the margins.
We take this opportunity to say that they are wrong.
This statement does not cover every element in our
national life.
It does not go to every city and every community.
But we hope it signals our intention.
It is a national policy.
It will have a national effect a national benefit.
The statement aims at excellence at creating the
conditions in which Australian talent can reach the
highest standards and Australians can njy the highest
standards. No cultural policy could aim at anything less.
The statement is also concerned with access at making
our arts and heritage accessible to everyone.
We aim to do this through partnerships with State and
other levels of government and through private
benefaction wherever possible.
As an example of the pursuit of excellence we are
creating with the Victorian Government a National Academy
of Music in Melbourne.
A school of music of the highest standards for students
from Australia and overseas.
With the Queensland Government we are establishing the
National Indigenous Performing Arts Institute, a centre
of excellence to preserve and foster Australia's unique
indigenous art forms and heritage.
Here in Canberra, in association with the ACT government,
the Gallery of Aboriginal Australia will be established
on the Acton Peninsula on the shores of Lake Burley
Griffin. 
The Gallery will be co-located with new premises for the
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Studies.
I should here pay tribute to Rosemary Follett for her
initiative and vision, and not just so far as the Gallery
of Aboriginal Australia is concerned.
Here at the NGA, the ACT government will partner the
Commonwealth in the construction of a purpose-built
exhibition space to house major national and
international exhibitions.
In the pursuit of both excellence and access to it, we
will continue to develop the National Museum in ways
which will enable maximum public access to the nation's
cultural heritage, through a combination of touring and
use of new multimedia.
New museum gateways are being developed at Old Parliament
House Canberra, and Sydney Customs House.
In time I hope the National Museum will be an umbrella
organisation which provides access to the holdings of all
our national collecting institutions.
The National Sound and Film Archive is the repository for
much of Australia's audio visual history and therefore a
unique and valuable history of the evolvement of
century Australia.
The premises which the Archives currently occupies do not
provide an adequate facility from which these treasures
can be viewed or heard by large numbers of visitors.
We will rectify the difficulty that the archives
presently faces of a shortage of exhibition, display and
laboratory space.
In Melbourne the Australian Cultural Foundation will be
established to gather more effectively into the cultural
development of Australia the humanities and social
sciences.
To give the Foundation a firm base from which to start it
will operate as part of the Australia Council, at the
same time providing the Council with a Melbourne
presence. The Australia Council continues to be pivotal in the
nation's artistic life and cultural development.
It has played a crucial role in our reaching the levels
of excellence and wide participation in the arts we
currently enjoy.
Important though it is, it cannot however continue to be
merely a grant giving body. 
The Commonwealth believes that the Australia Council must
now spend more of its resources in audience development,
creating linkages with new broadcasting technologies,
market development here and abroad and in stimulating
more participation in the arts from the private sector.
The Government is confident the Council is determined to
take up the challenge but recognises it cannot hope to
succeed without additional funds.
We want a Council which continues to do the things it
presently does so well: so we are providing an increase
in base Council funding of $ 18 million over four years,
particularly to assist individual artists.
This will also help to meet the cost of increased wage
obligations caused by a recent arbitrated wage increase
for actors and dancers.
But we want it to do more and that is why, among other
things, we are introducing triennial funding, and a new
major organisations board.
We have long recognised the need for the Council and its
clients to operate in an atmosphere of stability and
predictability so that they may undertake better forward
planning in the same way as any other business enterprise
does.
The Council has already done some preliminary work to
identify organisations which will be funded through the
new board, and I expect that they will be announced
shortly. The Government continues to believe adamantly in the
principles of peer assessment and arms length funding so
it will not be intervening in the selection process,
though the Minister will be consulted.
However, it is reasonable to expect that two
organisations which will become part of the MOB are the
Australian Chamber Orchestra and the Sydney Symphony
Orchestra. The ACO is an orchestra of international quality, and a
world leader in its field.
The Sydney Symphony Orchestra, we also believe has the
potential to be one of the great international
orchestras. In keeping with other truly great orchestras, the SSO
will be allowed to operate under its own local control
allowed to draw on the resources, enthusiasm and
character of Sydney. 
The Commonwealth will maintain its funding in real terms,
but through the Major Organisations Board of the
Australia Council, rather than the ABC.
The Government will also be providing additional
assistance to augment the Orchestra to full international
size and enable it to enhance its current touring and
recording program.
By agreement, the Orchestra will also maintain
facilitational and media linkages with the ABC.
We have begun with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra.
The way is open, however, for the other orchestras to
follow if they wish.
If these initiatives are taken in the pursuit of
excellence, several others announced in this policy will
create access to excellence in music for many thousands
of Australians.
There are extra funds provided for Musica Viva's schools
program enabling it to tour Australia wide.
We are also providing extra funds for opera on tour.
In another initiative, calculated to join music to our
national life, I am pleased to announce today the
Commonwealth will provide a prize of $ 100,000 for an
original symphony to commemorate the centenary of our
nationhood in the year 2001.
Film and television production constitute another great
success story of our recent history.
No other medium, perhaps, offers ordinary Australians
such insights and access to the national character,
heritage and identity.
And no other medium carries the image of Australia so
pervasively abroad.
The film and television industry is a vital resource, an
essential element of the national culture.
Australians have demonstrated their desire to see more
Australian product on screen, and Australian producers
have amply demonstrated their capacity to deliver quality
programs, provided funds are available.
Therefore, the Government will establish a special
Television Production Fund providing $ 20 million per
annum for three years from the next financial year. 
9
The Fund, which will be located in Melbourne, will
support the production of Australian drama, children's
programs, documentaries and the developing and marketing
and multimedia applications.
It is aimed expressly at the quality end of the film and
television market.
At least 50 per cent of the Fund will be available to
independent producers, the balance will go to the
networks for in-house productions.
And productions financed from this Fund will not count
towards existing Australian content quota requirements.
SBS too has suffered from a shortage of production funds
and has had to rely increasingly on overseas material
which does not of itself reflect the Australian
multicultural community.
The Government, therefore, will provide $ 13 million over
four years to SBS to commission high quality Australian
programs. This will enable SBS to utilise the language skills base
of contemporary Australian society and make programs for
sale into Asian and European markets.
I am also pleased to announce today that after
negotiations with the Commonwealth Government and subject
to the settlement of some final details, The News
Corporation Limited and its film production company,
Century Fox, have agreed to establish a movie studio in
Australia to produce major international length feature
films.
The establishment of the studio offers large potential
benefits to Australia.
With distributional links through Fox and other world
distributors, Australia can become a larger part of the
world trade in entertainment, while establishing itself
as a hub for content in the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific
markets. Linkages with internationally integrated multimedia
companies will also help Australia become a greater
participant in the burgeoning markets for content that
will be carried over the world's information highways.
The planned facility will include three sophisticated
sound stages equal to any in the world, with all the
associated pre and post production facilities.
The studios will be available to independent Australian
film makers and are expected to attract independent
production companies from overseas. 
The Commonwealth Government and 20th Century Fox have
discussed locations for the studio in Sydney and believe
the Showground site to be the most suitable this, of
course, is a matter for discussion with the NSW
government. The Commonwealth will assist with site preparation and
development. Our cultural policy directly addresses the challenges
which confront Australia in realms of information
technology and multimedia.
It was in recognition of these challenges that the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts were combined.
The move was made to deal with the convergence of
broadcasting, telecommunications, computing and creative
industries and technologies.
It is true that we have in Australia one of the more
advanced telecommunications networks in the world, and
there has been substantial investment in our information
highway. Australians will have access to the interactive
multimedia which is already changing our lives and
creating extraordinary new possibilities in education,
the arts and information; the way we learn; the way we do
business. In 1993 the Commonwealth established the Broadband
Services Expert Group to report on the implications for
Australia of developments in multimedia and broadband
services. The group nominated content as the critical issue for-
Australia. Indeed Australia has the opportunity to become a world
leader in the production of content.
We can, for instance, if we move rapidly, gain a
significant share of the CD-ROM market.
In the longer term though not very much longer we can
create a dynamic multimedia industry in Australia.
Our strengths in film and television, literature, music
and art, in combination with our highly educated
population, give us an excellent platform on which to
build.
Multimedia thus creates the potential for expanding our
cultural industries.
It provides new opportunities for people especially
young people with creative talent. 
So that we can take full advantage of the opportunities
open to us, and guarantee that we enter the 21st century
in the front rank of nations, the Government has
announced in the cultural policy five specific and
complementary measures costing $ 84 million over a five
year period.
We will establish a coordinating body known as the
Australian Multimedia Enterprise; several Multimedia
Development Centres; and a series of national Multimedia
Forums.
We will also be commissioning CD-ROMS involving material
from our major cultural institutions for Australian
schools.
And we will provide specific assistance to foster our
film agencies move into multimedia.
If we are to rely on talented Australians using their
imagination and creativity to provide us with the content
for new media, we have to ensure that they get a fair
return for their efforts.
You will find in the document a range of measures that
we've taken to protect the intellectual property of our
content providers.
As this launch is taking place in the National Gallery,
it is particularly appropriate to mention one of them
the Government will be providing $ 1 million to assist
with the setting up of Viscopy a copyright collecting
agency for the visual arts.
This copyright society will ensure that artists,
including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists-,
whose work is particularly prone to unauthorised use,
will obtain a proper financial return for the use of
their work.
With the growing ability to reproduce visual images
through digitised technology, an increasing source of
income for our artists will be the fees collected from
such reproduction.
This policy has taken some time to formulate.
That is no bad thing.
We think it will boost the quality of Australian life now
and in the future.
It will boost the creative element in our national life.
It will create new cultural industries.
It will mean more work and opportunities for Australian
artists, writers and other creative people. 
12
It will make us a more cohesive country.
It will enrich us for years to come.
I hope it will be seen as a landmark a moment which we
confirmed our faith in the life we have built here, and
our ability to meet the challenges which the future
holds. In the preparation, many people deserve our thanks.
Not least among them was the Cultural Advisory Panel we
appointed and who provided, in a sense, the kernel of the
Statement. It has grown like Topsy since but their report was an
essential starting point, and I thank them for their
efforts and wisdom.
I must also thank the three Ministers who preceded
Michael Lee David Simmons, Wendy Fatin and Bob
McMullan. And I must thank Michael for his contribution.
Many Australians contributed to the formulation of the
policy through the submissions they made to the
Government, and through their attendance at public
forums.
There are many others.
Most of all I want to thank the creative artists of
Australia and I mean all of them, from the stars and
the major organisations to the people in communities all
over Australia who engage in works which enrich theirlives
and countless others.
This cultural policy of necessity has addressed some of
the great questions now facing Australia.
And, by and large, that is what I have addressed in this
speech today.
But you will find there is a good deal in this policy for
all those engaged in the creative life of the country a
good deal I truly believe for all Australians.
With this policy we have set out to devise a better
creative climate in Australia.
With it we recognise the value of creative effort and
what it means to our future.
We are spending $ 252 million to build the infrastructure,
boost the funds, create the industries which will employ
and reward creative effort. 
13
This statement goes a long way towards bringing culture
and creativity into the mainstream.
The opportunities will be there in the future. The
openings will be there for talent and industry.
It will be a new environment, and one in which success
will depend less on governments and more on the creative
initiatives of Australians.
We will all be richer for the effort all so much more
aware of what it means to be Australian.
ENDS 
ENT: 19-10-94 : 9: 23A : 6162754499--l
CREATIVE NATION ADDITIONAL OUTLAYS SUMMARY
TABLE 949595-96
$ rm 96-97
im-97-98
Australia Council
Increased Funding for Australia
Council Increase in base funding to the Australia
the greatly expanded arts industry
Major Organlsatlons
Board of Australia Council Council to enable It to support
2.0
Establishment of a Major Organisations Board which will provide stable
and predictable funding to major performing arts organisations
Commonwealth Support for the Arts
National Institute for Indigenous
Performing Arts Trainino0.45 5.2
Establishment of National Institute for Indigenous Performing Arts
Training
Regional Festivals
Support for regional festivals, including touring of high quality arts
activities
Musica Viva in Schools0.35 0.35
Extension of the Musica Viva in Schools program to Queensland, South
Australia, the Australia Capital Territory and the Northern Territory
5.3
SENT BY' 062715300:# 2 
~~ 19~ B-E1YN0:-T 9 4 9: 23AM 6162754499-6750;
-2-
National Ogera Touring
Consortium 1.15 1.85. 1.85 1.85
Additional funding for the Australian Opera and the Opera and Ballet
Orchestras and for the establishment of a national opera touring
consortium National Academy of Music
Performance 2.0 2.4 2.2 2.2
Establishment of a centre of training excellence for musicians of
outstanding talent
Enhancement of Sydney
Svmnih-ony Orchestra 0.0( a) 2.5 2.5
Transfer the Sydney Symphony Orchestra from the ABC to a local
management board and provide increased funding to enable its
enhancement to world standing
Educational Lending Rights
Scheme 0.15 0.3 1.0
Extension of Public Lending Right Scheme to educational libraries
National Gallery of Australia
Construction of a New Galler 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0
Construction of New Exhibition Gallery for travelling exhibitions
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting
Agny0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
Provision of seed funding for the establishment of a visual arts copyright
collecting agency
, SENT BY: 06271c300; 9 3 
SENT 5y: ; 19-1O-94 9: 23AM 6162754499-. 062715300; a 4
-3
Film, Television and Radio
SBS Production Fund4.04.0
Provision of funds to SBS for the production of multicultural drama and
documentary programs
Television Production Fund0.020.020.020.0
Establishment of a Television Production Fund to provide for additional
quality Australian content on commercial television, with international
export potential.
Multi Media
Australian Multi-Media Enterprises45.20.00.00.0
Funding for the creation of a multimedia product and services fund to
accelerate their development and comnmercialisation in Australia for
regional and global consumption
Interactive Multimedia Forums0.675 0.625 0.35
Funding for forums to bring together individuals, agencies and enterprises
from the cultural and multimedia industries
Cooperative Multimedia Development
Centres0.117 4.078 8.04
Funding for the development of a number of co-operative multimedia
centres for tertiary institutions and industry groups to work together on
research, development and marketing of multimedia product
Australia on CD Proaramn3.683.680.0
Production of a series of multimedia CD titles which display a wide range
of Australian cultural endeavour, artistic performance and heritage
subjects 8.04 0.0
' BY:; 19-10-94 9: 23AM 6162754499-052715300; 4 4 
SENT BY: 9~:; 241A9M-10-94 61527544Si-O675O; 5
-4-
Film Industry Participation in
New Media 1.08 2.18 2.08 2.08
Package of measures aimed at stimulating the development and
production of new media projects in the film industry as -well as targeting
training needs in the audio-visual sector.
Heritage Our Past and Our Future
Review of Commonwealth
Heritage Progertles 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.0
Establishment of a Committee of Review to examine the management of
Commonwealth owned heritage properties
Old Parliament House
Refurbishment 1.1 3.2 0.0 0.0
Provision of funding for the refurbishment of the Members' Dining Room
and Kings Hall
Old Parliament House
NFSA programs 0.5 0.15 0.15 0.15
Funding for National Film and Sound Archive ( NFSA) display and
outreach program at Old Parliament House
Gallery of Aboriginal Australia
and relocation of AIATSIS ( b)
Construction of a Gallery of Aboriginal Australia incorporating the National
Museum of Australia's indigenous collection, to be located at Acton
Peninsula and for the new accommodation for Australian Institute of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies at the same site
National Film and Sound Archive
Long Term Accommodation 0.0 8.0( a) 1.0( a)
Funding of for the development of long term accommodation for the
National Film and Sound Archive in Canberra
BY: 062715300;; 
ENT BY: ; 19-10-94 S: 24AM 6162754499-062715300; 6
Transfer Australia II to, and enhance,
WA Maritime Museum 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.2
Provision of additional resources to the Western Australian Maritime
Museum and for the return of Australia II to Fremantle
International Projection of Australian Culture
Visual Arts Tours Abroad 0.25 0.3 0.15 0.15
Elite Performance Tours Abroad 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9
Funding to enable elite performance and visual arts tours overseas.
Integrated Australian Promotions 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0
Funding will provide for an integrated campaign promoting Australian arts
and culture in specific overseas markets
TOTAL ($ 252.705m) 62.477 74.913 58.745 56.57
Notes: Indicative only. Actual outlays to be confirmed following further
consultations.
To be determined following discussions with the ACT Government,
ATSIC and AIATSIS. 


PRIIMNIES TESPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATLNG, MPPRESENTATION OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S EMPLOYER OF THEYEAR AWARD, PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, 19 OCTOBER1994. 1 welcome the opportunity to be with you today, for the presentation of thePrime Minister's Employer of the Year Awards.These awards help all of us communicate a very important message to theAustralian community.That message is about the economic and social benefits of employing peoplewith a disability. It is simple and uncontroversial, but we have to repeat it oftenbecause it is often ignored. It goes like this:To grow, as an economy and as a nation, we have to make the most ofall our resources, and this includes the talents and energies of peoplewith disabilities. We must ensure that everyone has an opportunity tocontribute and share in Australia's growth.This message under-pins our broad commitments on social justice and access andequity. It also meshes with the " Working Nation" agenda, outlined in the WhitePaper on Employment released in May this year.Through the Employer of the Year Awards we help to turn the message intoreality by acknowledging and supporting Australian employers who lead theway in encouraging and assisting people with a disability to join the workforce.We also recognise and demonstrate, practically, the significant contributionspeople with disabilities make.
2People with a disability have shown that they are willing and able to take up thechallenge of working in mainstream employment.People with a disability have proven they do bring special attributes to theworkplace, in terms of dedication to the job, low levels of absenteeism and staffturnover. In the right job, with the ight training and support, they offer as much as anyworker. People with a disability want, and have the right to, a fair go to compete in theopen labour market and employers need a skilled and reliable workforce.The Employer of the Year Awards recognise that once barriers to equalemployment opportunity are overcome, everyone employers, employees andthe community stands to benefit.Over 300 employers around Australia have been nominated for this year'sawards. This is a record number of nomdiations and shows the real advancesbeing made in human resource management practices by Australian businesses.It also shows our message is being received.The Awards have been part of the Government's wider process of reform indisability policy over the last ten years.By changing existing supports, and introducing new services, our reforms havehelped people with a disability to have many of the same opportunities toparticipate in the life and work of the community as anyone else. These areopportunities which many without a disability take for granted.The Disability Services Act of 1986 went a long way to address long-standingbarriers faced by Australians with disabilities.The Disability Reform Package brought fundamental improvements toassistance provided for people with a disability. This included the developmentof further measures to assist open and supported employment for people with adisability. A key feature is the linking of income support for people withdisabilities, with education, training and work opportunities.
Many of you will know of a more recent development, the Supported Wagesystem, which involves wages based on skills and productive capacity andincome supplementation through the Social Security system. This will allowemployers to employ people with a disability on a pro rata award wage, wherenecessary, and will greatly increase job opportunities for people with moresevere disabilities.The Disability Discrimination Act, which came into effect in 1993, makesdiscrimination on the grounds of disability unlawfiul, including in employmentsituations. Now, through work in developing an Australian Disability Strateg, we areembarking on a comprehensive and systematic effort to address barriers toaccess, equality and participation for people with a disability.The Strategy will provide a plan of action across Government programs tocomply with our own Disability Discrimination Act and the United NationsStandard Rules on the Equalisation of Opportunities for Persons withDisabilities. Under the Strategy equal opportunity goals for people with a disability will beset out and we will define ways to achieve them over the next ten years. A planof action has been developed covering Federal programs and responsibilities.We are also working with State and Territory Governments to develop anational Australian Disability Strategy for the next ten years.My colleague, Carmen Lawrence, as the Minister for Human Services, hasrecently announced the formation of the Australian Disability ConsultativeCouncil, to advise the Government on the development and implementation ofthe Strategy.In the Employment White Paper, we expanded the employment assistanceavailable to people with a disability through:a better access to labour market programs through the Job Compact;
S greater emphasis on individual case management with relevant casemanagers having a lighter case load and greater resources;more employment assistance through additional places in theCommonwealth Rehabilitation Service and Disability Services Program;andS ongoing funding for specialist psychiatric pilot units.Before I hand back to Dr Lawrence, I want to thank everyone who has helpedwith these awards.I would like to thank the ACTU, and the Australian Chamber of Commerce andIndustry, for their support. You are key players in this work.Finally, I would like to thank and congratulate all those employers present, andthe Awards finalists in particular, for their outstanding effort to ensure thatpeople with a disability have the rights, choices and opportunities that mostAustralians take for granted.Your efforts and these awards demonstrate the benefits of harnessing the skillsand abilities of people with a disability.In this way we are all contributing to building a fairer and better Australia.



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO MTIA ANNUAL DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, TUESDAY, 24 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Let me thank the Association very much for this invitation and Graham for
those words of introduction. I have always liked coming to MVTIA dinners. I
have been doing it now, on and off, since the early 1970s which is probably
too long, but there it is. But the fact is, I have always believed in the
Australian manufacturing industry. I have always believed in the capacity of
Australian managers to take up challenges and do well. And, as you know, in
my own family we were in the heavy engineering business and I've had, from
boyhood, a fairly unique opportunity to understand how innovative Australian
companies can be and how hard they try. So, as a consequence, I am very
gratified by the success which the industry has had in recent years by its
leadership and by its confidence and I am delighted to see the title of the
program " A Dynamic Year for Australia'' and the sense of confidence which
Graham mentioned in his introductory remarks.
One of the nicest compliments I have been paid in recent times was paid to
me by Bert Evans. Bert is a nice person and he does pay compliments, but
not that often to me. But he said look I'm a member of the 180 degree club.
And I said what's that Bert. He said well I'm one of the people that
believed in tariff protection, I'm now one of the people who believe that the
policies introduced over the last decade have given us a future we could
never have had in the past. He didn't go on to say he is a true believe, but
he's a believer. And I thought this was a tremendous admission not just of
honesty and frankness, but of somebody who is prepared to see an
opportunity and grasp it and speak for an industry which has seen an
opportunity and grasped it. Because it is true and I think Bert would
acknowledge that if we were having this discussion, or a meeting such as this
years ago or even 10 years ago, the tariff drum would be well and truly
beaten. And doubters would be admonished. But the fact is, now, with tariffs
coming down, we've seen in the period since, manufacturing production
double, we've seen manufactured exports triple. And as a consequence, one 
of the things which is giving us a greater capacity to trade into the world and
to reduce our debt and to service it is our capacity to produce goods and
services. And that, of course, we are seeing very strongly with manufacturing
industry. Graham gave you the figures. In the middle 1980s we were
exporting 14 per cent of our GDP, that's today 22 per cent of our GDP. But
we only need to go through a change such as that, continue that change and
it won't be that long before we are well and truly above the ratio of
comparable countries. That is, somewhere between 22 and 30 per cent of
GDP. So we are well and truly on the way I think and we are seeing such
great sophistication come into manufacturing as the competitive breezes
have come into the economy, as the place has loosened up. As the
competitiveness has changed, as the wage profit share changes, as the focus
on productivity improved, as the exchange rate garnered competitiveness for
us, all of these things have seen tremendous change. And one gets a
tremendous, I think, boost of encouragement going to things like the launch of
the Collins Class Submarine: the quietest, most effective conventional
submarine in the world, made in this country. And when you look at the
sophistication of the weapon systems, one can't pretend that such a thing can
be whistled up out of nowhere, or that we claim it to be first class but it really
isn't. In fact, it is. And that, along with the capacity to produce frigates, and
other categories of naval vessels, sophisticated aeronautical products and
everything then from super computing to remote sensing and all of the other
technological things which we have managed to do, all proves, I think, that
given the challenge, Australian manufacturing can get in there and measure
up to it and also seeing what is coming. I mean, it is delightful for me to hear
references to APEC at a dinner such as this. Or to see the MTIA set up in
Indonesia, which it has, and to participate in the Australia Indonesia Today
exhibition which is on this year, the largest trade exhibition we've ever had.
To see the MTIA there and actually going hard at it does give one
tremendous confidence that we are actually going to do something pretty
clever in this country.
Now I took on board Graham's remarks about microeconomic reform and I
think microeconomic reform has to continue. A lot of it's behind us, but there
is still a lot of it ahead of us, in all sectors. But we shouldn't forget, I think,
that so much has been done in the labour market, even if more is to be done.
In telecommunications, in air transport. Just take air transport as an example.
Fares have declined by 30 per cent, passengers have risen by 80 per cent in
2 1/ 2 years. Or in telecommunications if one looks at the tariffs now in
telecommunications and the services it is a revolution we are seeing there.
We've seen it in the ports and wharves, the trouble is that the yeilds are not
going to the people who needs them, that is the shippers, they are staying in
the hands of stevedoring companies and state government bodies. But the
primary change is behind it and the Commonwealth Government this
government has paid for much of the redundancies and the trade union
movement has made most of the adjustments. We're now turning containers
around here, in this country, equivalent to ports like Rotterdam. We've got
lower than OECD crew manning levels on our ships and going lower, but we
are not yet seeing this in lower freight rates and we need to. 
But we need other changes too, and that is in places like power and water
and gas. And I notice the Leader of the Opposition saying to you today. He
said that ' four or five years ago, he thought of microeconomic reform' that's
me ' and would have told you that it was on the top of the Government's
agenda. Today he has almost completely forgotten about it.' Well I didn't
forget about it at the COAG meeting and I didn't forget about it trying to push
Hilmer past a whole lot of conservative Premiers and finding an uphill battle
all the way. And I have always thought it a great irony that a Labor Prime
Minister should be in there saying to a set of Liberal and National Party
Premiers to believe in competition and try and get them committed to it in
places like electricity, water and gas. I don't mind late converts providing
they come on board. But it is in these areas where the micro reform has to
continue. Graham also mentioned the labour market. And I think one needs to reflect
there upon the success we have had to date. And that is we've now got a
labour market which is much more supple and flexible than it has ever been.
We've moved off centralised wage fixing. We are now moving strongly down
the road of enterprise bargaining, particularly with certified agreements with
companies and trade unions. And we are opening up this field, the non-union
field, with enterprise flexibility agreements. Now I know that the recent
decision of the Commission rankles the MTIA and they are, I think, appealing
the decision about absorption into over award payments of payments in the
safety net. But importantly, I think the MTIA's position isn't that there
shouldn't be a safety net, they believe there should, but they don't want it
caught up in other agreements which are not certified. Well these are things I
think that a view is capable of being put upon. But we are told that of these
enterprise flexibility agreements, that is in areas where unions are not
involved but covered by federal award conditions, that they can be varied and
suspended and that, though some unions have opposed their suspension, of
the 12 so far proposed, only one has been rejected and there are another
or so in the pipeline likely to be approved. So I don't think that the MTIA
should shy away from enterprise flexibility agreements, even if some smaller
companies are at pains not to have unions involved. And the reason, I think,
why we have this condition that unions have a right to be heard, is because it
is the suspension of the award which is material to their interest in other
sectors or other companies within the same sector and hence, is of interest to
them.
At any rate these are things, which I think, in which time is going to tell. I
think the enterprise flexibility agreements are going to be an important field of
change for business and for the MTIA membership, as is indeed the larger
companies who actually make green fields agreements with trade unions
under the certified agreement area. At any rate, it's all light years from where
it was even half a dozen years ago. And, of course, eons from where it was
in the late 1 970s and the early 1 980s where we had 16 and 17 per cent
wages growth with no productivity cover. Just banging its way right in, 
hammering its way into the inflation rate and hammering its way into interest
rates, low growth and with it, of course, low employment.
Now I want to saying something tonight about monetary policy, interest rates,
and the budget because today was an important day with the adjustment of
interest rates up by 1 percentage point. I think the thing to say is that we
should draw confidence from today's decision. That is, confidence in two
things, that we are growing strongly but we are going to manage the growth
and that the interest rate rise is basically about smoothing the growth and
prolonging the period of growth. That is, prolonging the period of this
recovery right through the 1990s. Not letting it get to an explosive cocktail
where more drastic remedial surgery would otherwise need to be undertaken.
Now, I notice the Leader of the Opposition today has attacked us for this
saying that the Government has gone, he told you, on an extravagant
spending spree and as a consequence, they are ending up now with rising
interest rates. Well this is the same Opposition that told you when the
government introduced the One Nation package that we would destroy the
economy and that the 4 per cent growth forecast were fairyland stuff. Well it
is no accident that Australia has pulled the right policy levers in recent years.
It is no accident we have been right at the top of the OECD league table of
growth and inflation and employment. It is no accident that in that survey by
the Economist magazine each month, we are at the top of it and we have
been at the top of it now for the last 15 months or so. And that is because we
are growing in excess of 4 per cent or thereabouts and we are starting to see
a lot of attendant employment growth come through as well.
You need to have a bit of memory in this game, even a short term one helps.
But at the last budget when we said that our forecast for investment growth
was 14 1/ 2 per cent, that was ridiculed too. But now it is coming through,
everyone is saying well it's too strong what are you going to do about it?
Well the answer is we are trying to clear the decks so that investment can
continue, at the same time smooth it and make clear that the interest rate
adjustments which we have are ones which will, as I say, maintain the
recovery and make it even longer than it might otherwise be.
So the simple message is that we have worked so hard so far to bring about a
durable recovery, we are not going to throw it away now. At its core, this
decision to lift rates shows that the Government is determined to manage the
growth and manage it well. As I said earlier, we should draw confidence from
it. Now let me say this about the markets, because, I was just saying to Graham,
I think it is very important when commentators for industries such as the MVTIA
go onto radio or television, they should make the distinction between
business, the employing bodies of this country, and the financial markets.
Because a lot of people in the community think markets is business. In fact
markets are the financial markets, the people who shuffle the paper all day.
And the markets, I suppose, are entitled to be dubious about inflation in this 
country after many years of an indifferent inflationary performance. But as we
consolidate low inflation, markets should recognise the change and factor it
into the equation. Ours today is a low inflation economy, but you would never
know it from the bond rates. If you look at the bond rates, they appear to be
factoring in an inflation rate 5 or 6 per cent. That is, with bond rates over
per cent and real interest rate of 4, gets you back to an inflation rate of 5 or 6.
Now I don't think there would be a person in this room in business that
believes there are wage or price pressures out there that would give support
to that 5 or 6 per cent assessment yet it is there. It is there in many other
countries too, but it's here and it shouldn't be. So it's 5 or 6 per cent, when
the underlying rate of inflation is 2. And this week we will have another
consumer price index out and we will have a further indication of whether
inflation is getting away. I don't think it is. But to be considering 5 or 6 in the
face of 2 is a very long bow on the part of the markets indeed.
We have become a low inflation economy and we should draw credits for that
and it should be reflected in lower premiums. So, at some point, if we
continue to churn out low inflation numbers the markets are going to have to
cut their cloth accordingly. That is, the bond yields will have to come down if
their implicit inflation forecast is not realised.
Some commentators are saying that we should tighten both fiscal and
monetary policy as the economy strengthens, that we should not rely
excessively on monetary policy. Well, let me say, I couldn't agree more, but
let's get clear what this means. It doesn't mean that we need to change the
budget every time we hear a piece of good economic news and it doesn't
mean interest rates have risen because fiscal policy is not tight enough. As
the Governor of the Reserve Bank said last week, interest rates are there
now to smooth the recovery. As I said earlier, to prolong it. They are not
there because of pressures on the supply of money. The higher rates are
there basically to have their effect upon activity.
So, as I say, it doesn't mean interest rates have risen because fiscal policy is
not tight enough. What it does mean is that the fiscal stimulus we provided to
get the recovery going should be progressively withdrawn as economic
activity strengthens. And, that is precisely what our medium term fiscal
strategy does and the deficit target of 1 per cent of GDP by 1996/ 97 is at the
core of it. So, monetary policy will play its role, but fiscal policy has that
medium term strategy.
If economic circumstances change fundamentally, sound economic
management dictates fiscal policy may need to be modified, but the important
thing is that is not the case now. The economic outlook has not changed
significantly from our May forecast when we framed the ' Working Nation'
initiatives and reaffirmed our program of fiscal consolidation. We therefore
do not intend to bring down a mini budget or to adjust the current fiscal
strategy as the Opposition and some financial commentators have been
demanding. 
We will review policy in the context of next year's budget, but at this stage
there does not appear to be a case for a large change. Now, let me just
briefly explain why. We are already tightening fiscal policy, not that we are
getting much credit for it. Some people conveniently forget the 1993/ 94
Budget. They conveniently forget all the hijinx in the Senate. They
conveniently forget all the attempts to try and stop the tax changes and tax
bills going through. They forget the fact that in that Budget we announced we
would be pulling a massive $ 9 billion out of the economy by 1996/ 97 $ 9,000
million out by 1996/ 97. That is, we were prepared on a discretionary basis to
cut $ 9 billion from the economy to pull the budget deficit back by almost 2 per
cent of GDP. That is in world terms an absolutely enormous cut. And, it is
not $ 9 billion that will be coming from higher growth. This is not $ 9 billion
coming in from the proceeds of activity. That is, more people in employment,
higher company profits, more tax receipts, $ 9 billion coming from there. This
is a discretionary $ 9 billion $ 9 billion which has been decided on by the
Government. But, when you tell that to the deficit daleks and the others what response do
you get? ' Oh well, we know about that, we have stuck that in our pocket, now
what about the next $ 9 billion?" Well, of course, they never tell you how to do
it, they just tell you you need to change it and, of course, most of these
people are tired retainers on the old broadsheets they have been there for
years singing the same tune that is, no deficit could be too little, no surplus
too large regardless of the economic circumstances. These are the same
people who said our growth and deficit reduction forecasts were
unachievable. You see, there is a great injustice in public comment in this
country, probably in most countries, but it is particularly true in this that they
are never accountable. So, if you drag these people like Max Walsh and
Paddy McGuiness and Terry McRann and all these other characters back
and say ' but what did you say at the time?'. They said that growth was
unachievable and the deficit reduction forecasts were unachievable. That is
all wrong. They have all been proved wrong, but they have now moved on
hoping that the community forgets what they said in the first place. Well, the
community probably does, but I don't. I tend to keep an eye on them. It is
pretty easy to keep an eye on them, they have been in the same place for
years. Well, what are we to do? Remember this, the public sector of Australia is the
third lowest in the OECD. This Labor Government has turned a relatively
large public sector into a small one. Are we to slash the social welfare
system that is carefully targeted? That is recognised internationally as
equitable and effective and holds our nation together. Are we to increase the
rate of company tax when we have, at last, a rate that is comparable to our
Asian neighbours? Just remember this, that the tariff cuts, the cost to
revenue from the tariff cuts and the company tax changes of 1993, cost the
budget $ 12 billion and the tariff cuts and the company tax changes cost us
about $ 5 billion every year. So, what do we do? Put them back up? Rebuild
the tariff wall? Jack up the company tax rates or increase the personal
income tax rates? Is there anyone out there looking for something higher 
than 47 per cent? Because that is one of the options that people speak of.
Or, are we to scrap the tax concessions for superannuation that encourages
Australians to provide for their own future or hop back into the long term
unemployed by knocking the White Paper changes out to leave a permanent
underclass buried away out there while the rest of us move on to prosperity.
Or, introduce a GST which was knocked over so comprehensively by the
public at the last election.
So, that is what these things are about. They are not jokes. Hopping into
spending in education or in TAFE or into universities or cutting back the
growth rate or cutting back, absolutely, payments to the aged or any of the
other targeted areas of family assistance, these are the sorts of things that
the Government, if accepting this advice, would have to do or stick up the tax
rates which I've just mentioned to you. So, the fact of the matter is that we
are maintaining fiscal consolidation at a pace appropriate to our economic
circumstances. Let me repeat that, appropriate to our economic
circumstances. The forecast deficit for 1994/ 95 is 2.5 per cent of GDP at a
time when unemployment is about 9.5 per cent. So, if you want a
comparison, the last time unemployment was 9.5 per cent, it was in 1984 and
the deficit was 4.1 per cent of GDP. Now, with the same unemployment rate,
it is 2.5 per cent. So, it demonstrates that, I mean if unemployment and the
need for the economy to grow and create jobs is an indicator here, it means
that the deficit is already substantially consolidated when compared with that
period. And, from 1993/ 94 to 1996/ 97 we will have cut the deficit by 2.5 per
centage points. That is pulling 1 per cent of GDP a year from it nearly
$ 5,000 million a year stimulus taking it out as we go along.
So, it is for that reason that we have received an appropriate
acknowledgment from the OECD which says that the Australian fiscal
consolidation is amongst the fastest in the world and our deficit reduction
target is only tougher, certainly tougher than all G7 member countries except
for Japan. So, I think, these things should be kept in some sensible
perspective. Let me say a couple of things about superannuation. When I became
Treasurer in 1983 we had $ 40 billion in super funds. As a result of the
Government's policies under the Accord with the ACTU and the
Government's superannuation guarantee charge we will see super funds
rising from $ 180 billion where they are today to around $ 350 billion by the
year 2000 $ 40 billion in 1983, $ 180 billion now, $ 350 billion by the year
2000. By the Year 2013 the guarantee will be adding two percentage points
of GDP to our national savings each year. It is difficult, I think, to overstate
the significance of this. It is a breathtaking reform and it is hardly surprising
that it has been acknowledged internationally as leading the world. We have
got, in fact, the World Bank imploring other countries to adopt a retirement
incomes policy similar to Australia and, again, the Economist Magazine said
recently that Europe would do well to consider our system as a way of dealing
with the budgetary impact of increasing pension costs for their aging
population. 
So, this is an enormous reform, one that the Government is very proud of and
one that complements fiscal policy and the adding to and the addition to
domestic savings in this country. The one, I might say, that our opponents do
not support because they want to go back to a superannuation system which
doesn't have a guarantee charge, where there is a contribution by each
employee in the country accessing their superannuation tax provisions, but
rather it being basically for those in the public sector and those in well off
private sector employment, but for the great mass of people they could only
get there by way of certain tax incentives and not under a specific charge.
Now, all of these things, I think, are important when one tries to look at the
totality of policy. So, perhaps let me conclude on these points and to say
this, that, I think, Australia has come an enormously long way in the last
dozen years or so. As Graham remarked earlier '. We are now exporting 22
per cent of our GDP instead of 14 per cent. The debt service ratio on our
debt that is the proportion of our exports that we commit to servicing our
national debt has fallen from 22 per cent to 11 per cent. So, our capacity to
service our on going debt has improved dramatically. That has come about
by greater exports and lower interest rates.
All this means, I think, is that we. continue to grow the Australian economy,
but again we want to see private sector investment move in there and we will
gradually withdraw the government stimulus as the private sector investment
comes in. But, we are not going to pull the rug out of the pace where the
whole thing collapses and, I think, this is one of the key points. While
monetary policy and interest rates will apply a proper supporting role in
smoothing the growth and extending the recovery period,
The Metal Trades Industry Association and its affiliates can play an even
greater role than they role they have played to date in growing out our
manufacturing base and going into exports, but there is just one point that I
might take issue with Graham about and that is, it is not simply microeconomic
reform that is slowing the growth. If you like, that is an inhibition to
a faster rate of growth in exports. One of these studies, done by McKinsey
and company recently, showed when they looked at the 700 exporters of
those with the fastest growing rate of exports in the categories of production
they found that they were not very different to thousands of other companies
the products weren't different, the structures of the companies were not
different, the balance sheets were not different it was just that one group
was enlightened and saw the opportunity and another group didn't. It
underlines what has always been a problem in Australia and that is a real
problem with entrepreneurship. That is, we are getting to the stage now were
in the period of an open economy and deregulation the good managers are
now climbing to the top, but we have been through three or four waves of
people on the way through.
Obviously, in the great body of companies there is a lot more potential there
that hasn't come out which has got nought to do with ports and wharves or 
telephones or anything else. It is just the fact is that they are happy to sit
here in Australia and work off the domestic economy, not understanding there
is a greater economy abroad. Now, we have got to tell them about that and, I
think, the Metal Trades Industry Association and its focus on Asia is one of
the key bodies in doing that and as a consequence more companies will be in
the business. If then we can help them with a more supple economy, better
micro-economic reform and the rest well then, we really are, I think, in there
for the long run.
So, don't mistake this point. There are very few, as Ralph Willis said last
week eloquently in the House of Representatives, there are very few
industrial countries that are anywhere near us at the moment in fiscal policy,
in growth, in employment, in cultural change so we shouldn't underestimate
our success, but it has been put there by a decade of hard work and change
and it is only by doing it together and, I think, this is one thing the MTIA does
well. It does talk to the trade unions, it talks to the government, it
understands there is a place for it in this society and it tries to work things
out. It is this sort of approach, I think, that pays results. In a consensus
economy you will always do better than one which is basically adversarial.
As I said, I always enjoy speaking to the MTIA. It is a body of substance, of
people who actually do things. To get out there and make things, go and flog
their wares around the world and there is always the objective test if you are
a manufacturer it either works or it doesn't. This tends to concentrate the
managerial mind on some of the other more esoteric areas of the public
debate and that is why, I think, speaking to an industry organisation certainly
beats the hell out of speaking to financial markets every day of the week.
Thank you again for inviting Annita and me along tonight and as I say, I have
been coming a long time now and I want to keep coming back. Arthur Calwell
said to me when I first came to Canberra he said ' you know the thing to do
after each election Paul, when the caucus meets be in it, because it is pretty
hard to be in the game if you are not there.' Well, I could just put a little
variation on the theme and say after each election at the Metal Trades
Industry Annual Dinner, I hope I am invited to speak, of course, as a Minister,
as Prime Minister and to see my party the great vehicle of Australian social
and economic reform chart the way to the end of the century. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ASIA LECTURE TO THE ASIA-AUSTRALIA INSTITUTE
BRISBANE, 26 OCTOBER 1994
I wanted to give this speech in Brisbane, and I wanted to give it to the Asia-
Australia Institute, because in their respective areas of government and
education Wayne Goss and Stephen Fitzgerald are showing the way forward
for Australia and its institutions in dealing with the region around us.
From the start, the Asia-Australia Institute has been working to bring together
the emerging leaders of the region from Government, business and
universities in order to shape the region and help to create an ' Asia
consciousness', not just to stand back and comment on developments.
Similarly, among our state Governments, Wayne Goss and his colleagues
have been pre-eminent among those working to strengthen ties with Asia and
the Pacific. They have had a strong sense of Queensland's place in the
economic life of the Asia-Pacific and have worked with business to build the
State's trade and investment links. Their active support for the teaching of
Asian languages in schools has had a nation-wide impact in time it will
have a profound influence.
So I am very pleased to be delivering the first Asia Lecture to have been held
by the Institute in Brisbane.
I am also very pleased that we have with us tonight Mr Huang Ju, the Mayor
of Shanghai, whom I had the pleasure of meeting when I was in China last
year. As evidence of the dynamism and ferment of economic growth in Asia
we could hardly have a better example than Shanghai.
My speech tonight will be about Australia's foreign policy and it will be about
the Asia Pacific.
Because, in a way which has never been true before in our country's history,
we are talking about the same thing.
I don't mean by this that Australia has no interests outside the region now, or
that we haven't been interested in Asia before. 
Our economic and cultural links with Europe and the United States, for
example, are very important to us.
The interests we have in preventing the spread of nuclear or chemical
weapons, or in supporting multilateral approaches to economic co-operation,
or in helping respond to humanitarian crises like Rwanda, are not confined by
regional boundaries.
Above all, the globalisation of the world economy makes it impossible for us
to ignore what is happening outside our region.
Nor am I claiming that Australia has not been involved in Asia before.
For the most part, our record of engagement is long and honourable, from our
support for Indonesian independence, through the establishment of the
Colombo Plan to the development of our great trading sinews with Japan and
later Korea, which helped to fuel literally the astonishing economic growth
in north Asia.
But that said, it is also true in a quite different way from the past a deeper,
more urgent and more intense way that Australia's economic, strategic and
political interests now coalesce in the region around us.
If we do not succeed in the Asia-Pacific, we succeed nowhere.
East Asia's economic explosion ranks with the end of the Cold War as one of
the defining developments of our time.
Beyond all other things, its consequences will shape the 21 st century for
Australia. In the twenty years from 1970, East Asia's share of world GDP rose from 12
per cent to 25 per cent.
At present, three of the world's ten largest economies are from the APEC
region. But by 2020 the World Bank estimates that seven of the top ten will
be APEC members. China, the United States and Japan in the top three
positions will be joined by Indonesia at five and Korea, Thailand and Taiwan.
By the year 2000, the APEC region will generate nearly 55 per cent of world
trade. These developments represent a profound shift in the balance of economic
power in the world from Europe to Asia, from the North to the South.
And it is an economic transformation which over the longer term will have
deep implications for strategic power as well.
Coming to terms with this change and taking full advantage of it represents
the single most important challenge for Australia in the 1990s. We need to
shape ourselves and our region to prepare for it. I 
We have no great and powerful patron in this. We have to make our own
way, in our own way.
In the past, it was possible for Australian governments and business people
dealing with Asia to take the policy equivalent of a five-day package tour to
Bali. But dabbling in Asia is no longer an option for Australia. Our engagement
with the region has to be uncompromising, unfailing, tenacious.
The task ahead requires a Government with a creative policy sense a sharp
awareness of the national interest and, indeed the national identity.
As I have often said, there is a cultural element at work in this confidence,
creativity an appropriate sense of national purpose and appropriate symbols
for it these are all part of the effort.
We will need to create abroad the structures and institutions which match the
new times, just as we have done at home.
This Government opened Australia up to the world.
We dismantled the ring fence of tariffs and foreign exchange controls
Australia had slumbered behind. We did it because we knew Australia did
not need to fear the world, and that we could prosper with competition.
The result of that succession of policy reforms has been dramatic. This
country is now far more integrated into the world economy.
Over the decade of reform, the ratio of our exports plus imports to GDP has
risen from 30 per cent to 40 percent. Australian equity abroad has grown
from around 3 percent of GDP in 1983 to almost 20 percent today.
The effective rate of industry protection in Australia is now about one-third of
what it was in the early 1980s and yet our exports now represent 22 per cent
of our GDP compared with less than 14 per cent in 1983.
Our exports to Asia have been booming, growing at a rate of 20 percent per
annum to the ASEAN countries and 12 percent to East Asia as a whole.
Three quarters of our exports now go to other APEC members.
But we also understand that just dismantling the barriers is not enough. All of
us government and business have to go out into the region and help to
shape it in ways which serve our interests.
And that is happening with a gathering momentum.
Our relations with the individual countries around us are in excellent shape. 
In Northeast Asia we have relationships of the highest importance. They are
grounded in economic complementarity but are growing well beyond that.
Japan remains overwhelmingly our largest trading partner and a country with
which our longstanding economic links are being matched increasingly by a
broad policy dialogue and partnership.
Japan is now going through fundamental change, both political and
economic. I am convinced from the discussions I had in Tokyo last month that the reform
process which is now reshaping the Japanese political system will have over
time a very positive impact on Japan's role in the region and the world.
Policy debate will become a much more important element of Japanese
politics. This will help nurture stronger political leadership with greater
initiative over the bureaucracy and a clearer sense of Japan's modern
international role.
Simultaneously, the Japanese economy is becoming more open and marketoriented.
Business is demanding economic reform and deregulation.
Consumers are taking advantage of wide-spread price discounting. The
economic integration of Japan with the rest of East Asia is proceeding apace.
Above all, there is a need for Japan to unleash some of its 157 trillion yen in
savings and to invest in itself, in the living standards of its own people.
Australia's relationship with the Republic of Korea is one of great potential.
Korea is now our third largest export market and may soon be our second.
In addition to a thriving bilateral trade relationship, Korea has been one of our
key partners in developing APEC and we have a security relationship dating
back to the Korean War.
I am looking forward to the opportunity to set new directions for future
cooperation when President Kim Young Sam visits Australia immediately after
the APEC leaders' meeting in November.
Our relations with China are deep and growing. China has more foreign
investment in Australia than in any other country a mark of the deep
complementarity in our relationship.
By some measurements, China is already the third largest economy in the
world. The World Bank expects it to be the largest within 25 years. Its
economy has been growing at an average of 9 per cent each year over the
past decade.
As China's economic weight grows, so will its military and political power.
If anything is inevitable about the 21st century, it is the growing weight and
influence of China in the region and the world. 
Australia has nothing to fear from this. We have been a firm supporter of
China's full integration into world and regional institutions. We regard it as
essential to engage China productively in the global economy.
But China's growth is nevertheless one of the great shifts to which the region
will have to adjust in the coming decades.
In Southeast Asia, our core relationship is with Indonesia. As I have said
many times, no country is more important to us.
The progress we have made in the past couple of years in broadening the
relationship is a matter of great satisfaction to me.
But we can do more. There is great potential for more Australian businesses
to establish themselves in Indonesia.
Neither Australia nor Indonesia has designs on the other and our strategic
interests in the broader region are similar. Our defence relations are growing
rapidly and I think they can be strengthened further.
We have deep and solid relationships with all the other ASEAN countries
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Brunei. Each of these
relationships has its own distinct strength, history and potential.
With Singapore, for example, we have a very close defence relationship
involving regular exercises and training.
And Prime Minister Goh and I have agreed to press ahead with building
strategic linkages between Australian and Singaporean companies operating
in third markets.
With Malaysia, we have an old and deep relationship, strengthened by the
fact that more than 100,000 Malaysians have studied and trained in Australia.
This is already having its impact in the business area.
Outside ASEAN but not for long Vietnam is a country of growing
importance to Australia. It is a strategically significant country with a resilient
hard-working population of 70 million and a strong national sense of purpose.
It will become a much more important influence as it becomes steadily more
integrated into the region.
For Australia, the island countries of the Pacific are an important part of the
Asia-Pacific too. In August, I chaired the 25th meeting of the South Pacific
Forum here in Brisbane. The emphasis at the meeting was on ways in which
we can address the pressing practical problems of sustainable development
in the area. I 
Papua New Guinea and the other countries of the South Pacific will continue
to deserve Australia's careful commitment as they confront the pressures of
development. New Zealand is a firm partner with Australia in the Pacific, as well as in
APEC. But beyond these bilateral links we need to create and sustain a multilateral
framework which can engage all the interests of the region.
Over the next few years the countries around the Pacific face a major
decision about what sort of region this should be whether its institutions and
structures should be focussed on East Asia or on the broader Asia Pacific.
The signs of this debate are evident on both sides of the Pacific and its
outcome will have a profound effect on Australia's future.
The growth of regionalism has been one of the great global trends since the
Cold War ended and ideological competition between East and West ceased
to be a determining influence on regional developments.
We have seen it at work in the expansion of the European Union, in the
speedy development of economic co-operation in Asia and Latin America, in
the creation of the ASEAN Regional Forum.
Regionalism should be a positive force, building on the common interests
between neighbours. But it can also have a darker side if it promotes the
emergence of competing and exclusive blocs.
My own very strong view is that the sort of region Australia wants to see, and
the sort of regional structures we need to encourage, are trans-Pacific.
This doesn't stem from any lack of comfort on my part with Australia's place in
Asia, but from my conviction that Australia and the western rim of the Pacific
all of us are better off in a region which is shaped by, and sustains, our
major economic and security linkages. And these remain heavily trans-
Pacific. Despite rapid growth in trade between Asian countries, trade and economic
links across the Pacific remain important to all of us in this region.
The United States remains Asia's single largest market, its major source of
capital and a vital supplier of technology.
One fifth of all East Asian trade is with the United States. And in 1992 the
United States accounted for more than a quarter of the total stock of foreign
direct investment in East Asia.
Because, despite the astonishing growth of some of the emerging economies,
the United States remains a formidable economic power. An economy of nine
thousand billion dollars growing at three per cent a year generates a lot more 
purchasing power than smaller economies growing at six to eight per cent a
year. The United States remains central to the region's security as well. Its
alliances with a number of regional countries, including Australia, are a vital
part of the regional security network and its capabilities provide strong reassurance
to the countries of the region that a balancing military presence is
available in the region in time of crisis.
At present we have a highly unusual situation in which the world's second
largest economy, Japan, is a strategic client of the world's largest economic
power, the United States. This is unprecedented historically. Try to imagine
Britain and Germany being in such a position early this century.
And all our interests those of the United States, Japan, Australia and the
other countries of the region are served by the preservation of this
relationship of strategic co-operation.
It is the core of US strategic engagement in the Western Pacific. It
legitimises Japan's defence role. And it removes the need for Japan to
acquire strategic capabilities.
Without the alliance, the pressure for Japan to throw off the constitutional
restraints on its defence posture would grow. The risk of regional instability
and a spiralling arms build-up would increase.
Australia strongly supports a more active international role for Japan. We
believe it has much to contribute to regional and international affairs.
I have said before that Australia regards it as an anomaly that the world's
second largest economy is not one of the permanent members of the UN
Security Council. But, as I have also said , it does not have to be " in uniform"
to perform this role.
These are some of the important economic and strategic reasons why I hope
we will continue to see the active engagement of the United States in the
region, and I believe we will.
But it is not pre-ordained.
The United States always has choices about its role in the world and where
and how it plays that role for example, the extent to which it focuses its
energies in the western hemisphere. We have seen it exercise such choices
in different ways in the course of this century.
Trade tensions between the United States and the North Asian economies
have the potential to fester and to attenuate the existing bonds across the
Pacific. Inevitably in an economy that size, a tension exists within the United States
between those who think that unilateral pressure is the best and easiest way 
to achieve trade results and those who see the broader virtues of a
multilateral approach.
This is where APEC fits in.
In the background to all my thinking about APEC has been a conviction that
the greatest danger to the economic dynamism which has been so important
to Australia's development and the region's, would be a fracturing of the post-
Cold War world into competing blocs.
By bringing both sides of the Pacific into a broader partnership, APEC offers
the best way of avoiding this sort of outcome.
It helps to lock in US economic and commercial interest in the region, which
in turn helps ensure US strategic engagement. It provides a framework to
help contain or manage competition between China, Japan and the United
States. And it gives the smaller countries of the region a greater say in the
nature and shape of the trading arrangements in the region.
It should be clear from what I have said that the last thing Australia wants is
for APEC to develop into a protectionist or inward-looking trade bloc. That is
just the sort of global outcome we think APEC can help to prevent.
But that does not mean, in my view, that APEC does not have an important
role to play in regional trade liberalisation in this part of the world.
So long as APEC's approach is GATT-consistent, and equally importantly
so long as it contributes to global trade liberalisation, it seems to me that, as
the weight of economic development in the world shifts towards Asia and the
Pacific, we have a responsibility to show that countries in this part of the
world can take a decisive step towards a free trade goal.
I am equally convinced that anything that we do inside APEC will have
beneficial consequences in bringing closer a new global trading round.
But it is not only in the area of trade liberalisation bringing down tariffs and
non-tariff barriers for goods and services that APEC is important.
It also has a very important role in trade facilitation that is helping to
eliminate administrative and other impediments to trade and investment in the
region. Indeed, matters like the harmonisation of product standards and certification
arrangements, which make it easier for manufacturers in one part of the
region to sell in the other parts of the region, will have even more importance
as trade barriers come down.
It was in my first speech to the Asia Australia Institute in April 1992 that I first
put forward publicly the suggestion that a process of periodic meetings
between leaders of the APEC economies should be established. 
Even at my most optimistic I did not expect that a little over two years later I
would be about to attend the second such meeting.
In two weeks' time the leaders of eighteen economies, representing more
than half the world's production and nearly half of its trade, will meet in
Bogor, as in Seattle, in a room without officials or a detailed agenda, to talk
about the economic challenges in our region.
I don't think there has been a more important meeting held in Southeast Asia
since the Bandung Conference of 1955 established the Non Aligned
Movement. In part, its importance lies in the very significant issues the meeting will
address how we can maintain the velocity of trade in this region by getting
down the formal and informal barriers.
We have been shown a path forward in two important reports from the
Eminent Persons' Group, and the Pacific Business Forum. The Australian
participants Neville Wran on the EPG and Philip Brass of Pacific Dunlop
and Imelda Roche of Nutrimetics in the Business Forum made a very
important contribution to the development of the APEC vision and I am
grateful to each of them.
For our part, what we hope to see come out of Bogor is a commitment to free
trade in the APEC region by a realistic date, in a GATT-consistent manner.
I'm not worried about the end date we set, so long as it is not too distant. As
we have seen in Australia, the main thing is to get the political commitment to
make a start. Then, with business factoring further liberalisation into its
decisions the momentum builds up and becomes unstoppable. That is the
process we want to start at Bogor.
Free trade through the Asia-Pacific is a huge enterprise. There are
commentators who are already talking as though it is an accomplished fact. It
isn't it will require major adjustments from all the APEC economies.
Free trade in the APEC region would bring Australia benefits several times
those of the Uruguay Round. And the benefits in terms of increased
competitiveness and integration with the region would be far greater.
It can underwrite Australia's future. It can give us sustainable growth,
employment, a role in technological innovation, cultural stimulation and
enrichment. It can substantially underwrite the democratic, rich and dynamic
nation we want to be in the 21st century.
But the Bogor meeting is important at another level too.
It represents a new level of leadership from Asia and a new level of
leadership from the developing world. 
In the past, the great initiatives in trade liberalisation have come from the
industrialised countries. For the first time in Bogor, one of the leading
developing countries is issuing the challenge. This vision is President
Soeharto's and it is vital that we respond to him.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It could be argued that the end of the Cold War has changed the world more
profoundly than any other single event since the Napoleonic Wars since
Lachlan Macquarie was Governor of New South Wales.
None of us has any experience of the sort of world we are moving into.
It will be more integrated than ever, a globalised environment in which
commerce is freer than ever in history; in which communications are
instantaneous and open to all; in which more and more aspects of national
government have an international dimension.
This prospect frightens some people, as change always does.
Our opponents, for example, wring their hands because Australia is party to
an increasing number of international agreements. They fret that these
agreements sometimes shape our domestic policies. They complain that our
sovereignty is being infringed and pine for a clearer, simpler world in which
foreigners kept a decent distance.
But it's not like that any more. From saving Antarctica as a wilderness park, to
protecting our security by banning chemical weapons, to expanding
Australia's access to other markets through the Uruguay Round negotiations,
to getting agreements on the harmonisation of product standards, we need at
an ever-increasing rate to talk and deal with the rest of the world.
That is the sort of international system we are now entering; with fewer clear
lines between domestic and external interests, and one in which these
external interests economic, strategic, political are intertwined in a way we
have never seen before.
The best guarantee of our national sovereignty will not be any walls we build
around us, but the resources we can call upon within ourselves. The degree
to which our industrial culture operates to principles of world's best practice
and within a culture of innovation and creativity will be essential to our
national sovereignty: the degree to which we are able to engage and
compete on the international front line will be essential. Our national
sovereignty will depend on our worldliness and integration with the world.
Equally it will depend upon the less tangible resources of tradition and
culture: the values of democracy and tolerance will continue to serve us well,
so will our language, so will all those things which remind us of our common
heritage and interest.
We have no need to be defensive about our place in the Asia-Pacific. 
Australian engagement with the region is important to us but, equally, it is
important to the region.
Our relationships with Japan, China and Korea show how important the
economic complementarities between Australia and our neighbours are. And
they will continue to be important as economic growth spreads to the
countries of Southeast Asia.
Our services like education have long made an important contribution to the
development of the region, and we are now seeing other Australian services
like health, housing, engineering, communications and law being exported to
the region and helping to sustain its economic dynamism.
Our skills in basic scientific research, and increasingly in the application of
that research through government initiatives like the Cooperative Research
Centres, are a regional resource.
Information technology will play an increasingly important part in our
relationship with the region and the multi-media initiative among other
elements of the Government's cultural statement will significantly boost our
role in the information revolution, particularly as an international software
provider. Our security links, both bilateral and multilateral, make an important
contribution to regional stability.
But we also contribute because we think broadly about the region. We are a
source of ideas and we are good at implementing them. Our contribution has
been seen in many regional initiatives including APEC, the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the Cambodia settlement.
And, beyond that, Australia itself the sort of society we have created here
is an asset to the region.
I make this point not out of national vanity but because we see too often in
Australians the reverse of this an excess of national self-deprecation.
Australians can take a justifiable pride in the achievements of this country, in
the egalitarian, multicultural and humane democracy we have built.
It is a society in which the rights of the individual are protected against the
demands of the state.
This sense of human rights is intrinsic to our sense of ourselves.
The difficult task is not deciding whether human rights are universal. Of
course they are. It is deciding how to apply our own beliefs in the
international arena. 
It is not surprising that many of Australia's neighbours have different
standards from our own.
Sometimes that is the result of different levels of political or economic
development.
Sometimes it is the result of a belief that the good of society at large is more
important than the rights of individuals.
Sometimes, there is no question that human rights are abused, by any
standards. Picking our way through this moral thicket is one of the most difficult things
we have to do.
But I am utterly convinced of one thing. We will get much further in advancing
human rights by talking to our neighbours than by shunning them. Cutting off
contacts is less likely to succeed than making human rights part of a broadlybased
relationship in which we are able to talk freely and openly about our
differences.
We do not, and cannot, aim to be " Asian" or European or anything else but
Australians. But we can and should aim to be a country which is deeply integrated into the
region around us. Which understands that our neighbours are increasingly
proud and justifiably proud of what their societies have accomplished the
amelioration of poverty, the growth of education, the massive improvements
in health standards.
By the turn of the century, by the centenary of our nationhood, I hope this will
be a country: in which more and more Australians speak the languages of our
neighbours in which our businesspeople are a familiar and valued part of the
commercial landscape of the Asia-Pacific
in which we are making full use of the great resource of the growing
number of Australians of Asian background
in which our defence and strategic links with the countries around us
are deeper than ever
in which our national identity is clearer to us and our neighbours
through the appointment of an Australian as our head of state
in which our national culture is shaped by, and helps to shape, the
cultures around us 
Political scientists have recently been asking themselves what will be the next
big thing in global conflict to replace the ideological struggle of the Cold War.
Much of their discussion has centred around the prospect of a " clash of
civilizations" with suggestions that the coming great strategic divide will fall
between the western, Confucian and Islamic worlds.
If that is in any sense a real prospect, it is one which Australia, by nature and
inclination, stands strongly against. Contemporary Australia itself is evidence
that cultures can coexist and build on each other to create a strong and
cohesive society.
The enterprise in which we are now engaged, the creation of a thriving
community of nations across the Asia-Pacific the enterprise of APEC is an
extension of this model.
It is the best assurance we have that this will be the model for the world as
the next millennium approaches.
ends 



I
4
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP,
OFFICIAL OPENING OF KURILPA PARK, SOUTHBANK, BRISBANE
THURSDAY 27 OCTOBER, 1994
Well. I'm delighted to be here on this occasion, but most particularly to have
been able to have joined with Brisbane City Council in doing some of the
things that we thought we could do together during the worst of the recession,
to provide some hope and some value to young people, in particular, who
were unemployed or long term unemployed, over the course of the recent
past. And, it's not really part of one's experience that city councils take on
with such fervour, with such a sense of decency and humanity, the interests
of young people in particular and even mature aged unemployed people, to
find tasks for them that lift their self esteem, give them a place in the scheme
of things and, as an end result, achieve something on the way for the city and
the people.
And, this has happened and the collaboration between the Commonwealth
and the City Council has been a matter of great pleasure to me. And, I
congratulate the Lord Mayor on taking this initiative. Because, it's one thing
for the Commonwealth to have the money to do some of these things... we
can't do it unless there is the help and assistance on the ground, the sense of
ambition, locally, for these things to happen. And, I'm delighted to say that
we've seen it with Brisbane City Council. What we have seen here is, I am
sure, just another, further manifestation of the concentration on the river
which we are seeing in Brisbane in recent years certainly since Expo'
some years ago. I think, now, most people in Brisbane regard the river as a
major asset where I'm not sure this would have been true all that many years
ago. And, Kurilpa Park is going to be a further asset to the river and a place
of solace for people to come because cities need some open space and
some breathing space and this is a bit of breathing space another part of
the lung of the city. And, it wouldn't be here without the efforts of these
young people.
The Lord Mayors statistics, I think, are pretty impressive. That is, the
number of trees put into place, the tonnage of garbage which has been taken
away, the lawns, the stonework, the footpaths... all employing, over the
course of it. 2000 people, 700 of whom have found full time employment. So, 2821 
it's a pretty successfui strike rate when one is considering that the young
people mainly young people involved here are amongst the longer term
unemployed. And, that sort of work experience is terrific for them, it makes
the community feel good about itself, but most importantly it makes them feel
good about themselves.
The Lord Mayor was kind enough to congratulate the Government on the
White Paper and I think the White Paper is one of those things... I was saying
last night the attention span of the media is so short these days. When I first
went into Parliament 25 years ago stories would be developed in the print
media and would then be picked up by television. Something like the White
Paper would go for weeks, people trying to digest it. Now, the reverse is the
case; television picks it up for a night, you get a one day follow-up in the print
the next day and that's the end of it. Done. Now, we're still building the
White Paper and I see Neville Bonner has joined us I have just been at
ACOSS where he was present, this morning, saying that we are going to be
case managing 560,000 people this year. We're setting up in what is a world
first, a system of case management where an individual person will be
relating to an unemployed person, unemployed 12 months or more, and
understanding their aptitudes, their educational qualifications, what they'd
like to do and getting a plan in place and a subsidy to get them back into
work. So, you can imagine setting up a system where we are actually, personally
case managing over half a million people. It is going to be an enormous
challenge. But, one that will mark this society out from other comparable
countries where we will not have, and will not accept that 300,000 people
should go on the labour scrap heap while the rest of us move off to
prosperity; that we will keep the country as one, inclusively, inclusive and
together and that we will get the longer term unemployed people back into
mainstream jobs. Now, we've already had tremendous success in the last
year; since the election 413,000 jobs have been created in this country. We
were heading for a target of half a million over three years, we're four fifths of
the way in two thirds of the time, or just over half the time.
But, importantly, 80,000 of the 400,000 jobs have gone to the long term
unemployed. If you were looking at 400,000 jobs in the eighties, that 80.000
would be more like 15,000 or 20,000. So, out of 400,000 jobs, 15,000 or
20,000 might have gone to the long term unemployed. This time, out of
400,000, there are 80,000 which have gone to the long term unemployed so
we are really starting to get them back into the mainstream of the labour
market. And, as the economy picks up and grows and as we bring more
growth to the labour market, hopefully, we'll really start chopping that long
term unemployment back.
The other great thing about the White Paper is that we're saying that we will
not let any person, any young person under the age of 18, slip through the
system. If someone drops out of education we will case manage them back
into it. And, if not into mainstream education secondary education into
TAFE, and if not into TAFE into a subsidised workplace and on the job
2822 
training. In other words we just won't let somebody leave at age 16 and,
basically, drop out. We're going to try and get them back in because I think a
country which does not care about its young people is not a country with a
future. It is as simple as that. So, this is very important to us and the
innovation that we had in there we're now starting to stream kids in years
11 and 12, the last years of secondary school, into TAFE accreditation so
they can actually get their career path set in years 11 and 12 and do things in
secondary school which give them accreditation for TAFE, thereafter.
So, you might ask what this has got to do with the park? They are all a
common theme. That is, we won't leave the unemployed behind
particularly the young unemployed and whether it is work experience under
JOBSKILLS, LEAP or the other labour market programs in the White Paper,
they are things that, I think, a country as wealthy as this should commit itself
to. Now, one may say, " Well, that's entirely reasonable", but not many
people were sticking their hand up in the depths of the recession saying,
' Well, look, we'll take young people on, we'll put our own money in and we'll
do it." Now, Jim Soorley did this and so did his council and we'll be forever in
their debt for it. And, the young people who have got those jobs, whose lives
have been restored will be in their debt. And what pnice? The product of 700
jobs in the economy versus the cost of 700 unemployed people. The obvious
benefit in terms of product of having those people engaged compared to
being unengaged is, of course, manifest. So, not only have they been taken
up but they produced quite a wonderful change in an area such as this and
when this gets to maturity and those trees get larger and it gets a bit of patina
about it, this will be a very lovely space for the city.
And, I'm actually delighted with the way Brisbane is changing. There is
tremendous growth behind Brisbane now, as one of the growth capitals of the
country. The fact that it has a greater Brisbane Council area and is not
broken up by small municipalities means that there can be city planning and
you have a Lord Mayor who understands the potential of Brisbane, the
demands which will be placed upon its infrastructure in the future, and how it
can, with the growth and particularly its temperate climate and its
relationship with the Asia Pacific become a very significant part of
Australia and one where we can do some things with city planning that will
make Brisbane one of the beautiful places in this country. One of the great
joys to me is some of the worst architecture of the sixties and seventies
and we've got more than our liberal spread of it right around the
Commonwealth: there's a great dollop of it here, of course, in Brisbane it
will be mulched in because the sites are more valuable than the buildings.
So, we get a second crack at it. That is something which I think is going to be
terribly good for Brisbane. I was delighted with the Commonwealth Law
Courts just across the river there, that we've been able to add a quality bit of
architecture to the city and a lot of the packing case rubbish which surrounds
it will go as the years go on. And, we'll be able to build some decent
buildings along the river front here and maybe get the height limitations right
and make this a very lovely city. 2 823 
4
At least. I think, we'd like to be involved, with Better Cities to see the
Commonwealth involved with some of these things, which we are now, of
course, in the greater Brisbane area and to see a partnership between the
government of Queensland and the Commonwealth in doing these things, but
in a tripartite relationship with the Council of greater Brisbane. So, there is, I
think, a great optimism about Queensland, a great sense of opportunity, of
the future and a sort of civic pride returning to the place where it is not just
simply a developers' melee but, where the public interest gets a look in
and there is an understanding that there is a greater interest in doing it right.
I certainly salute the Lord Mayor's efforts in this respect.
So, could I thank everyone associated with today, with this project, but more
particularly with the JOBSKILLS and LEAP projects around Brisbane and for
the many people involved in the supervision and design of these projects.
But, most particularly, to those unemployed people who have joined them,
who have benefited from them and who have given something back to the city
as they go off then into permanent employment. And, those who are
unemployed, we'll be case managing them back into a job and back into
training. So, again, congratulations Jim, on a job really well done and I am
delighted that my colleagues and I could be here on this occasion to declare
Kurilpa Park open. Thankyou.
ends.
2824 



I y
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF NEW FECCA HEADQUARTERS
CANBERRA, 31 OCTOBER 1994
In a recent UNESCO address, the distinguished French sociologist, Alain
Touraine, said the most important task facing the world was " to learn how to
live together" and that, above all, this means we need to learn how to
" manage diversity".
I don't think anyone would argue with this. It is a challenge to the international
community in the post Cold War world, and it is a challenge to our own
communities. We are entitled to say I think that we have done better than most others in
this regard.
The creation here of a rich multicultural society built on traditions of
tolerance, freedom and fairness is one of Australia's great contemporary
achievements. So much so, I'm not sure I am altogether comfortable with the expression
" managing diversity".
To me, it sounds too technocratic for our purposes.
It may have been appropriate a decade ago when Australia was coming to
grips with the principles and practice of what we know today as
multiculturalism. I don't think most Australians any longer view our diversity as something that
must be managed.
We don't think of it as a problem.
We think of it, increasingly, as one of our greatest assets. 1 
The multitude of different ethnic communities is one of our strengths not just
in the realms of culture and the arts, but in commerce.
I think what should really be exercising us is the task of tapping into the
resources of creativity and energy which multicultural Australia can deliver.
We are a country with links to more than 150 different cultures, religions and
traditions; twenty per cent of Australians were born outside Australia, and
these people added to their children constitute almost half of the Australian
population. In economic terms, therein lies great potential.
In recent years we have come to acknowledge this. We call it " productive
diversity". By this we mean that we recognise there are advantages inherent in the
understanding so many Australians have of the culture, languages and
business practices of many of our trading partners.
As we pointed out earlier this year in Working Nation: the White Paper on
Employment and Growth, this knowledge is now an integral part of the
Government's industry, trade and investment strategies.
Astute business people have moved quickly on this resource.
For example, the law firm, Phillips Fox, has used one of its Vietnamese-born
lawyers to help establish a presence in Hanoi and win contracts to translate
Vietnamese foreign investment laws into English.
The food exporter, Tixana, uses the business networks and market
knowledge of its Asian-born management and staff to tailor its snack foods for
export to South East Asia.
And there are, of course, many more examples like these.
The encouragement of real cultural pluralism has made our national life more
complex and dynamic. It has contributed a great deal to the artistic and
intellectual life of the nation.
I couldn't help noticing with some pleasure the other day what the great Irish
poet, Seamus Heaney, had to say about Australia after his recent visit. He
said he saw it becoming a " cultural magnet" for the world.
He said without " a trace of humour", according to the reporter that
Australia might become the centre of a " new humanism".
" I got this notion", he said, " that with the sun and population and good
management it could be the Tuscany of the 21st century". 
I think it's very significant that he counted the population as one of the key
elements. It was not with Tuscany in mind that we delivered the cultural policy
statement, Creative Nation, a fortnight ago.
But we did have in mind pulling together as many of the creative threads in
Australia as we could.
We had in mind encouraging the cultural ferment and giving a creative,
humanist ethic the chance to thrive.
We recognise the profound and fundamental contribution that our cultural
diversity will make in this process.
Creative Nation strengthens the inclusive basis of cultural policy in Australia.
We want to and must draw all those cultures into the mainstream; we must
draw upon them for strength at home and for our image abroad.
As we approach the 21st century, we should be projecting Australia as what it
increasingly is tolerant and pluralist, innovative and creative, rich and
diverse. For this our cultural agencies will need the capacity to develop high quality
products and expertise which reflect the emerging reality of Australian life
and Australian identity.
That is why we allocated an additional $ 13 million to SBS Television to
produce documentaries and drama.
I expect that the funding will enable SBS to produce quality programs whose
principal market is Australia, but which will also appeal to people in the
countries of Europe and Asia.
This sort of initiative seems to me an essential means of encouraging that
trend in Australia towards the development of a highly contemporary identity.
I have remarked on this several times before, and others are also making the
observation that our identity is being significantly shaped now, that it is
what we do today which defines us.
As the Reverend David Gill of the World Council of Churches told the
Centenary of Federation Advisory Committee:
" Our identity is not something inherited for good or ill, like it or not,
from years gone by. It is something we are creating. It is one of the
very special aspects of being part of contemporary Australia." I 
The Centenary of Federation Committee found " a clear consensus": there is
now a genuine desire to belong to a united, cohesive nation, and yet also a
real sense that tolerance, respect for difference, reconciliation and the old
Australian principle of a " fair go" are defining elements of contemporary
Australia. If it is true to say that these are the values we share and which, broadly
speaking, constitute our identity, it follows that we should want to see them
reflected in our concept of citizenship and in what we teach our children.
The Centenary of Federation Committee found " a chorus of voices urging a
shared political culture in which people were agreed about the
responsibilities of citizenship as well as the rights of citizenship".
It is for these kinds of reasons that we established the Civics Expert Group,
under the chairmanship of Professor Stuart McIntyre, to provide the
Government with a plan for public education and information on Australian
government, citizenship and the constitution.
The Group will be delivering its report on 30 November.
Among other things, multicultural ism is a significant advance on the concept
of social democracy and I think modern Australia conclusively demonstrates
that it is a concept with practical advantages.
I have outlined how it gives us economic advantages abroad, particularly as
the global economy emerges.
Globalisation is more than an economic phenomenon.
To the extent that we are celebrating and redefining our nationhood in this
decade, we are doing it at a time when national and cultural lines are being
blurred in the global community.
To me and I think to many others that means we are uniquely positioned to
shape an Australia which sits comfortably and works creatively in the new
world environment of the 21 st century.
In this context I might say it is, therefore, perfectly appropriate that next April
Australia will host the first major international conference on global cultural
diversity. We must encourage the existing tendencies in multiculturalism.
And at the same time, we need to push on with the task of ensuring that all
Australians understand the foundations on which our nationhood is built. 
It is essential that we build into Australian democracy an appreciation of
democracy. That we build into multicultural Australia an appreciation of the tradition of
tolerance on which it stands and depends.
That is why we are addressing the issue of citizenship: not just through the
Civics Expert Group, but through the National Multicultural Advisory Council
whose first meeting, under the Chairmanship of Mick Young, I attended last
week. The Council will play an important role in ensuring that community views
inform the policy debate and help to frame the National Agenda for a
Multicultural Australia.
I hope the Council will address the issue of citizenship because ultimately it is
through the symbols and reality of citizenship that cultural identities are
included in our national life.
The concept of citizenship we have in mind is one that generates shared
values and a common understanding of achievements and aspirations.
It is now 45 years since the Citizenship Act was passed.
As we head to the centenary of Federation, it is time to re-examine our
citizenship legislation and look at how citizenship might enable all Australians
to participate more fully in the life of the nation.
There is, as you know, a report of the Joint Standing Committee on Migration
which examines this issue and the Government will respond in coming
months. But let me make take this opportunity to say, without prejudice to any of the
principles of multiculturalism, the Government believes that whoever takes up
residence in Australia should also make a commitment to Australia.
The first loyalty of all who have made Australia their home should be to
Australia. And it is not in anyway inconsistent with the principles of multiculturalism to
expect people to take out citizenship.
Australian citizenship enshrines tolerance and diversity.
Of course, the values embodied in citizenship do not of themselves make
good citizens.
Ultimately citizenship is a voluntary act, albeit one dependent on every group
and individual recognising that freedom and tolerance come with obligations. 
This, of course, is something which FECCA recognises.
They have made a great contribution to the success and development of
multicultural Australia.
The point I would like to make today is that by doing this, they have made a
great contribution to contemporary Australian nationhood and identity.
And the demand is there for FECCA to do much more.
You have been successful in dealing with many of the needs and aspirations
of those who have migrated to this country.
FECCA has played a valuable role in the establishment of the Australian
Multicultural Foundation; the National Language Policy; and the National
Office of Overseas Skills Recognition.
I am pleased that FECCA has deliberately sought to develop stronger links
with national non-government organisations such as the ACTU, the
Australian Consumers Federation, the Council on the Ageing and ACOSS.
But no organisation can afford to rest on its laurels and it is, therefore,
entirely appropriate that FECCA consolidate its role as the umbrella body for
ethnic communities' councils in Australia by establishing its national
headquarters in the national capital.
It is also appropriate that FECCA's executive is moving away from total
reliance on Commonwealth core funding, to one based on a mix of
Commonwealth and other sources of funding for achieving specific outcomes.
In this regard, I am particularly pleased to see the sponsorships from
organisations such as the Commonwealth Bank and Telecom. I hope others
in the private sector will follow their lead.
I am also pleased to learn that FECCA is developing an agenda for reform.
It has established a constitutional committee to look at ways of broadening its
constituent base; and its membership is currently contemplating expansion to
encompass Regional Ethnic Community Councils.
We think that any initiative to broaden the representative base of FECCA is a
good one.
As new migrant groups arrive in Australia, it is obviously essential for your
organisation to establish links with these people. 
7
Such reforms, together with those initiated by Senator Bolkus, could lead to
FECCA becoming the peak umbrella body for all residents of Australia from
non-English speaking backgrounds.
The Government would applaud this move and we would encourage you to
achieve the goal sooner rather than later.
Today's opening of this new national headquarters in Canberra is, I believe, a
major step forward for FECCA.
It marks a new stage in the Federation's history and I take great pleasure in
declaring this building open.
Thank you. 



EMBARGO. 8.30PM, 3 NOVEMBER 1994
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN QUALITY AWARDS
SYDNEY, 3 NOVEMBER 1994
Well, it's a great pleasure to be speaking to you all right across Australia.
The involvement of so many people in these National Quality Awards is as
good an indicator as any of just how far Australian business has come since
the Awards were first initiated in 1988.
Australian business has well and truly made the leap to international best
practice and quality is now a central plank of Australian business culture.
Of course, the Australian Quality Council has played a critical role in all this.
And I congratulate the Council for all it has done to build a quality culture, to
create a culture of excellence throughout Australia.
I think Australian business should also take great comfort in knowing that it
has the wherewithal to match it with the best in the world and, in many cases,
to be the best in the world.
Of course, Government too has played its part.
The many reforms we have introduced, and with which you are no doubt
familiar, have opened Australia to the world and provided an environment in
which business could flourish.
As indeed it has.
We've seen manufacturing exports grow by an average 15 per cent a year
over the last decade.
We've seen our exports of services, which place a premium on quality, grow
by more than 10 per cent a year to now account for one fifth of our total
exports. 
2
And, over the same period, we've seen our exports increase their total share
of GDP from 14 to 22 per cent.
These are all big achievements for which both business and government can
take credit.
Ten years ago, most would have seen achievements like these well beyond
our grasp.
And events like this one tonight would have been equally unthinkable.
Back then, you would have been more likely to assemble these sorts of
numbers for a national debate on how high the tariff wall should be.
And the overwhelming majority would have argued the higher the better.
Thankfully, that debate is now well behind us but it does have important
lessons. I think one of the most important lessons it has taught us, and it's borne out in
our export performance, is that we are right to have faith in ourselves in
one sense, that's what tonight's awards are about.
When we have faith in ourselves, we feel more optimistic about the future.
And feeling optimistic, having a sense of the possibility of a better world,
leads you to build that world.
Whereas if you don't share the optimism, you won't see any point in making
an effort.
That's why when people are confronted by big changes, like the opening up
of the Australian economy, they quickly fall into two camps.
There are those who don't have faith in our ability to meet the new
challenges. They fall back to supporting the status quo, or worse still, they advocate a
retrograde return to a supposedly glorious past.
These are the ones who once we start to grow strongly ask not " How can we
sustain the growth?" but " When will it end?"
These are the ones who when we have low inflation ask not " How can we
keep it low?" but " How high will it go?" 
And then there are the people, like those associated with the Australian
quality movement, who believe in our capacity to ride the waves of change
and to ride them well with excellence.
These people realise that in an increasingly competitive world you are more
likely to provide for those who come after you if you embrace the future not
with fear and loathing but with confidence.
And it's into this second camp that the majority of Australians are flooding
there's a real sense of confidence about the place.
It's a sense of confidence that we haven't had for a while.
And, in terms of our place in the world, it's a sense of confidence that we've
never had before.
You can certainly feel it among the business community, and particularly on
nights like this.
And it's not a sense of confidence that is boastful or short-sighted.
Nor is it of the sort paraded by the buffoons of the 1980s.
Rather it is a quiet confidence, a quiet confidence in business's ability to
produce world class products and services and the government's ability to
run a low inflation economy.
It's the sort of quiet confidence that leaves me feeling very optimistic about
the country's future.
And you can see it in the new class of business leaders that have emerged in
recent times.
You can see it in the leaders of small to medium sized firms identified in the
McKinsey Emerging Exporters report and the LEK Intelligent Exports report
leaders who had a vision of their companies as global exporters, who
searched out new markets and who then set their companies on the path to
winning those markets.
You can also see it in the leaders in the big firms like Tubmemakers, Toyota
and BHP Steel, firms that have picked up Australian Quality Awards in recent
years.
Tonight we honour all these leaders.
But by " leaders" I don't mean just the chief executives, just those who come
up to accept the awards, I mean those people that are committed to quality
and excellence right throughout an organisation. 1 
It doesn't matter whether you are a CEO, a line manager or a stores assistant
or for that matter a Prime Minister it's what you bring to the position
rather than the position itself that really counts.
Great organisations have great people throughout the organisation from
the bottom to the top.
And that's one reason why these Awards are so important they
acknowledge excellence right across an organisation.
Great organisations, be they firms or governments, will always welcome new
challenges.
And this is where APEC comes in we have to ensure that our world class
products and services aren't denied access, particularly in the booming Asian
markets.
There's no point in having a quality product if you've got nowhere to sell it.
What we are seeking to do with APEC will deliver significant long term
benefits to many generations of Australians.
We are looking to the forthcoming APEC Leaders' meeting in Bogor to make
a commitment to free trade in the region by a particular date.
Once the political will is expressed, business will factor it into their
calculations and the export success of businesses like the ones we honour
tonight will depend not on the extent of their access to the world's fastest
growing markets but rather on the quality of their products and that's as it
should be.
Harmonised standards are a smaller part of the picture and, through APEC,
we are already working to harmonise product standards and to secure mutual
recognition of standards and conformance arrangements throughout the
region.
And as we seek to improve our external environment, we continue to do the
same at home because we know that economic reform is a process of
continuous improvement.
That's why, in partnership with the States, we are putting in place a national
competition policy that will create a single market for Australian goods and
services. It's something that will be of major benefit to business and I hope those of you
in business keep up the pressure on your State political leaders to embrace
national competition. 
Together with the reforms in electricity and gas, already well underway, the
new national competition policy will give a huge boost to our international
competitiveness. Let me finish up.
Two weeks ago, when I launched our cultural policy statement, Creative
Nation, I referred to the raw energy, skills and ambition of Australians as
sources of great riches.
From them flow the creativity, innovation and dedication needed to bring the
value and quality of our products and services up to standards competitive
with the best the world has to offer.
Underlying Creative Nation and all the other government initiatives I have
referred to tonight is one thing confidence in our ability to excel at what we
do. It's as simple as that.
There are few other developed countries that can match present day
Australia. But we shouldn't be content with that, there's no excellence in parity.
As I see it, the goal of this Labor Government is to ensure that in the 21st
Century there is no better place in the world to live and do business than
Australia. This is a highly ambitious goal but it is achievable.
What's reassuring about the Australian Quality Awards is that they show we
are a nation rich in excellence, that Australians have the ability to deliver on
quality. Tonight's awards should give us every reason for approaching the new
century with a quiet but deep-seated confidence.
Thank you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CITIZ: ENSHIP PROMOTION LAUNCH
SYDNEY TOWN HALL, 4 NOVEMBER 1994
It Is a great pleasure to be here, on this very happy occasion.
My flr~ t duty is to congratulate all those who are becoming Australian citizens
today. I have no doubt it Is a great moment for all of you. And I can also say it is a
great moment for all of us who are sharing it with you.
Words like pride come to mind. It is a proud moment. But there is much more
than that at work here today. The feelings go much deeper than pride.
Today we are seeing people from an extraordinary variety of cultures and
countries, and an extraordinary variety of professions embrace Australia. And
we are seeing Australia return the embrace.
It is a ceremony with the elements of a marriage about it and a homecoming,
and a family reunion, and a graduation ceremony.
Whatever it is, the feeling Is a very warm one.
Perhaps " sharing" is the operative word.
People who decide to take out Australian citizenship decide to share in the
responsibilities of being Australian.
And in return Australia offers a share of the rewards.
And a share of the pleasure too, I hope.
We sincerely trust the pleasure will be lasting that whenever you say " I am
Australian" you will feel proud to say It. That it will mean to you something
special. 
It does not mean that you are accorded some elevated status in the world,
rather that you now acknowl edge as your home a country which is free and
democratic, tolerant and just.
It doe~ s not mean that you have renounced the inheritance of custom and
tradition you brought with you to Australia, rather that you have adopted as your
homeD a country which respects the diverse cultural Inheritance of all its
citizens. You have lost something, but, we might say, you've gained a whole country.
Nothing is asked for in return except your loyalty, that you keep faith with the
pledge you are taking.
There Is a real sense in which it can be said that when you take that pledge all
Australians take it.
The rights and responsibilities which you have taken on are borne by all
Australians and no Australian and no Australian government can ever take
them f~ or granted.
It is not enough to merely say we subscribe to these values we should live by
them, we should teach them, we should pass them on, we should enshrine
them in our institutions and laws, we should be prepared to defend them.
We have an extraordinary opportunity in Australia.
We have the chance in the last decade of the century to pull the threads of our
nationhood together: not into a monocultural, monolithic society, or into the
shape of the classical nation-states of the past century and a half.
The catchword is not uniformity, but difference. It is not conformity, but
creativilty. It is not exclusive, but inclusive. Not closed to the world, but open to
it. It is tru' 3 we need the things a nation needs.
We need a sense of common purpose, we need the ties of fellow feeling to
unite us, we need belief and loyalty.
But these days we must surely recognise that we are increasingly united by the
pride and the pleasure we take In multicultural Australia: our respect and
enthusiasm for cultural diversity has become a defining element of Australia's
nationat sentiment. 
That is what we find so moving about this ceremony. That is what unites us
today. I am sure the warmth is the warmth we feel when we welcome someone to our
family. The pride is in seeing Australia in idea and reality mediate such
vast cultural difference. So that men and women from Egypt, or Bangladesh,
or England, or Russia, Indonesia or Peru can, without losing any of their
individual identity, Identify themselves in common as Australians.
If this does not inspire warmth and pride, what does?
I have a feeling it is a variety of what one writer, Mary Kalantzis, recently cailed
" la postnationalist sense of common purpose"
This is not to cast off older Australian traditions or Institutions which serve us
well. It Is not to devalue the culture that has grown here.
In fac: I am quite certain we will see those traditions strengthened in coming
years modified in places, inevitably, but strengthened in their essentials.
BecaUse it is those essentials the essentially democratic, tolerant and
pragmatic nature of them which has made the transformation to a
multicultural Australia possible.
Contemporary Australia is built upon them.
Now we have the chance to make our multicultural society, and the tolerance
and openness on which It has been built, a recognised and recognisable
element of Australian nationhood.
If we can do this It will fit us very well for the modem world in which the barriers
between nations are dissolving and culture, communications and services
number among the most valuable commodities a country can have.
It will serve us marvellously in this regard and it will guarantee an Australia
which is not only culturally rich but socially cohesive and harmonious.
Just as Importantly, it will mean an Australia which counts among its primary
values the capacity to find practical ways to mediate differences not just
ethnic or cultural differences, but the differences between men and women.
between urban and rural Australians, between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
Australians. 
BecaLuse we want to invigorate our national life and national consciousness this
year we established a Civics Expert Group, Invested with the task of finding out
how much Australians know about their country and its traditions and
Instititions. We have also asked them to tell us what is the best way to fill in
the gaps in their knowledge.
For the same reason we have taken on a major promotion of citizenship. We
want to see a very large percentage of the million residents who are eligible for
citizenship take the step that the people here today are taking.
It will mean no less to their heritage and Individuality, but a great gain to the
country In which they make their livelihoods and homes.
The country which demands they leave nothing of their heritage behind unless
it Includes hatred and violence.
That 1: 3 another step we have taken: we will introducea Racial Vilification Bill to
protect Australians against those few who would incite racial hatred.
The Bill is not for the purposes of punishing common prejudice. It is to protect
Innoce'nt men, women and children against fear and intimidation. All
Australians are entitled to freedom from fear.
The legislation embodies a warning to those who might attack the principal of
tolerance on which our society Is built, and an assurance to those who might be
their victims.
It is something of a safety net for multicultural Australia. The expression in law
of those things which today we pledge our belief in.
Laws like pledges are necessary expressions of belief.
But ultimately what matters most is the energy and imagination of people.
In the Australia of my imagination people will continue to believe In their
citizenship deeply, yet wear it lightly.
I hope that is the message we all take from here: let us not be too pious about
it, and let's keep the flag-waving and drum-beating to a respectable minimum.
Let's simply rejoice in the fact that being Australian is a very good and fortunate
thing to be.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE THIRD RUNWAY AT SYDNEY AIRPORT
4 NOVEMBER 1994 * CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*
Well. today's a great day.
It's a great day for Sydney but it's also a great day for Australia.
The opening of this third runway means that we now have the sort of airport
you'd expect in one of the great cities of the world.
It's the! sort of airport worthy of a city, and a country, hosting the 2000
Olympics. But perhaps more important, this third runway will create a huge number of jobs
and deliver enormous benefits to the Australian community.
According to the Federal Airports Corporation, this runway will generate an
additional 26,000 airport-related jobs in the next five years, and an additional
one million jobs in the tourism industry over the next ten years.
I mean it's difficult to think of many projects that are going to generate these
levels of employment.
On top of the jobs, there will also be majqor benefits to consumers be they
business people or people on holidays.
And It won't be too long before they no longer have to factor in inordinate
delays -to their travel into and out of Sydney. 
2
Of course, making this a world quality airport that will generate enormous
benefits, not just for Sydney but for the wider Australian community is
something that's not without it's cost.
And, unfortunately, it's a cost that doesn't fall equally.
As we all know, there are a good number of people who live in the surrounding
areas, who will be adversely affected by noise.
For thiose people, we have put in place a $ 183 million package of measures to
reduce the Impact of aIrcraft noise on the local community.
I might add that these measures aren't cosmetic they go further than many
similar programs at airports right around the world.
They acknowledge that the burden doesn't fall equally.
The noise control measures include
* the voluntary acquisition of 112 properties in the area of highest noise
exposure the 40 Australian Noise Exposure ( AN EF) contour
the Insulation of schools, colleges, hospitals, churches, and child and health
care facilities the 25 to 40 ANEF contour based on the ultimate capacity
of the airport
and the Insulation of 3,500 residences exposed to projected noise levels
above 30 ANEF.
Further, there will also be a study to assess whether insulation should be put in
residences exposed to lower levels of noise ( below the 30 ANEF contour) arnd a
pilot insulation scheme will be undertaken as a matter of priority.
This third runway is also a major accomplishment in construction and industrial
relations. Not only has the project involved the dredgi ng of 14 million cubic metres; of
sand from Botany Bay, the reclamation of 170 hectares and the construction of
kilometres of taxiways, but it has all been achieved six months ahead of
schedule and $ 32 million under budget.
Further, because of a ' co-operative contracting approach' between the runway
consortium and the Federal Airports Corporation, not one day has been lost to
industrial action during the entire life of the project. 
That's a great achievement and a tribute to both the workers and the
management. In constructing the runway, we haven't lost sight of environmental
considerations. To prevent silt fouling Botany Bay, a specially fabricated seven kilometre long
' turbidity barrier' has been built.
And Kl's the first time this technology has been used on a major project like this
one. In addition, 30 hectares of seagrass have been created in the embayment
between the runways.
Of course, it's also important to see this third runway in the wider context of the
Government's aviation policies to deliver a quality service to Australian
consumers. With this runway up and running, we can now rightly lay claim to having a
robust, integrated and Internationally competitive aviation industry one that
has decreased average air fares by 22 per cent since 1990 and has increased
passenger numbers by 58 per cent on our most Important routes.
But the reform needs to continue and that's why the Government has moved to
lease all FAC Airports and Sydney West airport at Badgerys Creek.
At its heart, this decision reflects the need to improve the efficiency of airport
investments and operations.
It should lead to Australia having one of the most innovative private airport
industries in the world.
All up these reforms, coupled with the construction of this third runway will
deliver enormous benefits to tens of thousands of Australians both in terms of
jobs arid additional business.
Today is a major step forward for the Australian aviation Industry.
And it's the sort of step we have to take if we are to ensure that 21st Century
Australia is the best place in the world to live and do business.
Congratulations to all involved in the completion of this critical piece of national
infrastnicture. Thank you. 



3'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE ABC SOUTHBANK CENTRE, MELBOURNE
NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; EO PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed Mark, Mrs Armstrong, David Hill, Haddon Storey and Mrs
Storey, my ministerial colleague Michael Lee, Senator Alston, the City
Commissioner, distinguished members of the ABC board, the Melbourne
Symphony Orchestra and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here at this, the opening ceremony of the Southbank
complex because for too many years the ABC has lived in rabbit warrens in
Sydney and Melbourne Melbourne the same as Sydney and I was delighted, in
the years I was Treasurer, to try and assist the ABC into a major focus facility in
Sydney and we have been able to do it as well here in Melbourne, and I
congratulate the board and the Managing Director for seeing these great
developments come about. It is, as the Chairman said, a delight that it is in
Southbank, and Southbank is a delightful area. It is an area Melbourne has
always had the view. there has always been the view that Melbourne has had
the lungs of the great parks around the city, and it has. But I think Southbank
proves another point, and that is the breadth and the breathing has got to be in
the built environment too, and we see it in the great cities of the world like Paris.
and we have seen it in cities that have seen their best and may be coming again
cities like Berlin, where the built environment matters, and Southbank has
shown this to Melbourne. And there is, I think, now somewhat of a celebration
about it, and I was also pleased to be involved if only in a small way -with a
number of Premiers who have been developing this John Cain and Joan
Kirner who is with us today and now the current Government of Victoria.
This is a great development for Melbourne, and I felt the other night when the
Festival was on the opening of the Festival at the Canadian Opera, where I
might say that the MSO sounded tremendous strength was coming from them. 
Afterwards we went down to the Riverside, and there was a real celebration
there. And there was even a clap for the Melbourne Casino they even got
their hands together as the candles lit up, everybody put their hands together, so
there was a great feeling of joy about the place. And why shouldn't there be?
The fact is, to have the ABC here right in the centre of all this is, as Mark
said, we're going to see Southbank become the area a focused area for
television production and multi-media as well. Indeed, a real milieu of arts and
culture, and it's entirely significant that the ABC should be here as Australia's
pre-eminent cultural organisation, because the ABC is undoubtably and
absolutely Australia's pre-eminent cultural organisation, an essential part of the
cultural fabric of this country. There is a word that is being thrown around at the
moment called convergence. You now, in this day and age of acronyms and
words, every couple of years there is a new big one that floats around the
current new big one is convergence. It means many things, but I think in this
context it means the convergence of what the ABC has to offer, and what
Melbourne has to offer. Because I think there is a real convergence here, and
we saw it the Festival which was directed very competently by Leo Schofield in
the last few weeks we saw it in that flood of energy, and we have seen it over
the years with the fact that Melbourne is a great city a city of ideas, of art of
music, of football, of sport and the convergence of these two gives us a
chance if Creative Nation means anything, we'll certainly see a lot of creativity
here at Southbank with the ABC.
In the Creative Nation statement I had the pleasure of launching just a few
weeks ago, it was my very great pleasure to see and to announce that the
Commonwealth would establish a national music academy here in Melbourne,
that Melbourne would be the home of the $ 60 million television production fund,
and also the home of the Australian Cultural Foundation and six multi-media
centres. And I am hoping that, along with all things else which Melbourne has in
terms of art and cultural sophistication, that these things will add new dimensions
to Melbourne, and see it emerge as in South-East Asia as one of the places
where art and culture and particularly Australian culture can emerge. There
is a great chance for Australia in the information technology, and in art and
culture, because we have always had whether it be in literature or in music or
in film and television and last night we were celebrating our film awards the
capacity to really add something to the technological availability of educational
and entertainment materials. Entertainment has been an industry which has
largely been locked up with the United States I think we now have the chance
to challenge that, and we can challenge it in the market to which we are closest
and which shares the same time zone as us. And that must give us enormous
opportunities to be up there, because many other cultures.. . the information
tech , nology culture has, and it will not be exclusively an English-speaking
culture, but there is a very large component from the English-speaking countries
there. And I think there is a real cultural impediment certainly at this point of its 
development of some countries which have mastered very great technological
advances, such as Japan, running into something of an impediment in dealing
with information technology. But there is no such impediment on Australia.
So that's why I think it is important to get our culture and our technology
together, and I suppose as Mark and David said earlier, eloquently, this building
is going to be a mix of the two fifty studios, eight of them entirely digitalised
being the home of all this creative capacity. It's the very essence if we have to
find it in a building of what this jump into multi-media means, here at
Southbank. But I think this capacity to project ourselves into this world is very
great indeed, but that's why I say " you can't do this unless you're confident about
yourself". You can't be out there as some sort of derivative culture saying " oh, is
there a place in here for You have got to go out there and bang the doors
in, and you can only ever do that when you are entirely confident about where
you are and what you have become. And that is why I have always thought the
republic means so much to us not simply so much for the constitutional
change, but for the sense that it brings. You can't go around the world saying
" here we are, here's our culture, here's what we can add, but by the way, we're
borrowing the monarch of another country while we're at it." Now, we all know
that act is over, it's just a matter of when it runs out. And I always say to my
Tory friends, " come on board, better late than never there's always a place for
you"-. Anyway, what we are talking about is energy it's the energy of the city, of
Melbourne here, it's the energy of the ABC, it's the energy of the creative people.
If multi-media, the transmission of our values, the transmission of our thought, of
our culture is about anything, it is about energy. And we are seeing a real stir in
the energy of this country someone has put a big acupuncture needle into
Melbourne and Sydney, and in Perth and Adelaide, and the energy is well and
truly flowing. And so what we have to do then is sort of direct it around the world
so we can enjoy it and so can others. The ABC, of course, has been a bearer of
culture and tradition for this country for as long as any of us can remember, and
not just that, a trailblazer it's not just the bearer, it's also a trailblazer. And its
charter has been to focus on Australian culture, and I think this charter is going
to be more important as the years go on as we see homogenised
entertainment around the world, as Hollywood tries to extend its hegemony over
the world information highway. As we -start to see the capacity for major
broadcasting companies to actually have that sort of impact, standing by one's
culture is going to be, and promoting one's culture and developing one's culture
is going to be exceptionally important to this country. Not just for what we can
do abroad, but most particularly, what we do at home. So the charter values of
the ABC its charter role in news, current affairs, sport, drama, ideas,
information all the things it does, and does well, we will need it to do even
more of* as the, if you like, the international assault comes, and come it will with 
pay television, and with satellites and with the computer linkages through the
information highway.
So let's think that in developing this building at Southbank, we are getting ready.
We are getting ready to be able to project our culture and to develop it in the
context of this great international change which is with us. The ABC, of course,
has responded to this challenge not just now, but has in these years and in a
number of ways with Australian Television International as a case in point,
which is an entirely valuable projection of our values and our culture. And I am
often told, when I go to Indonesia for instance, that the Indonesian cabinet
many members of it watch ATVI news of an evening, and if you are really
lucky, if you get the time right, you can even watch Question Time it comes
through, and then you appreciate that part of the Standing Orders which takes
the interjections out and all the rest. But it's there. And that healthy, robust
celebration of our democracy we have on our news services and in our
Parliament, is out there and the values are being transmitted. And I think that's
a tremendous thing.
And the same with pay television the Government, with the Board and the
Managing Director, have seen a role for the ABC in pay television. It's going to
be tricky getting it right, as it is for anybody in this business. Whether it's going
to be satellite delivered or terrestrially delivered, the fact is the Government
believes that the ABC if we're going to have pay television transmission into
homes then the ABC should be there. It will be up to the ABC as to who it
packages its product with, how it does it and where it gets the value. But the fact
is it has got two channels there, and of course, in the end as many channels as it
likes as the fibre-optic cable is rolled out, and as much as it can sell in programs
and packages. But it should be there, and it can be there, and I think it is
important that it is there.
We have also seen remarkable changes with radio. I think it has been a great
job done with radio across the continent great variety, great quality. In the last
year we have seen five major international awards to ABC radio, fifteen major
Australian awards and in the last five years, we have seen an increase in the
audience reached from 25% to 40% of the population. That is a tremendous
change that is a revolution in communications really for a medium which has
been around a very long time. And all of the networks lead in Australian content.
Of course with that, Radio Australia is now, still at this point, broadcasting to
about 50 million listeners, and JJJ that ground-breaking network for young
Australians is now being extended to rural Australia. So there has been a
tremendous change in radio, and we all appreciate the quality of ABC radio
because I think almost one-third to half the country listen to it every week. So
this -isa nother thing. 
But the ABC has its history also in what it does in drama and in music, and let
me say a couple of things about the orchestras, given that we have made them
the subject of some discussion in the Cultural Statement, and the MSO is with us
today. I have always doubted whether Australia could actually with 18 million
people build an orchestra of the standard of the Berlin Philharmonic or the
Vienna or others, but it has always been my great ambition that we could. And
given the fact that because the ABC started the city orchestras as radio
orchestras, we have over a period of time, been able to give our cities very high
standard orchestras, and that has been a great thing for Australia. We are a
tremendously urbanised country, with two very large concentrations in Sydney
and Melbourne, and the SSO and the MSO have sought to service those
communities with their orchestras. So the Government has had two approaches
to this: one, that we try and establish a national music school that can actually
feed an orchestra by the people who operate and teach in it, and by its product,
and maybe build one organically continue to build an orchestra organically or
another approach, which is essentially to try and encourage the individual
development of an orchestra by getting the cheque book out and trying to
develop it and to buy in the skills we need to make it into that international
standard. We have chosen that route for the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, and
that option is available for the MSO. My advice to the MSO is to say to Aunty
" thank you Aunty, we love you, but we are leaving you but please leave us
room to come home occasionally". But that is a matter for you, and you can
make your mind up about that.
One of the things we are seeing from this lI'm delighted that the ABC has said
that the MSO will be its flagship orchestra that has already encouraged the
Victorian Government to donate $ 600,000 a year towards it, to expand its string
section and make it stronger. Well today, I would like to top that up to $ 1 million
so at least the orchestra can expand its string section, and we can see what the
ABC is prepared to do with it. I will be very interested to see, we have always
had some competition between the SSO and the MSO, and what a good thing
competition always is, and we are going to see more of it, and the nation will be
the winners from that and not just here, but abroad as well, so good luck to you.
Could I just say a couple of things about the Managing Director, because he has
been in the news these days? I say this David, after 8 1/ 2 years you have got
the right to leave anywhere. When I walked into my Chairman after 8 1/ 2 years
as Treasurer and told him I was leaving, he wasn't particularly pleased, but I still
left. Admittedly I came back a bit later to do something else. An old friend of
mine, Jack Lang I'm always getting Jack Lang quoted back to me by my
opponents said to me " The only reason they will ever take you Paul" he said,
" is if they really want you". Well, you can make those sort of comebacks in
public life I'm not sure if you can leave as Managing Director of the ABC and
then make a comeback probably that is a bit of a tall order. But, 8 1/ 2 years is
a very long time, and for an institution.. . and David has certainly knocked a lot of 
the rough edges off the ABC, and all the developments I have spoken of this
building, the building in Sydney, and they are not just buildings they are
actually the bringing together of hubs of creativity the shift into Asia, the growth
in radio, the changes in the management of the ABC are very great changes
indeed, and they should be logged in the national consciousness as we see the
ABC move through these various eras of change, at the pace of change today
with multi-media coming the way it is, with pay television coming the way it is,
getting ready for that, and working it out and let me tell you this, nobody quite
knows where all these technologies are going, and trying to keep a foot on all of
them is one of the things which the ABC has done under David's leadership, and
I think this is something well done on its behalf. I did see today across the
headlines in The Australian: " Hill forced out says Downer". Now I thought he
was referring to Robert Hill. Now I know it is a teensy-weensy bit horrid of me to
say that, but the fact is moderates I don't know what price they have on the
scalp of moderates in the Liberal Party, but it is very high. At any rate, it
wasn't it turned out you had to read down the story to see he was talking about
you David, and that's is why I thought I would say that whenever you go and I
think you have said you were going in June after 8 1/ 2 years, it is one hell of
an innings, and good on you.
So perhaps let me conclude where I began and say it is more than a pleasure to
be here. To see these complexes put together, and to know it is such a
tremendously strong underpinning of the ABC, and to know what the ABC has
meant to Australia down throughout the decades, and to know now as we see
the threat of homogenisation heading towards us, just how centrally important
this unique cultural institution is. To be here, at Southbank, in this year, when
these changes are right upon us, there's a sense of poignancy about it which I
think we all feel and understand. Annita and I are delighted to be here today,
and it is with very great pleasure indeed that I declare the Southbank Complex
open. Thank you.
ends. 



Q
PRIME MINISTER
( CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PF J KEATING MP
INAUGURAL NATIONAL GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
NATIONAL CONVENTION CENTRE CANBERRA
7 NOVEMBER 1994
Well, it's a pleasure to address this your first National General Assembly.
And let me congratulate those of you who took the initiative, who exercised the
leadership, to make this historic meeting possible.
Although it is IG0 years since the first local council was created in Australia, I think it
is timely that you should come together to identify the key issues facing Local
Government. After all, these are times of great change for all levels of government, times that
demand we take stock of whcre we are so that we can have a bigger say in where we
go. I think it's particularly appropriate that it is a Labor Prime M~ iister that speaks to your
first National General Assembly because Labor governments have long recogniscd the
key importance of Local Government in our Federal system.
it was the Whitlam. Government that first introduced direct untied assistance to local
government. It was the Hawke Governmcnt that proposed the Constitution be amended to reflect
the critical role of Local Governiment in our national life.
Despite that referendum not getting up, the current Labor Government has continued
to work to strengthen the role of Local Government.
We have sought to give it a status in the community that it descrvcs, a status
commensurate with a tier of government that employs around 160,000 Australians and
spends around 10 billion a year. 
It's why we introduced the annual consultations between Local Government and the
Commonwealth in 1989.
And why we also moved to give Local Government fMl membership of COAG.
This Government is committed to seeing that your aspirations and needs, and those of
the people you serve, are heard in the highest forums of the land.
But it's more than just giving you a forum in which to speak * important as that is.
It's also about making things happen in partnership.
Back in 1992 when the Federal Government was looking to give the economy some
much needed stimulus the Statcs were found wanting.
It was Local Government wh~ ich stepped into the breach to join up with the Federal
Government and deliver a Capital Works Program on time and beyond expectation.
It was a -major exercise with Local Government and community groups putting in more
than S$ 120 million to match the Commonwealth's contribution of $ 350 million.
This was a great example of the Commonwealth working with Local Government to
harness local knowledge, comrnitmcnt and organisational strengths to achieve an
important national objective.
And it reminded us that programs work best when they are delivered at the local level
and reflect local needs.
That's something people in both Local Governmcnt and the Labor Party understand.
We also both understand how important it is to bring thc people along with you, to
hold a community together when times gct tough.
This is the case now for many communities, particularly the rural communities in
Queensland and New South Wales which are experiencing the worst drought on
record. For them, times have never been tougher than they are today.
There will be some of you here who have firsthand experience of the devastation that
the drought has brought, of the enormous personal and financial burdens it has placed
on so many ini our rural communities.
Being in Local Government means that you have that special sort of relationship with
people that only a local person can. 
And more often than not it usually means you too shoulder part of the burden when
things are tough, that you too lend a hand way beyond your professional
responsibilities because that's the way things are done in the bush.
To those of you here and to the many others in Local Govcrrnent who have played
such an important role in helping to ease the hardship of the drought, let me take this
opportunity to express the Government's great appreciation for all that you have done.
Yours is a contribution that will be remembered.
The drought is a big issue for the Labor Party -we're determined not to leave the
people on the land behind.
We're concerned about the future of family farming, of the impact of the drought on
rural society.
That's why we put in place the drought package that we did, a package which includes:
the establishment of a Drought Relief Scheme which provides familics with
cash for basic necessities and gives thcm access to Family Payments and the
Healthcare card
the removal of the existing Austudy farm assets test for all families in
exceptional circumstances
increased resources for financial and social counselling-,
and further measures under the Rural Adjustment Scheme to assist farm
businesses both now and during the recovery phase.
Since we announced the drought package just over six weeks ago, we've already been
able to make a substantial contfibution to helping farming families in the most severely
affected areas.
So far, nearly 1,000 fanilies have had their claims approved under the Drought Relief
Scheme, and another 2,000 plus have lodged their claims with the Department of
Social Security.
On top of this, another 6,000 families have applied for a certificate for the drought
relief payment which is the first step in the process.
So, we are getting the payments out there, but we need to push this process hard to
make sure all those eligible receive the assistance they so desperately need, and
quickly. 
To those of you that will be returning to communities experiencing severe drought, I
would urge you to keep up your efforts to encourage those who are eligible for
assistance to apply.
And also to let the local people know that if thc situation deteriorates further that the
Government is prepared to provide additional assistance on top of the $ 164 million
that has already been allocated.
The drought is a good reminder that the activitics of Local Governent extend right
across [ lie Australian community, that what might be a burning issue for some one in
inner suburban Melbournc might have little relevance for someone in far north
Queensland. But whatever different challenges we might face from time to time, there is, I think,
one challenge that we all face continuously.
And that is the challenge of Icadership.
For my part, I have always thought that one of the keys to leadership is imagination,
having a sense of what's possible and taking the odd risk
Because if you don't have that you won't be moved to chance your arm, to push for the
big changcs, the ones that really matter, the ones that affect peoples lives for the better
and over the long term.
Leadecrship is not, and never has been, the preserve of any one person.
Nor is it somcthing that flows from occupying a particular position.
It's about getting things done and being effective.
Its about generating and maintaining miomentumn
It's about making sure the place is better off for your effort a sense of stewardship if
you like.
In sum, it's about recognising and seizing the right opportunities to make a meaningful
difference to people's lives.
That's the thinking that lay behind the drought assistance measures and it's certainly the
thinking that. lay behind Working Nation, the White Paper on Employment and
Growth. In Working Nalion we wanted to ensure that unemployed people, particularly long
term unemployed people shared in the economic recovery. 
We also wanted to ensure that regional Australia got its share too, that this wasn't just
a recovery in the big cities.
And it was for this reason that we aninounced thc Regional Developincnt Strategy, a
strategy designed to harness the enormous leadership potcntial that lies in the men and
women of rcgional Australia.
It not a strategy that seeks to replicate the quick fix solutions of the past or to adopt
a scatter gun approach.
Nor does it see throwing buckets of money as the answer to the regions' most pressing
problems. As McKinsey revealed in their Lead Local Compete Global study, given the task of
rejuvenating a region, regional leaders said they would far prefer $ 2 million and
committed local leaders rather than $ 50 million minus the local leaders.
And that's why I believe the challenge of regional Australia is primarily a challenge of
leadership. As McKinsey also pointed out, you can take two different regions in Australia with the
same factor conditions, the same level of infrastructure, the same level of human and
natural resources but one region will prosper while the other fails.
And the reason one region succeeds is because it has leadcrship.
It has leaders who share a vision for their region and who arc prepared to bring all the
key players together to chart a common course.
And what's true of the regions is just as true for local councils that go to making up
regional Australia.
Of course, adopting a Regional Devclopment Strategy that focuses on leadership
assumes that the lcaders exist, that regional Australia has within it a real wealth of
talented men and women.
Well, it has.
it's something that was clearly borne out in the work of the Regional Development
Taskforce which was chaired by Bill Kelty, and included your energetic President,
Councillor Peter Woods.
The Taskforce itself played an invaluable leadership role in getting regional
communities to think about their long-term future. 
It found that right across the country there were people looking for new opportunities
to quicken the pace of economic development in their region, people who wanted to
build on the strength of their region and find their region a place in thc international
economy. And I think this is something that will come increasingly into play as more local
councils become involved in competitive tendering, contracting out, resource sharing
and enterprise bargaining.
Our overall economic policy objectivc of sustainable low inflation growth can only be
achieved if the right conditions for growth can be created in the regions.
And in this endeavour, the Commionwealth and local government share considerable
common ground.
We agree that effective local government participation is vital to the success of
regional developmcnt activities.
We agree that the three tiers of government should work in partnership to plan for
economic and regional development and to deliver appropriate programs.
And we agree that the need for effective local government has never been greater.
And it's because of this common ground that we want to see Local Government take a
leadership role in implementing the Regional Development Strategy.
Since its announcement in Working Nativ-1, the Regional Development Strategy has
remained very much on track.
By Christmas, we hope to have around ten regions active in the program.
And over the life of the program we hope to extend it to around forty Regional
Economic Developmntn Organisations.
The first region to take advantage of the program is likely to be the Northern Rivers
Region of New South Wales which I visited earlier this year.
During my visit, I was particularly heartened to see how the people around Lismore
share a common vision for their region and are committed to breathing life into that
vision. They have got themsclves together and are now planning a regional development
strategy based on sustainable, value adding agricultural production and niche export
marketing. 
7
Importantly, they have developed bi-partisan political support for the regional
developmcnt activities.
Thcre are also a number of other regions in Queensland, Victoria, Wcstern Australia
and South Australia which are getting ready to participate in the program.
This is great news.
It shows a nation with regions that are prepared to work on a future for themselves
rather than rely on outside funding only,
Recent analysis of economic data shows that quite a number of regions are strongly
outgrowing the capital city areas in activity and employment.
And some of the regions have even greater potential with significant growth in
population. These are the areas giving the lead to regional Australia.
Before I finish let me make reference to one other area where Local Government can
support the cfforts of the Federal Government and that is in the area of social justice.
I'm thinking here of two groups whose potential to add to our national endeavour has
not been sufficiently recogrniscd or tapped
I am thinking of our indigenous peoplc and our women.
Over recent times, the Federal Government has taken unprecedented steps to accord
our indigenous people a proper and just place in the nation.
So I'm pleased to see that your National Agenda reflects that same objective.
And I trust that it's something that you will give effect to in the course of your
deliberations at this historic meeting.
I'm also pleased that Local Government has more women representatives than for most
other Australian governmcnts.
But at around 20 per cent it is still too low.
Achieving more equitable representation of men and women in Local Government, as
elected representatives and mayors, and also in senior managemcnt, is about keeping
faith with our democratic and egalitarian traditions.
It is also, fundamentally, about recognising and using the full array of leadership and
talent at our disposal. 
8
I would urge you to look carefully at this issue, to consult with women Councillors and
women Local Government staff, and to put in place a practical strategy to increase
women's participation in Local Government decision-making and management,
Let me wind up.
As a key player in regional Australia, Local Government bas both the opportunity and
the responsibility to provide the sort of leadership that the Commonwealth's new
approach to regional development seeks to encourage.
It is an opportunity arnd a challenge I know you arc more than capable of accepting.
And through it, I want us to continue to work together in partnership -for the
good of the nation.
How etfectively we work together will, however, depend to a great deal on the
outcomes of this first National Gcneral Assembly.
And while I know your diversity makes it difficult, Local Governent will play a far
greater role in achieving national objectives if it speaks with a unified voice.
That is the challenge before this first National General Assembly.
But whatever the outcome, the Federal Government will continue to look for a Local
Government system that plays an increasingly important role in the affairs of our
nation, a system that combines local priorities with broader national goals.
Thank you. 



0 , C
PRIME MINISTER
( CHECK AGAiNST DELIVERY)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE HUNTER ADVANTAGE EXHIBITION
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA
7 NOVEMBER 1994
Well, let me say what a real pleasure it is to open the Hunter Advantage Exhibition.
And the timing couldn't be better.
Only this morning I was speaking to the National General Assembly of Local
Governments about the enormous wealth of talent that exists in regional Australia.
And now we have it on full display here with the Hunter region a region I might add
that is one of great beauty and character.
The Hunter is a very old region, one of our oldest, but one which has certainly
rejuvenated itself and now looks to the fu~ ture with great confidence.
I think it's also worth making the point that in the great countries of the world, it's the
regions that define them.
It's the regions, rather than the political boundaries of their states, which give countries
their character.
It's certainly the case for France, Germany and Italy.
In Australia, this is also true, though it's not so well recognised.
But not only does the Hunter give this country character, it is also a region with a
strong export profile, a region that knows what it means to Lead Local and Compete
Global. In fact, the picture of the Hunter today is very impressive indeed. 
And it bears a little looking at.
Some of it, of course, is very familiar.
Most Australians will know about the Hunter's coal mines and coal export port one
the locals claim is the largest in the world but one that is certainly the largest in the
southern hemisphere.
Most Australians will be familiar with the Hunter's enormous variety of agriculture.
Most, I imagine, will have quaffed the odd glass of world famous Hunter wine.
And not a few Australians will have caught waves on Newcastle's great surf beaches.
But I suspect far less Australians know about some of the other aspects of the Hunter,
that it has in fact an increasingly diverse industrial profile with significant growth in it's
high value added goods and services.
That's something borne out by this exhibition which includes some of Australia's best
companies. In fact, last Thursday I presented Hunter Valley Rewinds with one of only 12
Australian Quality Awards to be given this year.
The Hunter is also a region with a fine University which is playing its part in the export
drive. It has developed a water purification system, the TUNRA Jetfiote, which is destined
for export markets.
And its Centre for Industrial Control Science has developed a special computer
controller for use in the mining, chemical, engineering and car industries.
This controller which has already generated considerable interest from many
international firms will be chasing a share of what is potentially a multi-billion dollar
export market.
But innovative products are by no means the preserve of the university sector and I
couldn't but help noticing the Medicab, the automotive stretcher, that forms part of this
exhibition. I understand that the Joint House Department has already expressed interest in
purchasing one for use here in the Parliament.
But if the developers want to double their sales here at Parliament House, they midght
do well to give the Leader of the Opposition a call. 
Although the way things are going at the moment, I'm not sure whether he should
station it near the House of Reps or the Senate.
I think it's also worth making the point that one of the reasons for the Hunter's success
is that it has a very healthy industrial relations profile that may have something to do
with the fact that the Australian Centre for Best Practice has its head office in
Newcastle.
But I suspect it's got more to do with the fact that the Hunter has developed a detailed
enterprise agreement, one developed between the region's councils and unions, and one
which McKinsey in their regional development study cited as an example of a
sophisticated performance measurement driving changes in behaviour.
Over the years, the Government has sought to tap into the enormous assets of the
Hunter and when necessary to give the region a hand up.
Through the Better Cities Program, we are providing $ 70 million over a four year
period to the Honeysuckle redevelopment, which has already begun to revitalise
Newcastle, providing jobs and attracting private sector investment.
For my part, I should confess some involvement in the decision to set up a tax office in
Newcastle, although I hear a few of the local business people will never forgive me for
that. But whatever assistance might have flowed to the Hunter from the Commonwealth and
State Government over the years, this is little compared to that which has come from
the leadership exercised by those people living and working within the Hunter itself
This theme of leadership is one that I addressed in some detail this morning when I
pointed out that, faced with the choice between $ 2 million and 20 local leaders and
million and no local leaders, regional leaders would opt for the former because local
leadership is something that can't be bought.
In fact, the Hunter has a fine tradition of leadership and one which has been
particularly strong in recent times.
It's leadership that came to the fore in the aftermath of the Newcastle earthquake.
It's leadership that continues today.
And it finds its expression in the many companies that are on display here.
Let me congratulate those who had the initiative to stage this exhibition, particularly
Mrs Jill Wyborn from the Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Of course, this exhibition complements the other great work that is being done by
many people and organisations right around the Hunter. 
I'm thinking here of the contribution of the likes of Dr Margaret Bowman, the former
Chairman of the Hunter Institute of Higher Education who participated in the Regional
Development Taskforce chaired by Bill Kelty.
I'm also thinking of the work done by Rotary as part of the Employ Australia initiative
which has seen more than 2500 vacancies notified to the CES over the past 3 weeks.
With leadership like this, it's difficult not to feel optimistic about the Hunter's future.
And it's something that will be given a huge boost when a Regional Development
Organisation is shortly established in the Hunter.
This Regional Development Organisation will have a major role in harnessing the
enormous leadership reserves in the Hunter and putting into place a strategy for the
region. It is, as you know, one of the major Working Nation initiatives designed to ensure that
regional Australia also participates in the strong economic growth now underway.
I suspect this commercial may have run a little longer than it should have but then there
are so many good things to say about the Hunter.
Perhaps I might leave any further comments to others here.
So let me finish up with my own vote of confidence in the Hunter and my
congratulations to all those associated with the putting together of this fine exhibition.
Thank you. 


K.4PRIME MINISTER"* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPFOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS ASSOCIATIONSYDNEY, FRIDAY 11 NOVEMBER 1994I am a well known enthusiast for APEC but when I first started talking about it,it wasn't an acronym which sprang readily to the lips of most Australians.But things are changing. I was very pleased recently to come across the firstreference to APEC I had seen in an Australian newspaper cartoon.Once the cartoonists get hold of something you can be pretty sure it is sailingdown the mainstream of public consciousness.
I am glad that is happening, because it is where APEC deserves to be.It has always seemed to me to be the right idea for Australia, the right idea forthe region and the right idea for the world at large.
It is the right idea for Australia because it defines a region which is critical tous. It includes the economies to which we sell 75 per cent of all we export,and our key bilateral relationships on both sides of the Pacific.
It is the right idea for the region because it encompasses its most importanttrade and economic links. It helps lock in United States economic andcommercial interest in the region which in turn helps to ensure US strategicengagement. It provides a framework to help contain or manage competitionbetween China, Japan and the United States. And it gives the smallercountries a greater say in the nature and shape of regional tradingarrangements. It is the right idea for the world because it links both sides of the Pacific in aco-operative endeavour and helps to prevent the division of the post-ColdWar world into three competing blocs.And it is the right idea because it is not intended to be, and will not become, acapital " C"-type Community which closes itself against the world, but a small11c" community of common interests, seeking prosperity with its internationalpartners through trade liberalisation rather than closed barriers andsubsidies.
One of APEC's great advantages, which we are seeing fully in play inPresident Soeharto's proposals for Bogor, is that it spans not only both sidesof the Pacific but the full spectrum of the world's economies from the mostindustrialised and developed countries, through the dynamic Asian tigers, todeveloping economies like Indonesia.So when APEC talks about trade and economic issues, when it frames itsactions, it has to take into account the full complexity of eighteen economies,all looking for growth and liberalisation but at different stages of development.That is important, because it is the way the global economy is going. Cooperationacross different levels of development is the way we will have toaddress these trade and economic issues in future. In this sense, APEC is atemplate. On Sunday, I will be leaving for Jakarta to attend the second informal meetingof APEC leaders. As I said recently, it promises to be the most significantmeeting to have been held in Southeast Asia since the Bandung meetingestablished the Non-Aligned Movement in 1955.When I first suggested, less than three years ago, that APEC leaders shouldget together to discuss the challenges facing the region, I hoped in this wayto give the organisation some political horsepower and help it deliver somereal benefits to business.I must say I am well and truly pleased to be attending the second suchmeeting in November 1994. That it is happening is a reflection of the realbenefit regional economies have seen in the APEC process.The meeting at Bogor will include the leaders of eighteen economiesrepresenting half the world's production and nearly half its trade. And theyare growing fast.By 2000 these same economies will account for almost 60 per cent of worldGDP and 55 per cent of world trade.By 2020, seven of them China, the United States, Japan, Indonesia,Thailand, Chinese Taipei and Korea will be among the world's ten largesteconomies. So what happens in APEC can have a long-lasting impact on how the worldoperates into the next century.As in Seattle, this will be an informal meeting. Ministers and officials aremeeting over the next few days to sort out APEC's formal work program. A lotof valuable work will be done there.But the leaders, when they get together on Tuesday under PresidentSoeharto's chairmanship, will have no formal agenda, no set texts. We willbe alone in a room for several hours, without advisers, talking about our own
economic problems and opportunities and what we can do collectively aboutthem. No wonder the beads of sweat are breaking out on the brows of bureaucratsall around the region.This is an unusual model for an international gathering, and as we showedlast year in Seattle, it can deliver creative results.We will be coming to Bogor with a real sense that APEC is beginning tocoalesce. In the year since Seattle a lot of progress has been made on the initiatives weset in train then.Most of the recent press coverage of APEC has focussed on the tradeliberalisation debate. This is understandable. It is a large and importantissue. But it is also important not to forget the progress being made incleaning out the region's trade arteries by removing administrativeimpediments to the flow of goods and services the trade facilitation agenda.This is important to business and will become more important as tariff levelsdecline. Differences in standards can add between five and ten per cent tothe cost of entering a particular market.So it is good to see the work on standards going well. We are now movinginto the stage of negotiating Mutual Recognition Agreements between APECeconomies. An APEC network of these agreements will mean that any product testedonce will be accepted as having been tested everywhere. And standardsthroughout the APEC economies will be progressively harmonised withinternational standardsWe have also made good progress on a set of APEC investment principles.Investment is an urgent issue for the APEC economies. Foreign investmenthas been one of the driving forces behind APEC's growth.But if that growth is to continue, it is critical that foreign investment to andwithin APEC keeps flowing. For example, over the next decade East Asia willrequire an estimated US$ 1.7 trillion for investment in infrastructure alone.Much of that will have to come from foreign investment.At the same time, we will be seeing intense competition for investment fundsfrom Eastern Europe and other economies outside APEC.So there is a growing appreciation that to keep investment coming, the APECeconomies need more open and transparent investment regimes. Thereforms which Indonesia introduced in July reflect this recognition.
I hope we will be able to announce at Bogor a set of non-binding APECinvestment principles. That will enable us to take forward the dialogue withinAPEC about how we can improve our investment regimes.It is also worth noting that the first meeting of APEC Finance Ministers washeld earlier this year. As the Asia-Pacific becomes the world's new centre ofeconomic gravity the economic dialogue instituted at this meeting will beincreasingly important.APEC is also building people-to-people links. We decided at Seattle toestablish a network of APEC study centres throughout the region.I am happy to announce that we have decided to establish the Australianstudy centre in a joint operation between the University of New South Walesand Monash University in Melbourne.These two universities not only have a high standard of academic researchon APEC-related issues but they will be pursuing some innovative ideas foreducating Australians about APEC for example, through Monash'sexperience with the Open Learning scheme.APEC's progress in these and other areas, such as small and mediumenterprises, has been useful and welcome.But I have been convinced of the need to lift the APEC debate to a higherlevel. If we are to maintain the region's remarkable growth rates we need totackle the task of bringing down tariffs and non-tariff barriers for goods andservices. President Soeharto shares this view. He has suggested that APEC set at theBogor meeting a far-reaching objective of free trade in APEC by a specificdate and on a GATT-consistent basis.I have spoken with President Soeharto several times during the year and Iknow how committed he is to achieving this goal. He knows from Indonesia'sexperience just what the benefits of liberalisation can be.I told him recently that my support for him on this is total and unqualified.Because this is a remarkable development.Past pressure for trade liberalisation has come from the industrialisedcountries. They have set the agenda. They have put the pressure on.Now, for the first time, a developing country has said we should commitourselves to a free trade outcome. It is vital that we respond positively to thischallenge. Over the next few days something like a sense of awe would not beinappropriate such is the boldness of what is being proposed.
This is no simple task to get down all barriers to goods and services in theregion by a defined date.It is an extraordinarily difficult thing for most Governments to contemplate.The benefits of freer trade are clear but they are spread throughout oureconomies. The impact on special interest groups and protected sectorsoffers immediate pain. This is a problem we were very familiar with inAustralia as we cut our own levels of protection.So as Bogor has got closer, and the scale of the proposals has becomeclearer, it is little wonder that around the region a slight clearing of the throathas turned into the odd nervous cough and then, in a few cases, intosignificant breathing difficulties.I have been in touch with leaders from most APEC economies over the pastfew months and I hope we will get the commitment we are looking for atBogor, but I am certainly not taking it for granted.For Australia, the important thing is to get the process going. The end-datematters less, so long as it is not too distant. Because, as we have seen inAustralia, once the decision is made, business will begin to incorporate it intoits planning, and things will begin to move.No one is expecting fine detail out of the meeting in Bogor.Even if we reach agreement on a free trade outcome, some very importantquestions will remain: What form will the liberalisation take? What coveragewill it have? Will it extend to all GATT members under an MFN arrangementor will it be preferential?I don't underestimate the importance of these questions or the difficulties infilling in the gaps. Some long and arduous talking lies ahead.But getting the political commitment by leaders is the immediate requirement.That decision would set the region's economic agenda for the next twentyyears. None of what APEC is doing should be seen as a threat to the global system.I have said all along that anything APEC does should be GATT-consistentand equally importantly that it should contribute to global tradeliberalisation.We understand fully that the growth of the Asia-Pacific economies has beenunderpinned by the open multilateral trading system, which itself has turnedlargely on the United States's willingness to lead the world in tradeliberalisation. Now it is the Asia-Pacific's turn to lead the way. This is where the growth is.And despite strong liberalising moves, protection remains high in many EastAsian economies, offering them great scope to benefit from liberalisation.
Our ultimate objective, and our best interest, lies in global free trade.But there is no enthusiasm now for a new global and comprehensive round.We have to look for other strategies, and APEC is the best we've got.APEC trade liberalisation will lock in an outward-looking sense of regionalismand will reinforce global trade liberalisation.An APEC-wide approach would bolster the economic gains we would get fromunilateral trade liberalisation, and it would reduce the political costsbecause governments will be able to point to new opportunities opened up bytrade liberalisation elsewhere in the region.The benefits of APEC trade liberalisation for Australia and the region wouldbe enormous. Economic modelling tends to understate the gains because itdoes not capture the full effects on competitiveness and productivity.But initial Australian modelling work shows that, while APEC members do wellout of the Uruguay Round, they would do even better if APEC was toembrace full free trade. The annual gain to APEC aggregate national incomefrom the Round is around $ 112 billion by 2002 when the Round effects haveflowed through fully. But this rises to $ 366 billion by 2010 if APEC free tradeis achieved by then.Under APEC free trade, Australia's real output would rise by an estimated 3.8per cent and real national income by 1.2 per cent or $ 6.8 billion annuallyThis would more than double the projected real income gains for Australiafrom the Uruguay Round.The scale of APEC's advantages to Australia is something which, notsurprisingly, few Australians have yet appreciated.But already three-quarters of our exports go to APEC, and 31 per cent ofthese are manufactured exports. Over the next two years, increased exportsto APEC members are expected to create 70,000 new jobs in Australia.For Australian business, APEC trade liberalisation is good news, becauseAustralia is already so far down the path towards free trade.We have eliminated quotas and, by 2000, average trade weighted tariffs willhave fallen to 2.9 per cent. Motor vehicle and textiles, clothing and footweartariffs will be the only stand-outs.Clearly, going further would be in our interests if other APEC economies alsoliberalised. When and at what rate we did so would be a matter fordiscussion after Bogor.Australia's agricultural and minerals exports would flourish in open regionalmarkets. But our manufactures and service industries would also be well-
7placed to take advantage of the opportunities that would open up. Thedecade of trade liberalisation has made them much more competitive. Ourexports of elaborately transformed manufactures to APEC have been growingat 18 per cent a year since 1988-89.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The future trade and economic agenda will be the core of our discussions atBogor. But the meeting has other less obvious advantagesIt facilitates contacts between leaders which would otherwise be difficult toarrange -either for political reasons, as we saw in Seattle last year whenPresident Jiang Zemin met President Clinton, or for geographic reasons.For example, in Sydney tomorrow I will meet President Frei of Chile on hisway to Jakarta. After the meeting President Kim Young Sam of Korea willvisit Australia.
And at the meeting itself a lot of bilateral work will be done. I will be havingseparate meetings with President Soeharto, President Jiang Zemin. PresidentClinton, President Ramos, Prime Minister Chretien, Prime Minister Chuanand Prime Minister Bolger.I will have opportunities to talk informally to the others as well.And this sort of thing is multiplied eighteen different ways.Ease of communications between political leaders is important and thedynamics of international relations within the Asia-Pacific have, in my view.been changed fundamentally by APEC. The leaders meetings offeropportunities for contact which can cut through problems and resolveuncertainties. And, as we are seeing with the visits here of President Freiand President Kim, they can facilitate contacts between our business people.So I don't doubt that this will be two and a half days well spent.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Today, of course, is Remembrance Day.
There is something appropriate about the fact that I am talking to you aboutthe future of the Asia-Pacific on the 11 th of November, when we rememberthe sacrifice of those Australians, and the countless millions from othernations, who fought and died in the wars which shaped this century andwhich, for better and worse, shaped Australia's history.What comes next the legacy of peace, security and prosperity, we owe toour past will in no small way be formed by what happens in Bogor over thenext few days.ends



A-.
4, ~-1,~ A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
PRESENTATION OF " WALKING TOGETHER: THE FIRST STEPS",
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 17 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Sir Ronald, Pat Dodson, Mr Speaker, Mr President, my colleague the Leader
of the Opposition, the Leader of the Australian Democrats Senator Kernot
and Ms Lois O'Donoghue the Chairperson of ATSIC, Ministerial and
Parliamentary colleagues, members of the Council most particularly and
ladies and gentlemen.
I am very pleased to be here today for the presentation of the report " Walking
Together The First Steps" which describes Australia's progress towards
reconciliation after the first three years of effort by the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation. I think the fact that has been remarked already by the President, the Speaker
and Pat Dodson, that this Council was met with the approval of both houses
of Parliament, of the parties in the Parliament. The Council is a broad
representation of community and political interests and, of course, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander interests and it is a fine thing that we are so certain
of the process that the Chairperson of it Patrick Dodson, can actually
present with some pride the report to the Speaker and to the President.
It wasn't that many years ago when Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people had lost heart in any process of reconciliation. It wasn't that long ago
when the whole notion about land rights had fizzled out to nothing in some of
the places where people were still living a traditional life, in some of the large
states. And, there was a feeling of despair, I suppose, about the process, but
I think, that that has changed and that is the great thing. Because, something
token, a token process of reconciliation is worse than no process at all
because it makes a mockery of something intrinsically important.
But, I think, we all think now that there is nothing token about this and, I think,
that it is probably true that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
community feel better about themselves today than a few years ago and the 
Australian community feels better about reconciliation than it did just a short
time ago.
I think wherever principal strikes out, wherever a truth is spoken is like rain
falling on the ground things grow, good things happen and, I think, that
non-Aboriginal Australians have recognised the truth of what has happened
to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in this country. They recognise the
deprivation and the crimes and the rest and that has been said and, I think,
the High Court's decision in respect of Mabo righting a wrong, putting clear
a truth that this was not a continent of no one, that there was a civilisation of
people here, that there was an expropriation of their property and their rights
and that later, much later indeed, the High Court recognised that Aboriginal
custom and tradition would be a source of Australian common law. Now this
is a significant breakthrough, but of course, as we all in this room know, that
decision had legal power, but no facilitation and even in parts of it where it
was clear, or unclear where the power of it was there was an obligation on
the Parliament to legislate and say where it was and how it might be
exercised. That has happened with the Native Title legislation.
I think this community of ours feels much better about reconciliation because
of the passage of that Bill. I think they think that a wrong has been set right
and though there has been disagreement in a political sense about it, in the
end fundamentals invariably triumph and truth prospers and I have got no
doubt that our community today is more at one with itself than it has ever
been not totally at one, otherwise I'm sure Pat and the Council would
believe their work was finished and they couldn't possibly believe that. And,
we will have much to do in developing that reconciliation further, but now
there is that force to it. It is not just a Council meeting in the, sort of,
amorphous problems of Australia and trying to reconcile the interests and
aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with those of non-
Aboriginal Australians.
Land, of course, has always been central to an understanding of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander culture. The Native Title Act is about land, the
Land Fund Bill we are currently debating is about land for those who have
long ago lost a traditional association with the land, but shouldn't be denied
the right to acquire it or to live with it. So, that has got to be put right and
over time there will be in these fundamental things a basis of reconciliation
which we can then draw down for broader community support. I particularly
noticed the report of the Centenary of Federation Advisory Committee in
August which found that reconciliation is central to Australia's aspirations as
we approach the next century I think, a wise observation Premiers, Chief
Ministers, Opposition Leaders, RSLs, CWAs, youth councils, womens
electoral lobbies, local government, religious leaders, unions and business
organisations all nominated reconciliation as a major goal. This is a gigantic
step forward. This wouldn't have been so not so long ago.
As you know, I have just come back from a meeting of the Leaders of the
Asia-Pacific area who have done an important thing in deciding to bring the
Americas into a linkage with Asia so that we have an Asia-Pacific community 
and that we don't see the world break up into three trading blocs in Europe,
in the Americas and in Asia. We have had this debate all my political life,
anyway, about the north south dialogue and for the first time one can see a
real and tangible expression when a group sits down as this group did this
week to see the big powerful economies of the United States and Japan
dealing with and comprehending the problems and making arrangements to
deal with them with developing countries like Indonesia and China and Papua
New Guinea and some others.
You get the feeling that there is something good happening in the world, that
the Cold War which left these tremendous polarities and tensions, where
countries were bound up by this strategic tension, that having gone what has
blossomed is that which was most unlikely because this body APEC just
never had to happen. There was no logical reason why it happened, there
may be some logics in it, but it did happen and it has happened out of good
will and co-operation. We can only play a part in it if we go to the world as
one nation, as a nation united and not a nation in any way divided. That is
why Australians need to be clear about their identity and proud of it. But, that
identity must include the identity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders.
That is why you can't go hobbling to the world saying, " please put us in the
big race, but by the way, our indigenes don't have a real part of it and by the.
way, we are still borrowing the monarchy of another country."
So, feeling good about yourself doesn't happen unless it is genuine. It can
only be genuine if there is, I think, a goodness of spirit and something where
things are done, things are given, concessions are made and these, I think,
we are seeking to do with the Native Title Act and with the Land Fund and
other things, but more obviously, perhaps, by giving of ourselves, each of us,
towards something better.
So, that is what it must mean reconciliation it must mean that we reject the
notions that there is some sort of preordained right to the benefits of this
country to non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, that we have
really got to basically do it together and in the doing of it, that the
metamorphosis will mean we are a different country than the one we have
always been. No longer a mono culture and particularly with our multicultural
community and reconciliation with our older community we then, I think, do go
as one.
That means, I think, that the work can go on. Because there have been times
during the Council's life where we wondered whether work would go on,
whether it wouldn't peter out, just another attempt, add good will, basically
drying up in the face of intransigence and bias and prejudice. Well, I think,
there is enough around now and the fact that we can, in all honesty, receive
this Report with what it means, and have the President and the Speaker
accept it on behalf of the Parliament and the-nation is a logical interim step, a
report on the progress of reconciliation.
So, to all those people who have been involved the community
organisations, the industrial companies, the mining companies, the 
4
pastoralists, the Land Councils, the Aboriginal and Islander communities and
those who have served on the Council might I add a congratulations and the
very best of good wishes for the future of the council and its important work.
S' Thank you. 



I I r'.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
STATE DINNER FOR PRESIDENT KIM YOUNG SAM
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA
17 NOVEMBER 1994
Mr President, we meet again.
On this occasion it is here, in Australia, where you and
Mrs Kim are very welcome guests and friends.
For me it is a real and personal pleasure to welcome you
and your distinguished party to our country.
Before I turn to our very healthy bilateral relationship,.
I must say something about our work together on APEC.
In many respects nothing nearly so important would have
come from Bogor Mr President had it not been for your
vision, and persistence.
From its inception there have been APEC doubters and
critics. Korea has never been in that company.
More importantly, you Mr President, have been at the
frontline of our efforts to make something substantial
and significant of APEC.
We have shared a view about what was needed and have
joined our efforts to get the best possible outcome.
Through your efforts you have stamped Korea and yourself
as leaders in the Asia-Pacific.
That we were able at Bogor to agree an historic
declaration for free trade throughout the Asia-Pacific by
2020 is evidence of this.
Our agreement there is, of course, just the start of the
work and effort that is needed to turn this commitment to
reality.
One thing you can be sure of, however, is that we would
never have secured a result as significant as we did had
leaders not had the will to lead. 
As we now develop ways of taking forward and acting on
the Bogor declaration I know I will work closely again
with you Mr President.
While APEC is a broad regional body, it also stimulates
the development of bilateral relations. We saw in
Indonesia dozens of meetings between Asia-Pacific leaders
which preceded Bogor all ensuring better understanding
and co-operation between countries in the region.
Mr President, your visit to Australia, like mine to Korea
last year, is a sign that we both believe now in the time
to take the relationship between Australia and Korea to a
new level.
Our ties go back many years and are of the deepest kind.
Between 1950 and 1953, 17,000 Australian men and women
served in Korea to help defend its people from
aggression. More than three hundred died there. I paid
tribute to some of them when I visited the United Nations
cemetery in Pusan during my visit to Korea last year.
I am pleased to announce tonight that the Australian
Government will contribute $ 200,000 towards the
construction of a national monument on Anzac Parade in
Canberra to mark the sacrifice of the Australians who
served in Korea and to commemorate the links between our
two countries.
Australia has been a firm supporter of Korea's security
since that time. We are also conscious that, despite
recent hopeful developments, the security problems of the
peninsula continue to require vigilance and the active
interest of all nations in the region.
While an earlier generation of Australians knew Korea as
a country ravaged by war, the current generation knows a
very different country a strong democracy and one of
the most dynamic economies in the world.
Australia has been a partner in that growth.
In the late 1960s, for example, Australian engineering
support and consultancy helped to build POSCO's Pohang
steelworks. Australia has been proud to be associated
with POSCO and with the development of other Korean
industries.
There is a natural complementarity between our economies
which benefits us both and adds breadth and depth to the
relationship. Over recent years, our economic links have grown at an
astounding rate.
The Republic of Korea is now our third largest export
market and is likely to be our second largest in the next
two years. It is our eighth largest source of imports. 
Two way trade grew by 16 per cent in 1993-94 to more
than $ 6.5 billion.
Korea's growing status as a world trading nation is one
of the reasons, in addition to Trade Minister Kim
Chul-Su's long experience and personal qualities, that
Australia is supporting him for the post of Director
General of the World Trade Organisation.
We are also encouraged to see Korean and Australian
companies increasingly working together in a range of
major projects.
I attach real significance to your decision to bring with
you a distinguished group of senior Korean
businesspeople. I have no doubt they will find new
opportunities here for trade and investment, and that
their Australian colleagues will find new opportunities
in Korea.
Investment both ways has lagged behind our trading
relationship and is one area which we should work to
strengthen over the coming years.
Scientific research, industrial technology and energy cooperation
are other fields in which we can do more
together.
Each of us has the sense, I think, Mr President, that
this vital and growing economic relationship needs still
to be matched by greater bonds between our people. We do
not yet know enough about each other although we are both
working hard on this aspect of our relationship.
For Australia's part, we have nominated Korean as one of
the principal Asian languages to be taught in Australian
schools under our national languages strategy.
Nine Australian universities now offer a degree program
in Korean, compared with only one in 1988.
Education and closer human contact, through tourism for
example, will help to reinforce the economic
relationship. But it will do more: it will enrich the
lives and deepen the cultural understanding of those who
take part.
So the President and I have much to talk about tomorrow.
I began by saying that it was a great personal pleasure
to welcome you to Australia, Mr President.
One reason for that is because of my admiration, and the
admiration of Australians, for your deep commitment to
democracy, expressed at times at considerable personal
risk. Throughout your career you have stood unwaveringly and
courageously for civil and political freedom, for 
I r4 democratic parliamentary institutions and for the
observance of human rights. Your political life has left
a lasting legacy to your country, and a lasting example
to the world.
For this reason, it is particularly appropriate for me to
welcome you here in our country's Parliament House on
behalf of the Government and people of Australia and to
invite you to speak to us.
I now call on the leader of the National Party,
Mr Fischer, to join me in welcoming you.
ends 



K
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE OECD CONFERENCE " CITIES AND THE NEW
GLOBAL ECONOMY"
MELBOURNE, 21 NOVEMBER 1994 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Well, let me start by welcoming you to Australia.
And let me say how pleased I am that this major OECD conference is taking
place here in Australia.
It's a welcome development not just because it provides us with an
opportunity to showcase Melbourne and our many other great cities cities
that some have called the most livable in the world but because it is one of
the very few occasions that a major OECD conference has taken place in this
part of the world.
And clearly, it's the sort of thing that should happen more often.
Over the years, the OECD has been criticised for being too Eurocentric in its
focus, that it hasn't paid sufficient regard to the economic dynamism of the
Asia Pacific region.
And I think there has been an element of truth to the criticism.
So the decision to hold this conference here in Australia, in the Asia Pacific
region, is very much the right one because world attention is now well and
truly focused on the Asia Pacific region.
And in a way that it has never been before.
Last week's historic APEC Leaders' Meeting in Bogor has made doubly sure
of that.
33154 
And while the full ramifications of the Bogor Free Trade Declaration won't be
felt until well into the next century, I think history will come to judge the Bogor
Meeting a most significant event.
The fact that APEC has travelled so far in such a short period of time
indicates the wish of this region to become the world's economic powerhouse.
That, and the fact that the region already accounts for half of the world's GDP
and almost half of world trade, makes this the right area of the world to hold a
major OECD conference.
Another reason why the location of this conference is right is because it's a
conference on cities.
Governments in this part of the world, and the Australian Government in
particular, have a strong sense that building livable and sustainable cities is
one of the greatest challenges we face.
In fact, no region in the world has faster growing cities.
From 1970 to 1990, Asian cities accounted for half of the world's total urban
population growth.
And they now total more than half of the world's 30 largest cities.
Beijing, Bombay, Calcutta, Jakarta, Seoul, Shanghai, Tianjin and Tokyo
already have populations close to 10 million or more.
And they're set to grow even larger.
One estimate has it that 80 per cent of Asia's economic growth this decade
will take place in its major cities.
This has staggering implications for urban population growth.
For example, between now and the year 2000, China is estimated to add
more than the entire population of the United States to its cities.
Developments like these place an enormous responsibility on governments
and urban designers throughout the region.
Making sure you have cities that are functional seems to me to be
fundamental to participating in the region's growth.
But theres a bigger challenge and it is more than just making cities work.
It's about building cities that will endure through the next century. 33,5 
And that, in many ways is a creative adventure, for, as the Australian artist
Lloyd Rees once put it " Cities are the ultimate work of art".
We may well wonder as to what makes a great city, or for that matter a world
city. I think it's an almost indefinable thing.
But you certainly know a great city when you're in one.
Perhaps it's cities that are friendly, cities with generous public spaces and
street faces that are welcoming.
Cities like Melbourne and Sydney.
Or perhaps it's cities that give their dwellers a sense of joy and involvementcities
that are engaging.
Whether it's the boulevards of Paris, New York's skyline, the buzz of Hong
Kong, the raw energy of Shanghai or the splendour of Sydney Harbour,
places of beauty and function really strike at the heart.
A great city gives off its own resonances.
A great city above all else has a soul.
A city without a soul is a barren landscape that draws its sustenance from its
people rather than the other way around.
A great city nourishes one's sense of self, gives one a peace and a
communion with the built environment.
It creates a milieu which encourages endeavour and creativity, and
achievement and peace.
A great city's power comes from the power of its people, the intellectual life,
the business of its people, their attitudes to one another, their attitudes to
others, their principles their sense of mission.
These are indefinable things but they are as real as the cityscapes
themselves. The human relationship with cityscapes and the architecture is, I think,
central to the chemistry of fulfilment and belonging.
Ugly cities affront one's eyes and dull one's faith in the enlightened progress
of our civilisation.
3356f 
Huge cities of cold monuments slashed by expressways depersonalise life
and reduce one's self esteem.
Inefficient cities wear people down and diminish the community's capacity for
growth and wealth.
By contrast cities of structure and beauty lift people up, engage them and
encourage them.
Planning has such centralised connotations these days yet without
planning the developers often ignore the streetscape and sometimes leave
their indifferent product and its problems to another generation.
The traffic flows, the reliance on automobiles, the short half lives of buildings,
the altered balance, the alienation lies in the wake of private reward largely
unencumbered by civic pride or commitment.
It seems to me that we have to consider our cities. Think about them, care for
them, be proud of them, adapt them plan for them.
Not sterile conformity to plan but enough structure to provide the form for the
natural bacteria of the city to etch its pattern.
This sort of approach informs the way we think about our cities in Australia.
We want cities that are special places to live and great places to do business.
You can see it in projects such as Southbank which lies just across the Yarra
River here in Melbourne.
As you will see, one of the best things about the Southbank development is
that it provides a spectacular platform from which to view the city of
Melbourne in much the same way that the Champs Elysee allows you to view
Paris and the Statue of Liberty New York.
It wasn't so long ago that this was a dilapidated industrial and commercial
area. Those of you visiting our other cities will get a chance to see similar
rejuvenation projects right around the country.
I think it's also important to understand that despite the postcard images of
Australia as a vast continent, we are in fact one of the most urbanised nations
in the region with our cities accounting for 85 per cent of our total population.
And not only is our population concentrated in the cities, it's also
concentrated in a few major cities. 3 3 57" 
Sydney and Melbourne alone account for almost half our total population and
provide the great bulk of the nation's employment.
These two cities which aspire to world city' status however you might
define it are critical to the long term future of our nation.
Increasingly, we are coming to realise that it is the quality of our cities, and
our city networks, that are key to our ability to generate wealth.
The growing recognition of just how important our cities are is borne out by
some of the major Government programs now underway.
There is the Better Cities Program and the Australian Urban and Regional
Development Review which the Deputy Prime Minister spoke to you about
earlier today.
But there is another reason why we are now embracing our cities in a way
that we never have before and that has something to do with a new and real
sense of confidence.
It's a confidence in our long term future, a confidence that, if we put our minds
to it in the century coming, Australia could be one of the best places in the
world to live and do business.
And at this stage in our national history in the run up to the centenary of
our nationhood I think it's also important that we step back a little and take
a big picture perspective on how we can best tackle urban environment over
the long term.
That's certainly something that I have an interest in and it's part of the reason
why late last year I decided to establish an Urban Design Task Force
involving some of the nation's most eminent architects, planners, landscape
designers and academics.
My purpose in setting up the Task Force was a simple one: to find ways how
we might improve the urban environment.
The Task Force has just completed its report and I'm very pleased to formally
launch it today.
It's a good report which I know will be of great interest to the many people
involved in urban design in Australia.
I think the main reason it's a good report is because of what it will do to really
push the national debate on how we can best foster quality urban design in
this country.
As I see it, the debate will be a very necessary and healthy exercise and one
which I am looking forward to participating in.
3358 
So, thank you very much to each of the Task Force members many of
whom are here today for all you've done, particularly because you have
given your valuable time on a voluntary basis.
Let me also express my very deep personal appreciation to John Mant, the
Convenor of the Task Force, who had the major task of bringing together the
views of this diverse range of creative professionals.
I trust our international visitors will allow me the indulgence to take up three
key points from the report.
First, to achieve excellence in urban design it's imperative that we draw
together all those responsible for urban design, and I mean at every level of
government. As the report points out, the fragmentation of responsibilities for urban
planning at the local level makes it very difficult to allocate clear
responsibilities. It's a case of everyone, and therefore no one, being ultimately responsible.
And that makes it virtually impossible for the community to demand
accountability for the management of its urban spaces.
That, of course, is inimical to excellence in urban design and it, therefore,
raises the big issue of whether we need a major restructuring of government
agencies if we are serious about achieving high quality urban design
outcomes that benefit all Australians.
This is, of course, an issue that extends beyond the sole responsibilities of
the Commonwealth Government and I will be writing to Premiers and Chief
Ministers to see how we might work together on this issue.
Second, at its heart, good urban design is a multi-disciplinary activity.
I think this is something that not everyone involved in urban design fully
appreciates. For too long, good urban design in this country has been frustrated by
competing disciplines, professions, and government agencies which have
approached the issue in a narrow way thereby leading to a less than optimum
outcome. That needs to change.
But I'm pleased to day some are getting it right. 33a59 
An excellent example is the Design Studio that will run for a week at the end
of this month in Sydney.
The Design Studio, which will develop urban design schemes for Homebush
Bay for both the Olympics and up to the year 2020, is the largest design
workshop of its kind to be held in Australia and the first ever for the Olympic
Games. The Studio will take an integrated multi-disciplinary approach incorporating
leading national experts and specialists from around the world some of whom
are attending this conference.
The third comment I wish to make is that we need to give appropriate
recognition to the joint efforts that produce inspired and creative urban
design. For this reason the Government intends taking up the Task Force's
recommendation to establish an Australia Prize in Urban Design.
This is a first in that it will reinforce the multi-disciplinary nature of quality
urban design.
Thats why the award will be not about individual projects but about places.
It will recognise excellence in the building and sustaining of urban
communities. It will recognise the achievement of the many individuals who create places
that provide significant benefits to the environment and the community.
Further details of the award will be announced in due course.
So, those are some of my initial reactions to the Task Force report but, as I've
said, you can rest assured I'll be having a few more words to say over the
coming months.
So how do we pull all these threads together'? What lies at the core of good
urban design? How do we create livable cities in a global economy? How do
we create great cities that people want to live and do business in?
I think the best way we can answer these questions is to start by thinking of
our cities and imagining something better.
We want cities with both efficiency and beauty.
Quality of life is just as much bound up with the development of cities as is
economic advancement.
3360 
Our cities must enable us to respond effectively to developments in the global
economy. But they must also offer us a quality of life that enhances our work and
recreational well being.
They must be great places both to live and do business.
The two go hand in hand. They're self -reinforcing, a virtuous circle if you like.
Therefore, the way we manage and develop our cities is crucial to our
economic future.
It's crucial to our social future.
And it's just as crucial to the quality of our environment.
Getting it right is primarily a question of striking the right balance.
We don't want cities that are monuments to Mammon but neither do we want
cities that are museums of the past.
We will try to strike the right balance in Australia.
I am quietly confident that, with sufficient will and imagination on our part, not
too far down the track people throughout the region will come to see
Australian cities as ideal places both to live and do business.
To an extent, that's already happened with the many international firms which
have already set up their regional operations and regional headquarters here
in Australia.
Corporate executives in the Asia Pacific are coming to realise that if you live
to work you'll work anywhere in the region, but if you work to live there's a
good chance you'll choose to live in Australia.
There's already many that have come to Sydney and Melbourne and there
are an increasing number finding their way to Perth and Brisbane.
This move is just starting to build up a head of steam and I'm sure that, come
the next century, there will be many many more because our cities offer some
things that our competitor cities never will and that's likely, I believe, to make
our cities more sustainable over the long term.
We have some great cities, but we want to make them even better.
We want our cities to be more even hospitable, to be even more inviting. ~ 3U I 
9
We want cities that preserve the best of our past, that celebrate the best of
the present and give a sense of the future.
Cities that people live in because they want to and not because they have to.
Organic cities, breathing, changing, living cities whose progress is infused
with memory.
So let me wind up by saying what a pleasure it is for Australia to host this
major OECD conference on cities
I am sure the conference will promote a greater understanding of how we can
all build better cities in our respective nations, cities linked to the global
economy but cities which are great places to live in cities by and for the
people. Thank you. 



to reinvest
and drug
m" Feu nAdc. t and
Fund. In
ojects. In
3672.000 ially sold
1d but be
icular use
' Cigation the
establish in the
' ation md ) StS.
he use to
ttecting
iSSETS PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AAP CONFERENCE OF ASIAN, AUSTRALIAN AND PACIFIC MEDIA
EXECUTIVES, REGENT HOTEL, SYDNEY TUESDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 1994
* CHECK AGAINST DEUVERY'
I am very grateful for the Invitation to speak to such a distinguished audience as
we have here today and I welcome all of you from overseas to Australia and to
Sydney. It is somehow gratifying that within a week of the Bogor Declaration we have a
conference of media executives drawn from the Asia-Pacific.
Less than a decade ago, the Asia-Pacific was just a concept.
Increasingly today It is a defining reality.
With APEC all the more so, of course.
Mind you, had they read some of the Australian media at the weekend, the
uninitiated could be forgiven for thinking that the Asia-Pacific and APEC were still
unproven concepts, or realities of no great consequence.
Those of us with long experience know that this was the obligatory spray of
scepticism to prevent ary hubris sprouting.
The Australian media are conscientious in keeping us In our places and reminding
us that good works are never an excuse to draw more than a breath of
satisfaction. But in fact. like everyone else, they know that change j1 upon us.
No one I suspect knows it better than the Australian media. 3,137 
And if it is a political leaders prime responsibility to anticipate and manage
change, and confront the necessities change brings then I amr sure they aiso
know that the political leaders al Bogor did this as It has rarely been done before.
That was where the sense of euphoria came from: from doing something with
some genuine vision about it.
Not a mandatory genuflection or theatrical squint into the future, but an act which
might actually mark this generation as one with sufficient wisdom, care arnd
foresight to lay the basis of a better world for millions of people In the fUtue.
And sufficient resolve.
That it should have happened and that it should have been so rapidly taken for
granted perhaps testifies to the transforming times in which we live.
It seamns to me that these are times when the most pessimistic among us find ft
difficult to escape the possibilities on offer.
We might even call it an age of possibility.
So much changed with the end of the Cold War.
We watched, millions of us around the world, as its most powerful symbol the
Berlin Wall was broken down.
We all knew that we watching a long chapter in the history of the modern world
come to an end.
How we read its fail depended, I suppose, on our natural disposition.
Pessimists will tend to see only t problems which flow from the collapse of an
old order.
Optimists will fail to see them.
The near-sighted and the nostalgic will see a symbol of a century at it end;
romantics and visionaries will see the start of a new one.
My vote is with the pragmatists.
Pragmnatists will see the possibilities.
And seize them.
3 43 8 
It is a great era for those with an eye for possibilities in trade and investment the
envionment cultural development, information technology.
Namie your Interest.
We all know an era has ended.
We all speak of a new " Post Cold War world".
And In Bogor we took a practical step towards defining it.
It Is a cliche to say that much remains to be done, and many hurdles will have to
be jumped but it is just as true to say that an extraordinary amount w-as done
and an extraordinary number of hurdles were jumped.
We cid niot define the next century, but we gave ourselves a chance to shape it as
it should be shaped, which Is to say in all our interests.
In fact a clue to the shape of the new post Cold War world lay hidden In the drama
of events leading up to the end of the Berlin Wail.
While we watched the collapse of the Soviet Union on television and perhaps
secretly wished that CNN had been there in 1917, teenage students in California
were communicating by another means with teenage students in Moscow and St
Petersburg.
As tho Soviet Union disintegrated. and the legacy of older generations fell apart
before our eyes on television, a new generation was talking to Americans on
Internet unfiltered and unedited.
It gives us a glimpse of what awaits us in the 21 st Century.
And I think it gives us a hint of why we are more Inclined to think In terms of the
possible why agreements like the APEC agreement can be credibly pursued.
The barriers of distance and communication awe down and, In the end, It is not
easy to say why others should not follow.
We only need the courage to ask the question.
In APEC we did ask t.
And suddenly we are talking as a region in many forums, like this one. thinkm
as a region. ' 143: .9 
That was the source of the little puff of euphoria.
Thol feeling that what we had just done could be done again.
We can break down language and cultural bamers and Increase the
understanding and respect between us.
And we can break down the barriers to trade and Investment
We can prevent bottlenecks before they develop.
We can find creative ways to deal with issues before they become problems.
Global communications. for instance.
it is difficult to overestimate the impact that global communications wiil have on the
daily lives of all of us.
And, for that matter, on the daily operations of the media.
Interactive multimedia. In particular, now has the potential to become a new force
In education, art, culture and the media.
That Is why In the Australian Government's cultural policy, Creattve Nation, we
took a number of major Initiatives to generate a vibrant multimedia Industry as part
of our push into the information age.
These specific Initiatives seek to build on our creative abilities: a substantial and
innovative film and television Industry; our software skills and our entrepreneurial
traditions. They also seek to utilise what is one of the more advanced telecommunications
networks In the world as a platform upon which the multimedia Industry can be
Most of you here will be aware that our two major telecommunications players,
Teistra. and Optus. have plans to Install broadband cable to millions of Australian
homes before the turn of the century.
The plans involve some of Australias biggest and best known media corporations
which should come as no surprise given the convergence taking place across
media, information and telecommunications industries. 
These developments have profound implications for media organisations right
around the world and I am sure that all of you here are already grappling with the
challenges they pose.
I think It is worth making the observation that in all this, there is the real possibility
that those large media organisations. which have traditionally relied on the
broadcast nature of their medium, are going to come under Increasing pressure as
the ' iemocraisatlon of our information-gathering via networks like the Internet
takes effect.
That Is not to say that the major media organisations won't remain global players.
They will because some people will prefer to have their information handed to
themn In an easily digestible form.
In fact, there will be so much Information available that it may well be those who
can h~ est package and tailor it to specific needs who will gain a large share of the
globil information gain.
But for those who actively search for Information arnd news. the means of
communication available will enable them to sidesiep the hierarchical nature of
broacast newis and entertainment.
Via th~ eir PC they will be able to pick and choose publications and author at will.
This wIll also lead to an explosion of communities of interest groups of people
interested In a particular topic macroeconomics or microbiology. Chinese
medicine or the music of Chile will have access to all relevant Infbrmation on the
subject world wide and the ability to communicate with others expeut and
Interes-ted worldwide.
Recipients of information will have far greater choice In the information that they
choose to receive, and this will have considerable effects on media orgariLsatlons
whch are not used to the nature and level of their competition.
As the technology becomes more sophisticated, anyone with a small camera and
notebook computer will be able to show the whole world events taking place
virtually anywhere on the globe.
And, even if they clon't have a camera, they will still be able to descrbe events
taking place as they occur.
Broadcast will continue to exist, but it will be broadcast from the bottom up ralther
than th, 3 top down. 3 4 ' 1 
6
And anyone who wants to will be a journalist,
As the technology becomes more Sophisticated more parts of the globe will open
up.
This will, of course. have profound effects on the extent to which individual
governments can regulate the flow of Information both within and Into their nations.
In some cases, It may well be near impossible.
Governments can take steps to restrict the flow of Information and ideas: but they
do so at the nisk of limiting access to the very communication technologies that, in
the information era of the next century, will be so critical to national economic
development. This Ison e of the key challenges facing governments inthe region, particularly
if those~ governments which are less open than others.
And in one sense, this is why last week's Bogor Declaration of APEC leaders was
so profound.
It committed the developed APEC countries to achieving free trade by the year
2010 and the developing APEC countries by the year 2020.
It was a recognition that In the coming century. economic advancement will be
inextricably lInked to the openness of national economies.
Those who embrace the world economy and the information revolution now driving
it will prosper.
Those who don't will pay a heavy price.
I don't for one moment want to underestimate te task of translating the political
commitment of Bogor into an economic reality.
I don't underestimate the challenges we face.
But Bcgor means we will face them.
It means we " a faced the future.
I The commitment we made Is an enormous step forward.
For instance, it can hardly have escaped anyone's notice that the Bogor
I Declaration involved both developing and developed counties.
34 42 
It wasn't a case of developed countries trying to drag developing countries along to
a taible they didn't want to sit at.
To the contrary, the Bogor Declaration was very much the initiative of the
President of one of the worids most Important developing countries.
It is a great tribute to President Soeharto's leadership and standing in the region.
it is also a measure of his vision and grasp of the possibilities on offer In the next
century. The fact that Australia was able to play such an Important role in the whole AP EC
process, by launching the initiative in 1989 and then by turning it Into a Heads of
Government and leaders' meeting embracing a free trade agenda, shows just how
much Australia has changed In recent years.
While I am sure that many people In the region have a reasonable appreciation of
the nature of contemporary Australia. there is no doubt that the vast majority are
not so well informed.
That Is something we want to rectify.
I know, for example, tht it is still widely believed that the White Australia policy
still operates.
It was abolished more than twenty years ago.
Australia is, after all, a country where one In five of our population was born
overseas. And Hyt ou add to that number all the children of overseas-born parents you have
44per cent or almost half, of our total population.
While Australia Is neither a monocultural nor a monolithic society. and while
Australian communities ame separated by vast disances; and vastly different
regional and cultural affections, profound ties of fellow feeling unite us.
These days we ae Increasingly united by the pride and the pleasure we take In
the difference itself In multicultural Australia.
Our respect and enthusiasm for cultural diversity has become a defining element
of Australia's; national sentiment. 3 ' 14 3 
It was some indication of this fact when a recent poll revealed that a clear majority
of Australians viewed the recent wave of Asian immigration as of significant benefit
to Ajstralla.
Whatever way you look at it, the contrast between the Australia of today and the
Australia of thirty years or even twenty years ago could not be more marked.
The economic changes have been as profound as the cultural ones.
A decade of reform has given us one of the most open economies In the world.
Some time ago now, we floated the dollar, deregulated our financial markets,
knocked down the tariff wall and pushed ahead with a widespread program of
industry and mlcroeconomic reform.
That reform process has delivered substantial benefits.
We are now growing at 4 to 5 per cent. The Economist believes that next year we
will continua to grow faster than the other major industria. 1ised economies in the
world. We also have increasing business Investment, a big rise in employment, an
underlying inflation rate of two per cent and continued growth In exports.
In fact, 60 per cent of all Australian exports are to t Asian region a share that
has doubled In less than thirty years.
Exports to the ASEAN countries, for example, are at least equal to those going to
either the United States or Europe.
Trhis major shift of national focus to t region has also seen the reach of the
Australian media extend further Into the Asian region.
Radio Australia, which has been bro dating to the region for many years, now
has an estimated sixty mrillion listeners worldwide.
More recently, we have seen the establishment of Australia Television
International which now broadcasts to millions throughout the region.
Its charter Is to build on Radio Austr-alias reputation as an authoritative,
independent and Impartial provider of international news and information, and of
high quality entertainment which Is sensible to the cultural mores of a highly
diverse audience.
3,' 144 
9
Accompanying this whole push into Asia has been a large increase in the numbers
of Australan journalists based In th~ e region.
On% 3 problem with the coverage of Asia and the Pacific in the Australian media is
that, In my view, there Is not enough of it
But things are improving as the foreign pages of most of our newspapers show.
All of us get deluged with Information about the US or Britain, but if greater
regional coverage generates only a regional equivalent of an 0 J Simpson or
House of Windsor media soap opera, we're better off without ft.
But what we really need is better coverage: and that depends on first, ensuring we
have a flow of information fro a wide variety of sources and second, that those
sources are well-informed.
This works both ways.
Coverage of Australia in the Asian media also tends to be limited and to fall too
easily Into caricatures of Australians preferring the beach to work.
In this ignorance stakes, things are pretty well matched.
Not surprisingly, the reportage of Australian journalists has sometimes created
difficulties in our relations with some regional countries, particularly those where
the views and policies of the Australian media are seen by some as
interchangeable with the views and policies of the Australian Government
Media freedom Is a fundamental and unalterable tenet of Australian democracy
and Australian life.
Here in Australia, from time to time, those on both sides of politics may wish it
were a more positive and altoether less irksome and contrary beast, but these
sensibilities only exist at the margins.
At the centre, Australians hold the right to be objectively and critically informed
about current political developments as inalienable.
We do think, however, that when our media go to the region to the extent that
thy are ' our media they should be responsible and sensitive to the specific
circumstances of different nations.
Objectivity and knowledge about a regional audience which constitutes a mosaic
of different ethnic and linguistic groups Is essential if the Australian media are to
gain widespread respect I44.14 
However, as we seek to understand our Asian neighbours we are equally Justified
In expecting that they should do the same of us that the tolerance and
understanding should be applied equally to Australia anid its media.
At the same time, it Is important not to overtook the positive role that our media
can play in building a sense of community among regional countries.
With the advent of multimedia as a means by whch culture can be delivered, there
Is a real risk that local culture will be swamped by Imported products.
That Is even more likely to be the case where the Imported culture is of a higher
technical quality: In education and information programTs, for Instance, our children
are more likely to learn through a medium which Is more intuitive, and more fun to
operate.
That places a great responsibility on us to provide programs which take account of
cultural diversity and sensibility.
That was one very Important reason why we launched the multimedia initiatives
we did to build within Australia a multmedia industry which will ensure thal we*
continue to sustain and originate our own culture.
Given Australia's strong links to many of the Asian countries In the region,
Including the great link of migration, I think there is significant scope for Australia
to develop content for the region, content which Is sensitive to local cultures and
promotes them.
While we should seek to use the new communications technologies as a vehicle to
develop greater understanding and a greater regional Identity. we should also
encourage the maintenance of distinctive and diverse cultural values.
Australia Is perhaps better placed than most to do ifuls.
In this. as in so much else, technological change will have greater Impact than
government flat.
In the end ' cultural sensitMWi if we mean by that a thoroujgh understanding of
the cultural and political background within which events are taking place can
only come from the media themselves from journalists, editors and managers
who know what they are talking about and appreciate the complexity of the region.
3,146 
Most Importantly, It will come from informed consumers whose knowledge of jhq
countries they are reading about or heaing about Is deeper than what they pick up
from a five paragraph news story about riots or political change or economic
growth. That is why Austrailla has been putting such emphasis on Asia In our education
system.
We are developing a national Asian Languages Strategy designed to Increase the
number of Asian language teachers and to develop teacher training courses as
well as national student proficiency levels in languages such as Mandarn.
Indonesian, Japanese and Korean.
We are very conscious that we must continue to Increase our understanding of the
countries In the region that we will become a more effective player and a more
effective partner as we do so.
Obviously, the Bogor Declaration has commnitted us all to this.
It committed us all to a greater level of regional consciousness.
It therefore committed us Irrevocably to paths of change.
In this we feel confident that we can say we are at least as well advanced as
anyone even, maybe, that we are more advanced than most.
It is now more than a decade since we saw the need for major structural reform In
Austraiia. In tha* time we have learned a lot about change both about implementing it and
about managing It
We learned that it Is a tOring process, but it is also an exhilarating one.
And because it Is so rich In possibilities for all our countries and all our people,
surely none is more exhilarating than the process which so rapidly took us to the
declaration In Indonesia last week.
Perhaps the most important element at work in Bogor and Seattle was the one too
obvious to earn much reporting.
It was that all the countries of the region, in all their diversity, were talking to each
other, In a common forum, with a common interest.
The ac: of communication was the important one. 34 4 7 
r1 12
Ultimately it is from this that all those vast post-Cold War possibilities derive.
We need to keep the communication going.
We need to keep it expanding and deepening.
That Is why you, the region's media, have such a crucial and creative role to play
and why I am so gratified to see you here in Sydney.
Thank you.
3448 . iX 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING OF MANUFACTURING PLANT OF MERCK SHARPE AND
DOHIVE PTY LTD, SOUTH GRANVILLE, SYDNEY, 23 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Paul Bell, Managing Director of MSD, Jim Beattie, Lee
Ausbumr, Lesley Russell, Jim Gazilas, other distinguished members of the
management and ladies and gentlemen the employees of Merck, Sharpe and
Dohmo Australia.
It Is a great pleasure for me to be Involved with this. Not simply because it is so
proximate to my awn constituency here in Sydney and part of the general area
of Sydney where I am from and which I have represented now in the House of
Representatives for over a quarter of a century, but more particularly what has
happened here and is happening here is the very essence of what I have been
seeking to do and trying to bring about In the House of Representatives, In the
Government over the last 12 years.
I think It is entirely true, as Paul Bell said, there was a time when the investment
in this business had ceased and It was to be, as he put It, ' mothballed' or run
down and where it would soon be merchandising or wholesaling, distributing
products made by other arms of the company abroad. And, to see such a
change from that to one where we are seeing a very large Investment, a world
class production facility and packaging facility and distribution and a very strong
change and commitment on the part of the employees to the business is the
kind ol model that Australia needs and the model which will, of course, change
our industriaJ culture and Improve our levels of wealth, our capacity to employ
people. their rates of pay and, of course, our relationship with the rest of the
world. I was partIcularly pleased In the briefing I had a few moments ago to see
that exports had risen to about $ 125 million a year now, rising towards a
forecaint $ 250 million a year In a few years from now from virtually nothing not
that long ago. And, it Is part of that sea change in Australia looking out rather
than looking in. 
Now, what has obviously happened here is that there was a real conversation
betwee3n this industry the pharmaceutical Industry and the Government in
the 1 SSOs and, I think, Governments have got to make key decisions about
whether they want particular industries or whether they don't, what they can do
to try mnd make the environment more conducive to them staying and investing.
And, In a major policy change in the 1980s across a range of areas, we
improved the atmospherics for the pharmaceutical industry in Australia. I
suppose the most well understood part of that by those people In the Industry
and probably members of the public is the factor Tf scheme which was one of
the things which underpinned the future of the industry.
Now, governments can do those things, but if companies don't take them up
well, riot much Is likely to happen. But, I think, that at Merck, Sharpe and
Dohme they have seen a willingness on the part of the Government to say ' yes,
we want this Industry and it can make a contribution to our national product and
to our exports' and the company said ' in that case, we will see what we can do,
get a strategic plan together, a corporate plan and make some Investments and
try to make it all happen.' As a consequence we have seen this very large
investment here $ 75 million the most modem developments in the
production of pharmaceutical products and what I can see around the plant,
tremendous camaraderie and esprit de corp between all of you who work for the
business and those who manage it.
I suppose, this Is part of the sea change in Australia too. It is no accident that
we have an Inflation rate of just under 2 per cent. That Is there because of cooperation
from the workplace and because of some wisdom on the part of
employers not seeking to charge what the market will bear. These things have
changed the culture of industrial relations in Australia and there Is a commitment
and I hear Paul Bell say about a number of unions committing themselves to the
business here. I think there were 13 originally, there are now five and there has
been that commitment and, I think, when one looks at a lot of other societies
which have succeeded in production and in exports and probably Japan
obviouIsly comeS to mind, the management of great companies in that country
always seem to get this conducive relationship with the workforce. I suppose
this Is one of the points of difference we have with the Coalition in this country.
We say let's get people committed in a group way, to group objectives and let's
all travel In the same direction together rather than singling people off for
Individual wage contracts. If they pipe up they lose their job, If they don't sign
up for particular things they lose their jobs. That is not the environment, I think,
which produces the kind of outcome that you really need In a group sense to
make a business work, that is, a commitment right across the business and not
simply people taking employment contracts out of fear or out of pressure or out
of something else. The way to get the change and to improve the productivity 
and the culture of the business Is to get that commitment from the employees
and the management to work together.
I was delighted when I was taken around and just shown parts of the plant to
hear a number of the people demonstrating it to me say ' Well, some of our Ideas
are In there'. In other words good Ideas are appreciated rather than good ideas
being, In a sense, rejected because they haven't come from the top down. I
mean, there has been a sea change in Australian management. There was a
time when the boss saw the workers for a cup of tea and a scone on Christmas
Eve and that was that end of It or a beer maybe, then they charged off and all
came back to their being their grumpy self for the new year. Now, that has
changed and, I think, where ever you see managers enlighten people, who want
a goodJ relationship with their employees, people of good will can get It and, I
think, ' this business proves that too.
I'll just say one thing about the factor P scheme, I have been urged by Paul Bell
to continue to support it and part of the value of coming to a plant like this is to
see it in action. I think, we are providing something like $ 1 billion worth of
assistance and in return 17 companies have committed themselves to
undertake nearly $ 8 billion in additional exports. Now, when one looks at the
nature of the products here, there Is not just the added value and this is the sort
of added value that Australia can use, but there are also products that actually
make you feel good about producing, you are producing something that Is going
to help somebody and you are doing something socially useful as well as
something as productive and economically sensible.
So, this is, In a sense, part of the model that we see for Australia, being driven
by thei thing that Is our great comparative advantage-that is our education
systern. Because if you ask many Australians what Is Australia's comparative
advantage? they will say Well, it Is our minerals or it is our wool', but I would
say It is our education. As you know, 10 years ago only three kids in
completed secondary school, this year it is eight In 10, and we are streaming
per cant of those through universities and we are now building vocational
education to sit beside the universities so that we can have a very high
participation rate in school and a competent tertiary and vocational education
system which will feed businesses of this kind. Then, with our Incentives for
research and development I am delighted that we are actually seeing primary
research in pharmaceuticals undertaken here in Australa and here particularly
by Merck, Sharpe and Dohme.
So, congratulations to the Company. I mean, it Is always a tough task master
being the local subsidiary of an International parent company, singing for your
supper, trying to get a commitment by the international board to capital. It is
one thing committing it yourself, but when you have got to get someone else to
commit it, it is pretty hard and you have got to have a good story to tell and I 
4
hope that the story that Paul Bell and his colleagues have been able to tell
Merck In the United States is a story of Australia. The story of a modem,
sophisticated country with a strong base in education, that Is Interested in doing
productive things and doing them well and shipping to the part of the world
where we know we can be very competitive.
So, when you hear the term added value, this is what we mean and you see It In
these modem surroundings. And to see that commitment and, obviously, the
very good will that exists between all of you Is a real pleasure for me Indeed. It
Is with even greater pleasure that I now declare these facilities open and to
draw the curtain on the plaque. Thank you Indeed.
ends 



**** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY""* (( 2A
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
NATIONAL STRATEGIES CONFERENCE
SYDNEY 24 NOVEMBER 1994
It's a great pleasure to be here tonight to open this
very important National Strategies Conference.
It is an auspicious curtain raiser for the revamped EPAC,
and I congratulate the organisers, particularly Glen
Withers. I think a couple of comments need to be made at the
start. The first is that this is a conference of ideas: it is by
way of a think tank, a discussion among a very wide range
of Australians about where our opportunities lie, what
our ambitions should be, and what are the best ways to
realise them.
In other words, it is a means of creating some national
strategic ferment. If we create enough of it, new
policies will follow in due course.
The second comment that needs to be made is that the
focus here is not on economics alone.
The focus is on the things we need to do ( and need nct to
do) if we want Australia to remain a very good place to
live a pre-eminent and improving place to live and
work and raise our children.
While the strength and flexibility of the economy is
fundamental to this goal, a strong economy will not by
itself generate a strong society, or a compassionate and
creative one.
If the various aims of this conference can be boiled down
to one, it might be this: how do we balance economic
imperatives with human ones for security and peace of
mind, for a decent environment, for cultural nourishment,
and, particularly in this era of relentless change, for
confidence, hope and belief.
On the one hand, I imagine, this conference will be
examining where change is needed and the best way to
achieve it. 
On the other, I should hope you will be looking at ways
to ca; 1 with change.
Perpetual motion is stressful. The new is exciting but
we know it also has an element of shock about it.
This conference will make a contribution to our national
life if it can help us find solutions to these problems
which beset modern life. If it can help us keep moving
at a respectable clip, but with everyone on board and
without too much motion sickness.
In fact, we are doing this better than most. In the past
year, the Australian economy has grown at more than 4 per
cent.
At the same time, we have added to one of the most
sophisticated social security systems in the world a
revolutionary Job Compact and other education and labour
market programs, to extend opportunities to the long term
unemployed and make Australia's safety net more secure.
There is every reason to be positive.
We have an outstandingly favourable conjunction of
circumstances, the best for 30 years economic growth
combined with rapid employment growth, falling
unemployment, low inflation, record profit levels and
continuing high levels of international competitiveness.
The foundations of Australian society are very strong
they have never been stronger I believe and the
opportunities have never been greater.
I know some people have been saying in recent times that
things were better a generation ago.
It is true that unemployment was lower then and there is
no doubt that Australians enjoyed a high standard of
living. But it is also true that the labour force was
much smaller and a smaller percentage of Australians
participated in it.
This is not the time to enter into a debate with the past
and those who continue to prefer it to contemporary
Australia. But some of the nonsense should be shown for what it is.
Real household disposable income is about 50 per cent
higher now than at the end of the 1960s.
And we are surely much richer in the less tangible
things. 
In cultural terms so much less provincial, inward
looking and xenophobic. Much more open to the world and
very much more worldly.
This is an infinitely more interesting Australia and
one much more in charge of its destiny.
I hope you bring to this conference a sense of
achievement and optimism which Australians are entitled
to feel.
Not smugness or complacency, because too much remains to
be done and because, in this very competitive world, the
process of change and adjustment never ends.
But we have every reason to feel proud of what we have
done in recent times and confident about what we can do.
And it would be as foolish to leave this sentiment out of
your equations as it would be to leave out that other
great intangible of Australian life I mean a people
who, by tradition, recognise that cohesion, tolerance,
and fairness are the greatest social virtues.
Tie these things to the unprecedented opportunities which
now exist particularly those opportunities in the
region and the conclusion is inescapable.
The starting point of this conference should be that at
this point in Australia's history, things are very much
in our favour.
So what we need and what this conference can help
provide, I hope, are practical, coherent strategies to
consolidate our gains.
It would be inappropriate, of course, to pre-empt any of
your deliberations; but perhaps I should spell out what
are, broadly speaking, the Government's priorities.
First, of course, we need to maintain a competitive
growing economy if we are also to maintain steady
improvements in living standards and lower rates of
unemployment. For this reason we continue to seek greater economic
and political engagement with the region where the
opportunities are greatest the Asia-Pacific. That
is an essential element of Government strategy.
Our physical environment is our greatest natural
asset and a defining force in our national life and
character. It is crucial to any national strategy
that we redouble our efforts to achieve sustainable
development across the continent.
Finding paths to social and economic justice for
groups that have long been disadvantaged has, I 
think, been a hallmark of this Government. Because
it makes not just for a fairer society but a more
cohesive, confident and productive one, it remains a
policy priority.
We will also continue to encourage a creative and
cultural environment which enriches all Australians
and fosters ideas and innovation in an era when, as
probably never before, such things determine the
success of individuals and nations.
And because we are always stronger when we are sure
of our identity and we will continue to do those
things which are necessary to encourage a better
understanding of our democratic heritage, a deeper
faith in it and a deeper sense of what it means to
be Australian.
Australia's success self-evidently depends upon the
faith and belief of its young people, and that in
large part depends upon their education and skills
their capacity to create and to seize opportunities.
Education and training are fundamental to the
Government's national strategy, particularly the
development of the TAFE system.
Let me take you briefly through these objectives one by
one. The challenge to economic policy is to sustain the
favourable conditions we now have while reducing
unemployment to the level of around 5 per cent we have
set as a target by the end of the century.
This obviously implies a need both for effective monetary
and fiscal policies and for continuing microeconomic
reform to increase our productive capacity.
We have set out a program to reduce the budget deficit to
around 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97.
Not only is this one of the most stringent targets set by
any OECD country, it is also being pursued by an economy
which has one of the strongest public sector balance
sheets in the world.
On the monetary side, we have reacted quickly to emerging
trends, and clearly the authorities will continue to
monitor developments closely and take whatever action is
necessary to sustain the recovery.
We have achieved a great deal in the area of
microeconomic reform but the forward agenda remains
prodigious.
We will soon have the report of the National Transport
Planning Task force. 
In December, the Broadband Services Expert Group will
deliver its final report, which I will discuss a little
later.
But the central microeconomic game at the moment is
competition policy, including the proposed reforms to the
electricity and gas sectors.
The ball is very much in the States' court. Their case
for so-called compensation is more strident than
reasonable and if they try to drive too hard a bargain
the Commonwealth will simply go it alone.
We will pursue it in the national interest.
As I have said more than once in recent times, the States
are a permanent part of the political culture and their
sovereignty and integrity are not in question.
What is questionable is the constant " States rights"
refrain, as if the federation was created for this
purpose rather than to make an Australian nation.
The rights on microeconomic reform, like every other
issue, pertain to the rights of Australians and the
Commonwealth's responsibility is to protect and advance
those rights.
The Commonwealth's responsibility is to continue the
campaign for a more competitive and productive nation.
Every one of us knows that microeconomic reform is
fundamental to this. It is, therefore, fundamental to
our continuing success in the region and the world.
Last week's APEC leaders meeting in Bogor was a critical
turning point for Australia and the region, and really no
one should be in any doubt about it.
First in Seattle, then in Bogor, we have settled some
fundamental questions about the shape of our region and
the institutions that will serve it into the next
century. APEC makes less likely the division of the post-Cold War
world into three competing blocs. By engaging China,
Japan, the United States and the developing economies of
ASEAN in a multilateral economic framework, it also gives
us greater political and strategic assurance during a
period of very rapid change.
The firm commitment which leaders made in Bogor to free
trade in the region by 2010 for developed countries and
2020 for developing countries, is the best sign we could
have that the dynamic growth which has characterised East
Asia over the past ten years, will continue. 
APEC, as I have said recently, did not have to happen.
There were many other alternative futures for the region,
and among them the most likely candidate was drift. All
of them, I am convinced, would have been less happy
outcomes for Australia and for the countries around us.
But APEC is not the only or even the primary, means of
our engagement with the region. Strong, trusting,
bilateral links with our neighbours are essential both
in their own right, and if APEC's ambitions are to be
sustained. In our strong and diversified ties with Japan, our
rapidly deepening relationship with Indonesia, our longstanding
links with China and our growing relations with
Korea, our ties with the region have never been better.
This is a strong foundation on which to build.
Building a bilateral relationship of substance and trust
with Indonesia has been a prime aim of the Keating
Government. Indonesia is our largest, nearest neighbour much of our
future and theirs will be governed by what we are able to
do together.
At the cultural, commercial and strategic level,
Indonesia is the country of the greatest importance to
Australia; hence building that co-operation and
interdependence is central to Australia's long run
interests. The development of APEC will have important consequences
for the way the countries of this region interact, and
therefore for Australian security.
The maintenance of a strong, self-reliant defence
capability is a central requirement. We must be able to
deter and defeat any attack on Australia.
The Government will shortly be tabling its Defence White
Paper which will look at the way the Australian Defence
Force should be shaped over the next fifteen years. The
White Paper will build on the changes we have instituted
over the past decade to ensure that Australia can protect
its security in a rapidly changing external environment.
A critical element in maintaining defence self-reliance
is the role of Australian defence industries, We have
already shown in the construction of the Collins-class
submarines and in our Anzac Frigate Program that
Australia has the technological capacity to match the
best in the world.
We want to build this into a core capacity for defence
procurement, for our own needs and for the region as
well. 
Our economic success and, no less, maintaining our
quality of life into the next century depends on
sustainable use of the environment.
We have been blessed with a superb physical environment
and our responsibility to sustain it is total and
inescapable. We owe it to more than ourselves we owe it to future
generations of Australians and just as certainly we owe
it to the world.
This is an enormous challenge.
We need to address the emission of greenhouse gases and
the management of our coasts, the treatment of our
sewerage and the management of our forests, the control
of feral pests and woody weeds.
This evening let me concentrate on just two the
management of our coasts and land management.
The drought has highlighted the destructive effects of
past land management practices.
Our soils have been degraded. Too much of our more
sensitive land has been over-used.
We have not looked after our inland rivers properly.
We could well face a serious problem with blue-green
algae again this year because of the high level of
nutrients we are feeding into the rivers and the lack of
water flow.
These are large problems and ad hoc solutions will not
do. That is why we established the National Strategy for
Ecologically Sustainable Development ESD.
The Strategy embodied the twin goals of economic
development and conservation of the natural ecosystems on
which life depends.
The Strategy is not an end in itself, but a framework
within which governments are expected to work when making
decisions about development.
I know there is a feeling abroad that there has been much
more talk than action on sustainable development but I
believe we are about to see some dramatic signs of
progress. A prime example is in agriculture. 
Across the country farmers are adopting a more scientific
and conservationist approach to land and water
management. The prime mover, of course, has been the National
Landcare program.
Landcare has reached a lot of rural Australia but it
should reach all of it.
A general consensus has emerged that the past four or
five years of raising awareness and planning should now
be translated into action.
Together with participants in the Landcare movement, the
Government is now looking at how we can advance the
overall Landcare objective by promoting sustainable
agriculture and better management of natural resources.
Earlier today I announced a new Land Management Task
Force whose aim is to promote and facilitate the adoption
of property management plans by the farming sector.
At present it is estimated that more than 80 per cent of
farmers do not possess a farm plan including information
on soil and land capacity.
We want to draw into the sustainable development effort
all levels of government and elements of the private
sector, especially the banks.
The results will be five years or so in coming, but they
will be real and tangible.
Among them will be better water quality in our rivers, an
end to declining yields and new more marketable products.
Sustainable development bears a direction relationship to
our strategy for regional development, which is to say
that the great deal depends upon the capacity of local
communities and individuals to take responsibility for
their own future.
We see a lot of Australia's future energy and direction
coming from the regions.
This is where real affections and attachments reside. If
we can get the skills, the strategic infrastructure and
appropriate financial instruments to them, regional
Australia will play a dynamic part in our national
development. The development of regional industries should be matched
by the development of regional identity.
Because it encourages both greater variety and greater
protection, it seems to me good sense to associate
products ( particularly food products) with their regional 
source good sense for the industries and the regions
and good sense for the national economy.
I think there is little doubt that regions with a
stronger sense of identity and common interest will also
see more readily the need for sustainable development
practices and will more conscientiously adopt them.
Another environmental issue of great consequence is the
Australian coast.
In fact, there is probably no better example of why
national strategies are necessary.
Historically responsibility for the settlement of our
coast has rested with various levels of government and
various levels of administration without any underlying
direction or unifying objectives. The effect of this
lack of vision is now painfully apparent.
The overwhelming beauty of our coast is marred by urban
sprawl, poor planning and pollution.
We have generally lost the balance between conservation
and development. The number and complexity of issues and
interests involved make this a huge task.
The nature of this problem was documented in the Coastal
Zone Inquiry conducted by the Resource Assessment
Commission. The Report set out ways of steering decision
making at all levels of government towards the same
principles and the same goals.
This is not a master plan, more of a map which lays out
our journey.
We need more maps.
We need them in the cities to keep them both highly
liveable and exciting.
The Urban Design Task Force whose Report was delivered by
its convener, by John Mant, earlier this week offers us a
comprehensive map of the future of our cities which
means nothing less of course than the future for the
great majority of Australians.
On the subject of maps, right now we are engaged in
devising and implementing a strategy for the information
highway in Australia.
In the future, information will be the crucial element,
the key resource for Australians.
As I have said before, how well we play the information
game will determine how well we prosper as a nation. 
That is why the Report of the Broadband Services Expert
Group is so important. The interim report has already
significantly influenced our thinking.
It has highlighted the importance to Australia's cultural
development of our content providers having maximum
access to the information highway.
My colleague, Michael Lee, earlier today set down some
principles on broadband cable networks which will help to
ensure that we have such a competitive and open system.
These are fundamental principles we will not divide the
country up into regional monopolies for our carriers; we
will ensure that there is non-discriminatory access to
the broadband network; and there will be open access for
Pay TV usage of cable after a period of up to 5 years.
The leeway is to encourage the rollout of the cable by
allowing those concerned to share in the initial revenue.
The interim BSEG report also stressed how well placed we
are to be a major content provider. I am confident that
in the next few years, there will be unparalleled
opportunities for many talented young Australians in this
industry. The initiatives in Creative Nation will help them to get
a start.
To co-ordinate our efforts in this rapidly changing area,
I will be chairing a new Council on Broadband Services.
The Council will provide a focal point for examining new
developments in information technologies or opportunities
for broadband services and it will advise on issues
including the Government's own use of the new
technologies or various regulatory issues.
These things are essential. They are to this moment in
our history what railways and roads were a hundred years
ago. Earlier, I said that social and economic justice for
disadvantaged groups remains one of our priorities.
I think people have heard me talk about the principles
underlying the Native Title Act and the Land Fund for
Aboriginal Australians.
I also think they are familiar with the Government's
programs for the long term unemployed and the principles
underlying them.
It will be enough to repeat that we take the view that
the social and economic reasons for bringing the long
term unemployed back into the mainstream workforce are
compelling. 
Compelling because it is both a massive waste of
resources and an invitation to alienation and social
discord to leave them out.
The principle underlying the Government's social strategy
remains for want of a more elegant word inclusion.
Among other things, that means calling on all of our
talents and energy.
It is in that context, among others, that our continuing
commitment to multiculturalism may be viewed.
And the same might be said about Government policies to
promote the equality and interests of women.
Women have been a profound force in the changes of recent
years. They make decisions every day which profoundly
affect the life of the nation. They make them in
families, communities, schools and universities,
factories and offices. They ought to be making them
more of them in parliaments and boardrooms.
Most of you have probably also heard me recite the
Government's record of achievement in this realm as well.
I suspect you are also well versed in the reasons ' why
this year we delivered Creative Nation, the first
thoroughgoing cultural policy in Australia's history.
And I will not again regale you with the obvious reasons
glaringly obvious I would have thought why Australia
should in this last decade of the century substitute an
Australian for a British monarch as our head of state.
Broadly speaking, these things are all related to
encouraging in young Australians a deep faith in their
country belief in its best traditions and its future.
Creative Nation is about enriching the climate in which
they live. The republic is about leaving no room for
ambiguity if we cannot express our faith in Australia
through the ultimate symbol of our nationhood, what
message are we sending to the next generation?
Not, surely, the wholehearted one we ought to.
The symbolic gestures are important. The real ones are
more so.
The most important initiative we have taken for young
Australians in the past three years has been the
extension of technical and further education of the
TAFE system.
In the 1980s we greatly expanded secondary and tertiary
education. We increased secondary retention rates from
around three in ten to eight in ten. 
That was a great achievement and we need one of similar
dimensions, perhaps greater dimensions, in vocational
education and training.
The Youth Training Initiative announced in Working Nation
under which fifteen to seventeen year olds will be case
managed into education, training or work is one step
toward that goal.
The creation of the Australian National Training
Authority to drive the expansion of the TAFE system is
another. The Australian Student Traineeship Foundation, a scheme
delivered through regional partnerships between schools
and industry is yet another.
All these initiatives go towards meeting the great
education challenge for Australian in the 90s to bring
vocational education and training up to the level which
our economic and social ambitions demand. Ultimately, it
should be to a level the equal of any in the world.
It is more than economic and social ambition which drives
this, however.
In the end, meeting those ambitions translates into that
same faith in Australia I mentioned in another context.
Reduced to its fundamentals, the strategic aim of the
Government's policies on vocational education is giving
young people a reason to believe in Australia.
It is our most basic responsibility to give them a reason
for believing. And the best way to do that is to give
them the capacity to grasp the opportunities that now
exist. Nothing is so important to the Government as this and
nothing should be more important to this conference.
This conference which I am now very pleased to declare
open. Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER 102Pi4
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
SECOND WORLD WAR CIVILIAN MEDAL
I am pleased to announce today the establishment of a new Medal the
Civilian Service Medal 1939-1945 which will be awarded to thousands of
Australian civilians who served their country during World War 11.
Final approval for the Medal has now been granted by Her Majesty the
Queen.
The award's aim is to recognise the contribution of those civilians who served
in arduous circumstances in Australia during World War Two in organisations
subject to military-like conditions. Its creation was one of the
recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry into Defence Awards which
reported to the Government earlier this year.
The Government has so far approved four organisations as meeting the
criteria for the award of the Medal. They are:
The Australian Women's Land Army;
The North Australia Railway;
The Civil Constructional Corps; and the
Voluntary Aid Detachment ( for VADs who did not go on to military
service during the War).
Other organisations are under consideration for the Medal and if they are
found to meet the criteria their members will be eligible to receive the award.
All Australians who served in one of these organisations for 180 days or more
may apply for the Medal, to be awarded by the Governor-General on the
recommendation of the Minister for Administrative Services. The Medal will
also be awarded posthumously to next-of-kin, so close relatives of deceased
Australians who served in these organisations may also apply.
It is estimated that around 68,000 people will qualify for the award.
Recipients can choose to have their Medal personally presented by their
local Federal MP or Senator, or have it posted to them. 
Designed by Mr Horst Hahn, Chief Engraver of the Royal Australian Mint, the
Civilian Service Medal will be made of bronze. The Medal is ensigned with
the Federation Star and its design features the Southern Cross, symbolising
Australia, and Golden Wattle, symbolising the civilian population combined in
the defence of the nation. The accompanying ribbon will be three broad
vertical bands of opal green, ochre and opal green, separated by two thin
white stripes.
The Civilian Service Medal will be placed immediately under the Police
Overseas Service Medal in the Australian Order of Precedence of Honours
and Awards.
Application forms for the Medal can be obtained from:
electorate offices of Federal MPs and Senators; or
the Medals Validation Unit, Department of Administrative Services,
GPO Box 1331, ACT 2601. Phone: 06 275 3653 or 06 275 3654.
CANBERRA November 1994 



TEL: 2 . Dec 4 16 : 13 No .013 01/
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE YOUTH TRAINING INITIATIVE PROGRAM,
PARRAMATTA TOWN HALL, PARRAMATTA, 2 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much for that Introduction, Eden. Caroline and Ian, my
ministerial colleagues Simon Crean and Ross Free, and Paul Elliott, the
Member for Parramatta and his wife Julie, the Sarah Redfern High School
and young Australians. It is a very great pleasure for me to be involved today
with my colleagues in this initiative which came from Working Nation.
Because, I think the thing you have to know is that 11 years ago when those
of you who are now completing High School were 7 years of age, or those of
you who are in Year 11 were 6 some of us were thinking about a new
Australia. We were Imagining a country completely different than the one we
had at the time. Because you know enough about our history to know why we
inherit this vast continent, and have it as one to ourselves, we were part of
the old industrial culture of the West European/ North American world under
what used to be called Imperial preference. And we built up an industrial
base in this country which became antiquated and out of touch and
unproductive, and when the countries we traded with went into trade blocs
like Britain went into the European Community -Australia was left with this
ring fence of tariffs, and inside it a great heap of industrial archaeology.
Before that, of course, as the clip said, there were jobs aplenty. But, they
were unskilled jobs for low-value products. But, the history of the post-War
world with the rise of the great states like Japan and Germany, and the
continuing growth of the big industrial economies like the United States has
put the wealth into value added and into production which had with it
Innovation, and we in this country have had to now try and re-adapt Australia
in a relatively short period of time.
Now, that meant two things: how to employ our people what do they do, and
what sort of jobs will they have? And particularly our young people how
can we encourage them to be part of a society which produces good and 
T2EL.: Dec. 94 16: 13, No. CiI6 P-. 02/ 05
innovative things, a clever. country that has an international future? One
thing we all did know, was that we could never hope to be a clever country
when those of you in Years 11 and 12 were 6 and 7 years of age, we knew
that only 3 out of every 10 of you completed secondary school because that
is as it was. And that the rest that went back out were largely untrained 7
out of 10 untrained, Now, how can you develop a smart society with that?
And how could you look a young person in the eye and say, " We have a
place for you"?
So, we had to do 2 things remodel the Australian economy quickly,
rebalance It and take away all the ring fences, open Australia up to the world,
and at the same time, start to bring up the education of our young people.
Now, it is one of the great matters of pride to me, that in this year that same
cohort of young people it is not 3 in 10 completing secondary school, it is 8
in 10. 8 in 10. And 40% of that output is going through universities, and all
of those thousands of places have been added to the system since 1985.
Indeed, about 16 universities of the size of Sydney University have been
added to the system by this Government since 1985. But, because that is
you don't have to be a mathematician to work out the great majority of
young people were coming out of the system and not going to university, and
many untrained. Indeed, the majority untrained.
So, what we have focussed on in the last few years is developing vocational
ed -ucation, or as you would call it, TAFE. So that we have a national TAFE
system, and a national system of accreditation and a training certificate which
will give you mobility in this country, and the capacity to pick up a job. Now,
Simon Crean, Ross Free and I have been working now for a number of years
with some of our colleagues to build up that TAFE system. Because we have
got the universities well and truly up and running, the challenge now is to
build that TAFE system up, and to have it there so that as you leave school in
Year 12, you go in to that training and this period is the period we focus on
to 19 as a period of vocational preparation. In other words, the school to
work transition. So, this is what the Youth Training Initiative is about.
We had 2 things about young people in Working Nation: one was the
Australian Youth Traineeship Foundation, which is about encouraging young
people to start streaming themselves into vocational education in Years 11
and 12, while at school. That Is, to start taking on work experience and away
from school training, and picking up units for accreditation in TAFE while at
school. And Simon, Ross and I launched that in Gosford about 3 months
ago. Today, we are launching the second part of It, and that is the Youth
Training Initiative. And, the reason we are doing that is that about 14% of
students are dropping out of both school and further study. In other words,
they are not going to TAFE even if it is there, they are not going on) to a
tertiary education they are simply dropping out. Now, we have a view, and
that is that we are optimistic about this country. You saw this week we are
growing now at about 6% GDP growth, we have got inflation at under we
have had 400,000 job growth since the election. Now, this is a workforce of 8
million 400,000 jobs since the last election is a phqpomenal rate of
TEL 
TEL 3
employment growth. But we want to -stream young people ' into that flow of
jobs, and we believe that there is great cause for optimism about Australia
wo have never been mora w. mpatitive, wie have rievw Ucwi muiis iiriuvallve,
our education system is up and really driving product innovation, we are now
exporting to the Asia-Pacific as we have never done before we are actually
sitting beside the fastest growing markets in the world for the first time in
Australian history, and you might know that with APEC Asia Pacific
Economic Co-operation in a very historic declaration I was involved with in
Indonesia 2 weeks ago that we have agreed all of us the countries of the
Asia-Pacific, to develop a free trade area. Now that means that Australia will
be part of a large market that it has never been part of before, and the
exciting possibilities are there for young people to look at some of these
countries, and some of these great cities like Shanghai in China where you
see this enormous activity, or in Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam, or Jakarta in
Indonesia these are all the possibilities. You could be working for an
Australian company and very easily find yourself there, then find yourself
back in Australia, then find yourself in North America the range of
possibilities for you now Is endless and entirely invigorating.
So, with that sort of prospect and this sort of growth, we want all of you, that's
every one of you, to take the opportunities of a tertiary education, a
vocational education, and we don't want you slipping through the cracks of
the system into unemployment where your self esteem drops, where you think
the world is not interested in you, and you start turning your back on society.
This place is too rich and it has got too much going for it, for that to happen.
So, the Youth Training Initiative is something we've thought up which will start
from the first of January next year and it will work in this way: if you're under
18 and you've been unemployed for 13 weeks you'll be eligible for
assistance. Now, that assistance comes by way of a case manager. A case
manager is a person who individually makes a relationship with you and
starts to understand your educational attainments, your personality, what
your aptitudes are, what you might do. So, you have that one to one
relationship, you don't just go down to a CES office and give your name
across the counter looking for a job, or worse, not go at all. We actually have
this case management, one to one relationship where the case manager
helps you to Identify your needs, to search then for suitable education,
training and work opportunities and to help you coordinate access to services
such as labour market programs.
Now, a labour market program is something where there is a job subsidy and
there Is structured training. So, this person assesses you, tries to understand
what you are capable of, gets you back into structured training or education
or into work. In other words, we don't let you fall through the system,
somewhere. So, the Youth Training Initiative is one of those links perhaps
one of the last links in this hierarchy of changes to take young people who
are part of that 14 per cent, who run the risk of falling out of the system and
believing that nobody wants them and society isn't interested in them. This is
our way, the government's way of saying, we are interested,. we will pick you
_ Dec-, 94 140-ui, 0,5 0 S 
TEL: 2 . Dec .94 16 : 13 No .013 P. 04/* 05
4
up, we will individually enquire about you, we'll take a personal interest in you
arid we'll put you back in the system. So, this is what we are launching today.
We're launching the Youth Training Initiative. And, it also means if you're
assessed as being at high risk, that is, the likelihood of you being at high risk
of long term unemployment because of, say, your attitude, your attainment,
your family background or something a combination of factors leads one to
assess such a person as being at high risk of long term unemployment
then the case manager will start managing you immediately. In other words,
there is no 13 week wait.
So, we think that this is a great social improvement, The whole of Working
Nation was about a social Improvement. It was about saying that those
people who've been out of work for 12 months or more and that can be
people In their middle age, or young people who may be unemployed 18
months or two years that we say that this is not good enough for Australia.
This Is not good enough for a country which believes in fairness and equality.
And, we will pick you up, case manage you, train you, give you a job subsidy
and get you back into work. Now, I told you a few minutes ago that since the
election just under two years ago, we've had 400,000 job growth. About
100,000 of those have gone to the long term unemployed. This is the cause
of much satisfaction on the part of the government. Because, were we
speaking about this 10 years ago and we had 400,000 jobs, maybe 20,000
would have gone to the long term unemployed, or 25,000. Now, we're talking
about 100,000 so a quarter of the jobs are going to the long term
unemployed. And, that is because of what we call the labour market
programs and those labour market programs are actually focusing these
people up.
So, Working Nation was about that. It was about streaming the long term
unemployed back into work, it was about saying as we all move on as a
country we will move on together, we won't have an underclass where the
long term unemployed are the shock absorbers in the system who carry the
burden of economic change. But, rather, we bring them along with us and we
move them along together. But, whatever we do in this respect, as a
government, we are entirely certain we must do that and more, with our
young Australians. That is, if we believe that Australia has such, now in the
nineties, a low Inflation and high growth future producing innovative products
and exports and linkages to the rest of the world, we know that, properly
trained, the jobs are going to be there for young Australians. Because, our
experience In the eighties was the same in the last ten years we've created
nearly two million jobs. Young Australians got more than their share of those,
but those who are not trained can't, and won't. And, that's why we want to
train them. Now, I don't know that there are any other countries that have
programs quite like this, we think this is a pretty revolutionary approach.
Because, we are saying, as a matter of national policy, we won't let one
young person slip through the system if it is avoidable, and that we will go
and case manage them and strike up a personal relationship with them, and
get them back into structured education or training, or into work experience. 
ILL: 2. LJBC 16: 13 No. 013 F. C~/ C~
So, you look at that panoply of things: tertiary education, the massive
participation rates now in schools, the growth in tertiary education, the
building of vocational education, the Australian Traineeship Foundation, for
students in years 11 and 12 to start streaming their way into work experience
while at school, setting up their career path while at school. And, then, those
who are untrained, the 14 per cent, the ones who drop right out of education
and training this initiative is about getting them back in. So, you run right
across the spectrum, from those with the highest TERs going on into tertiary,
to those who have fallen out of the system, we say the system should have
everybody. So, that's what It Is about, that is what we've been seeking to do. And, I am
delighted to find so many people in education, so many young people
responding to these programs and doing so with a confidence, that I
believe young Australians must have. One of the key things I would like to
see this government achieve, indeed the country achieve, is that the optimism
we have is passed on to every young Australian that they feel good about
Australia, they feel good about themselves, they feel good about the nation's
identity and its sense of self confidence, and they believe that there is a place
in there for them. This is what this is about. So it is with very great pleasure
Indeed, that today, I launch this Youth Training Initiative on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government, and believe that every young Australian, as a
con-sequence, can have the hope that if the system doesn't work quite right
for them, in double jig time, we'll have them back on the track and back in this
society that cares for them, that nurtures them and that loves them. That's
the sort of country we want.
ends. TEL 2 Uec .* J416 13 No. 013 F* 05/ 0c-" 



PRIME MINVISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 6 DECEMBER 1994
THE APEC INFORMAL LEADERS' MEETING, BOGOR, INDONESIA
I want to report to the House on the results of the second informal meeting of the
leaders of APEC economies, which I attended in Bogor, Indonesia, on 15 November.
It is not overstating the case to suggest that the Bogor meeting, and the Declaration of
Common Resolve which leaders issued afterwards, has permanently changed the nature
of our region and the fu~ ture of Australia.
For nearly forty years, Australians have spoken loosely about what we have called " our
region" of the world. We have regularly talked about our " northern neighbours". But
until now these phrases have been statements of aspiration or hollow cliches rather
than descriptions of reality and real national intent.
What our region was, where it extended, who was in it, whether the others we claimed
as partners accepted that role, was always uncertain indeed unknowable.
With Bogor, however, Australians can say for the first time that the region around us is
truly " our region".
We know its shape; we have an agreed institutional structure; we share with its other
members a common agenda for change.
Historical turning points are rare and, like phantoms, they are seen more often than
they are found to exist.
But I am certain, Mr Speaker, that the Bogor meeting will be seen as such a turning
point as the beginning of the Pacific century.
Just as the Bretton Woods agreements after the Second World War established
structures in the LIMF and the World Bank which enabled the world to grow and
prosper, so in APEC we have established a model which will serve the interests of the
post-Cold War world.
It brings together in one multilateral framework a grouping which by 2020 will include,
according to some estimates, seven of the world's ten largest economies, and which by
the end of the century will account for 57 per cent of world trade. 
It gives all the economies Iof this region developed, newly industrialised and
developing a stake in a cooperative enterprise whose aim is to maintain the dynamism
and growth in this part of the world.
It offers business people the opportunity to plan with confidence as Governments work
to remove unnecessary blockages to trade and investment.
It engages the United States, China and Japan in a structure which minimises the
danger that trade frictions will eventually lead to strategic tension.
Between my arrival in Jakarta on 13th November and my departure on the 16th, I held
bilateral discussions with Prime Minister Chretien of Canada, Prime Minister Mahathir
of Malaysia, President Jiang Zemin of China, Prime Minister Chuan of Thailand,
President Clinton, President Soeharto, President Ramos of the Philippines and Prime
Minister Bolger.
The day before I left, on 12th November, 1 met President Frei of Chile in Sydney. And,
of course, President Kim Young Sam of Korea visited Australia immediately after the
Bogor meeting.
APEC was, of course, a central element in all these discussions, but they also enabled
me to cover some important bilateral issues.
Dr Mahathir and I were able to agree, for example, on the need to improve exchanges
6RN67en'Nalaysia and Australia in the area of science and technology.
Pre sident Frei and I agreed to encourage Chilean and Australian business people to use
each counti-y as a base for expanding business in South America and Asia respectively.
I was able to have a very frank and productive discussion with Prime Minister Chuan
about Cambodia and Thai-Australian relations.
My own experience was replicated by the other leaders. The easy opportunity to hold
high-level discussions like these gives APEC leaders' meetings a value additional to
APEC's economic agenda.
The informal leaders' meeting was hosted by President Soeharto on 15 November in
Bogor. I want to pay tribute, Mr Speaker, to President Soeharto's chairing of APEC during
the year and at the Bogor meeting. A consensus of the 18 APEC economies on these
very large issues was an extraordinary achievement. It required great leadership and
vision, and President Soeharto provided that. We would not have achieved this
outcome without him.
As was the case in Seattle last year, the Bogor meeting was held without officials
present and without a pre-set agenda. 
Following consultations between leaders' assistants, President Soeharto had prepared a
draft declaration covering our common ambitions for APEC and its economic goals.
These subjects formed the focus for much of our discussion.
The central element in the Bogor Declaration of Common Resolve is a commitment to
free trade and investment in the region by 2010 for industrialised economies and 2020
for developing economies.
And what underpins that commitment is our recognition of the growing
interdependence of regional economies and the need to work together if we are to
maintain high rates of economic growth.
APEC's commitment to free trade was made in the context of our support for the
multilateral trading system and our desire to strengthen it.
In other words, Mr Speaker, APEC leaders showed that they were opposed to the
establishment of a closed and inward-looking organisation, but wanted whatever we
did in APEC to be additional to the GATT agreement GATT-plus.
We agreed, for example, to accelerate the implementation of our Uruguay Round
commitments and to undertake work aimed at deepening and broadening the Round's
outcome.
We called for the successful launching of the World Trade Organisati' 1on in January
1995 and for all APEC members to work with non-APEC members to achieve further
multilateral trade liberalisation through the WTO.
One of APEC's major benefits, in fact, is that by engaging the United States and East
Asian economies in a common framework it helps prevent the spectre of a world
divided into three hostile trade blocs in Europe, Asia and the Americas.
We agreed to a " standstill" commitment on a best endeavours basis to refrain from
increasing measures of protection.
We also decided to expand APEC's trade and investment facilitation program.
As a result of a proposal I made in Seattle, for example, we have now endorsed nonbinding
investment principles for the region which we will develop to make investment
flows in the region easier.
The trade facilitation program, on which a good deal of progress has already been
made, will become even more important to our business people as tariffs in the region
come down.
Ministers have been asked to draw up proposals for APEC arrangements to improve
customs procedures, establish common standards and lower administrative barriers to
market access. In this area of trade facilitation, APEC economies that are ready to
implement a cooperative arrangement may do so, while those that are not yet ready to
participate may join at a later date. 
In Australia's case, for example, we are already discussing with a number of APEC
economies, such as Malaysia, Korea, Canada, New Zealand and the United States, the
possibility of an agreement under which we would mutually recognise each others'
testing and conformance arrangements.
The Bogor Declaration also gives further impetus to the dialogue on economic policy
which began with the first meeting of APEC Finance Ministers earlier this year. In my
view, these consultations on economic growth strategies, regional capital flows and
other macro-economic issues will become more important for APEC over the next few
years. Another new approach in the Declaration comes in the decision to examine the
establishment of a voluntary consultative dispute mediation service, to supplement the
World Trade Organisation's dispute settlement mechanism. APEC's informal and nonbinding
approach offers a useful, non-adversarial way of dealing with regional trade
disputes. One of APEC's most valuable dimensions is the way it brings together developed
economies, newly industrialised economies and developing countries.
When APEC talks about trade and economic issues, when it frames its actions, it has
to take into account the full complexity of eighteen economies all looking for growth
and liberalisation, but at different stages of development.
As I have said before, this is important because it is the way the global economy is
going. Co-operation across different levels of development is the way we will have to
address these trade and economic issues in future.
That is what made theBogor agreement remarkable it was an agreement reached
within the framework for the_ future. Bogor was not about catching up or rectifying
past mistakes. It was visionary in a rare sense and a true sense.
We agreed at Bogor, for example, that in addition to our trade liberalisation and trade
facilitation agendas we should expand co-operative activity across the fields of
education and training, science and technology, small and medium enterprises,
economic infrastructure including energy, transportation, telecommunications and
tourism and sustainable development.
In all these areas, in fact, APEC is already building linkages and discovering new areas
for co-operation.
Leaders at Bogor recognised the important contribution made to regional debate by
the Em~ inent Persons Giroup and the Pacific Business Forum, representing large and
small businesses throughout the region.
It was decided to ask these two groups to continue in operation to advise us on ways
we can step up APEC co-operation.
I am pleased to announce that Australia's participants in these groups Mr Neville
Wran on the EPG, and Mr Philip Brass, Managing Director of Pacific Dunlop and Mrs 
Imelda Roche, Managing Director of Nutri-metics on the Pacific Business Forum
have accepted my invitation to continue in their positions.
All three of them have put enormous effort into the APEC task and I thank them for it.
I am confident that their experience and commitment will help us meet the new
challenges APEC has set itself
But the most important new decision to come from the Bogor meeting was on trade
liberalisation. The Bogor commitment is precise, wherein the leaders agreed to " complete the
achievement of the goal of free and open trade in the Asia Pacific no later than 2020",
with industrialised economies achieving the goal no later than 2010.
The goal involves a multiple year effort but, as the declaration says, " we will start our
concerted liberalisation process from the very date of this statement. We direct our
Ministers and officials to immediately begin preparing detailed proposals for
implementing our present decisions."
We have a long way to go before free trade is implemented in APEC. Much detailed
work remains to be done before we get an agreed plan of action for our meeting in
Osaka next year. No doubt there will be difficult negotiations and hard talk as we
chart the way forward.
Complex issues will need to be addressed, including modalities, coverage and whether
benefits will be extended on a Most Favoured Nation basis.
It may be that APEC will need to approach these issues in quite a different way from
past trade negotiations.
But contrary to the belief of some commentators, I do not think these next steps will
be the most difficult part. Perhaps the most complicated. Perhaps the most timeconsuming.
But not the hardest.
That part was getting the political commitment to a free trade goal for all APEC
economies made by the 18 leaders at Bogor.
That was what has given the region the negotiating agenda which will carry us
forward. My views of the Bogor outcome were shared by my colleagues there. As Prime
Minister Bolger has said: " The level of commitment from leaders was remarkable it
is truly going to change the nature of trade in the world in the next five years."
President Ramos has described the Bogor declaration as " A truly momentous decision
a very solid road map that we are all committed to follow." President Clinton said
he was convinced the declaration will be of historic importance. Prime Minister Goh
of Singapore said the declaration has " sown the seeds for prosperity in the region".
Like Mr Vincent Siew of Taiwan, Prime Minister Goh has committed his country to
the 20 10 timetable for free trade for industrialised economies. I 
The advantages for Australia and the region of the commitments made in Bogor are
very great.
Modelling by the Office of National Assessments and the Industry Commission
suggests that free trade in APEC would more than triple the national income gains
from the Uruguay Round outcome alone to more than $ 300 billion.
For Australia, we estimate that under APEC free trade, Australia's real output would
rise by 3.8 per cent and real national income by 1.2 per cent.
This would include a 27 per cent increase in Australian exports and a 20 per cent
projected rise in imports. Once the effects of APEC trade liberalisation have fully
flowed through, we can expect a permanent increase in employment of over 200,000
jobs. The great advantage for Australia will come from the opening up of the fast-growing
APEC markets that already take three quarters of our exports.
It will come, too, from making Australia more attractive to investors from the rest of
the world.
For Australian business and workers, APEC trade liberalisation is good news because
Australia is already so far down the path towards free trade.
As Philip Brass of Pacific Dunlop has said " For Australia, it is all up-side."
By 2000, a full decade before we are committed to achieve free trade, Australia's
average trade-weighted tariff will be just 2.9 per cent. In 1986/ 87 it was 10.7 per cent.
Even in industries we have come to think of as highly protected, such as textiles,
clothing and footwear and motor vehicles, tariffs will be low by 2000 only 15 per
cent in the case of motor vehicles and between 5 per cent and 25 per cent for TCF.
This is amongst the lowest in the region. Tariffs on passenger motor vehicles range
from 100 to 300 per cent in some APEC economies, for example, and non-tariff
barriers are common.
So a great deal of our adjustment has already happened. Australian industry has
already shown it is more than capable of competing in a low tariff environment.
While average trade-weighted tariffs have come down by 44 per cent over the past
decade, Australia's exports of manufactures have grown by more than 17 per cent a
year in the case of elaborately transformed manufactures.
Even in the areas of passenger vehicles and textiles clothing and footwear, companies
like Toyota, which plans to lift exports from Australia from $ 47 million in 1990 to
$ 600 million by 2000, will benefit from lower APEC barriers.
I have said before that APEC gives Australia for the first time a seat at a very large
table. But the extent of the benefits we or any of the others will gain, and the extent to 
which our voice is heard at this table, will depend on each of us; on our recognition of
the need for change and improvement; on our ability to use the resources we have
effectively and efficiently; on our imagination and creativity.
This is a large challenge that lies ahead for all of us in Australia for governments, for
business, for our unions, for our education and training system.
Our officials at home and abroad will have to liaise even more closely with industry.
Our business people across the board will have to understand the region better.
We will have to maintain the pressure for micro-economic reform.
To coordinate our response to these challenges, the Government has decided to
establish an ad hoc APEC committee of Cabinet.
I will chair the committee, with the Minister for Trade as Deputy Chair. Other
members will include the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Treasurer, the Minister for
Industry, Science and Technology, the Minister for Employment, Education and
Training, the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, the Minister for Transport
and the Minister for Communications and the Arts.
Detailed sectoral consultations will be undertaken by all the relevant Industry Ministers
to make sure we understand industry concerns and aspirations.
The Government's White Paper on employment, Working Nation provided for TCF
and PMV assistance arrangements to be reviewed sdfdecisions iia-nie taken in 1997 on
post-2000 arrangements. These reviews will take account of what progress is being
made on trade liberalisation in APEC. Through my colleagues Senator Cook and
Senator McMullan the industry will be fu~ lly involved in these decisions.
APEC has consistently confounded the sceptics.
Just twelve months ago the British journal, The Economist, described suggestions that
APEC should aim to form a free-trade area as " the stuff as dreams are made on".
In a sense they were right, but not in the way the Eurocentric editorial staff meant.
Last year, Australian newspapers were claiming that my ambition for APEC to become
an Asia-Pacific community was premature.
Yet, this year, without the slightest controversy, the Bogor declaration spoke of our
" moving toward a community of Asia-Pacific economies".
Why has APEC continued to go fujrther, faster, than the doubters expected?
Because it makes sense for all the diverse economies of the region.
I have said before that APEC did not have to happen. When the Cold War bindings
were removed, the development of a cooperative structure like this was neither
predictable nor inevitable. The next generation would probably have forgiven us for 
failing to see the possibilities for letting the opportunity pass because it was
" 1premature" or the " stuff of dreams".
There was certainly nothing inevitable about the Bogor declaration. It was an act of
will by regional leaders and an act of goodwill. It was the result of imagination and
co-operation.
Alternative Asia Pacific futures were possible.
We might have seen the growth of a self-confident but inward-looking Asian grouping,
building on East Asian trade and investment flows and excluding Australia.
In my view that would have had the most serous consequences not only for the
economic growth of Asia and the Pacific but for the strategic stability of the region.
Over time it would inevitably have attenuated the defence and security partnership
between the United States and Japan with a broader impact throughout the region.
On the other hand, the region might have drifted along as before, buffeted by internal
and external frictions, but developing no institutional framework to deal with them.
It is true that the economic integration of Asia was underway before APEC began and
that even in the absence of such a structure it would no doubt have continued.
But it would be a very different sort of integration more ad hoc, driven by companies
working in their narrower interests and less open to Australia and Australian business.
We would have failed to engage the rapidly developing Chinese economy, or Indonesia
and the other South East Asian countries, in a broader regional framework. A critical
opportunity and one which is open for only a very short time would have been lost.
For Australia, either of these paths would have made for a stultified Australian
economy, strategic uncertainty and political isolation.
Instead, this Government chose the path of shaping the future for ourselves and the
region. Australia proposed APEC. We worked with other regional countries like
Korea to develop it. And now we have given it new institutional focus and energy by
proposing regular meetings of leaders to give it the executive authority that the
ministerial level meeting could never have had to give it the power to make the sort
of decisions taken at Bogor. I am very proud of what Australia has been able to do.
The Bogor declaration will help ensure that this generation of Australians and our
successors, have a dynamic role in their own region.
I said recently at the National Strategies Conference in Sydney that our most
fundamental responsibility is to provide for the next generation as we were provided
for to provide the conditions for security and prosperity and opportunities for talent
and energy.
Simple hard work and earnest intentions will not of themselves deliver these things.
The world has changed and we all must change with it. 
The Bogor agreement was a recognition of this fact.
It is, of course, no reason to make less of our effort here in Australia. On the contrary,
because Bogor has, in an unprecedented way, taken on the responsibility to provide a
better world in the 21st century, the challenges for us are more obvious and immediate.
The Australia in which I grew up was a prosperous and secure place. It was then and
it is now an extraordinarily good place to live.
But if we are to maintain our way of life, the Australia of the 21st century will need to
be built on different foundations. Our success in the world will depend on our
effective integration with it. Our success in the world's most dynamic region will also
depend on this.
Bogor does not assure us of prosperity. It does not guarantee the future for the next
generation of Australians. That will continue to depend on the efforts of Australian
governments, Australian businesses and Australian workers.
But Bogor creates a massive opportunity and I think every Australian should be aware
of it.
I think every Australian should know that the chance really is there. In the next
century, to be Australian should mean not only the privileges we currently enjoy, but a
share in the extraordinary economic and cultural riches of the Asia-Pacific, and a
creative role in our region's remarkable progress. This opportunity is, I think, an
exciting prospect. I 



i2.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE TRIPLE J TRANSMITTERS INTO REGIONAL
AUSTRALIA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 6 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It's so hot my make-up is running. I borrowed someone's make-up in the
office and she said to me " do you want the lippy too?", and I said I'm not
doing an impersonation of Julian Clary, I am only impersonating myself.
It is wonderful to be here and see this extension of Triple J's network. I
suppose if you like the present and you are inclined to the future, and you
look forward to the future, then you are inclined to Triple J. But if you are
stuck in the past and you have got old fogies for friends then you are inclined
against Triple J. And I suppose that probably marks out the Triple J
supporters from those who are not. But what we have seen here is the
development of a marvellous, authentic stretch of Australian communications
and Australian radio. As David said, or Michael Lee said, that is from a small
studio in Darlinghurst not so many years ago to now a national network of 1.8
million people. And now with the extensions into 22 regional areas, a much
greater network altogether. And of course, their grearTeg-fi-7Australian
music and comedy I mean HG and Roy were a couple of bodgies not so
many years ago, now the most fabled social commentators in the country.
Even Paul Lyneham and some of his colleagues in the ABC are feeling the
pressures these days... . the Kerry O'Briens of this world are feeling the
pressure from Roy and HG. And they came along with Triple J.
But I think it also tremendous that Triple J's big contribution has been in
breaking in new Australian bands and not just the Coral Snakes today, but
INXS, Yothu Yindi, Midnight Oil, and more recently they first recorded and
broadcast the Newcastle band Silver Chair which I now understand are on
top of the charts. I mean, with that support, just imagine what I could have
done with The Ramrods back then in the 60s. I mean I did take them from
nowhere to oblivion, and with this sort of support... . the battle that I had to get
them on the Parlaphone and I did and to get them played I knew every
manager of every radio library in Australia. And I would always have the 
sitting on the edge of the desk, trying to get it played the D-45' s as they
were then.
At any rate, the fact is that this is a great thing that Australia has become one
of the music capitals of the world in popular music, and Triple J is of course,
playing a tremendous role in all that. And of course, for apparently only 18
cents a year it costs each of us only 18 cents a year, which is a little more
value than 8 cents a day. Probably not, because I do think the ABC has
stuck to its last and stuck to its charter, and I am not ashamed to say I am
very proud to say that I am a core supporter of the ABC and Triple J.
And of course, the other thing is it's about the only station -in the country
where you would expect to find a woman disc jockey, which is also a
breakthrough for Australian radio because it is rather monopolised.
I would like to just say that this you know, you wonder when you pass these
budgets, and the appropriations go out, whether it is money well spent, but I
think this extension which is $ 20 million worth to these 22 regional areas,
and I am told we go something like by 1996 Triple J will reach 44 regional
areas and cover an additional 4.7 million people, then with 80% of the
population. A far cry from the thing which Moss Cass kicked off in 1975 and
which has come along from as someone said earlier that small studio in
Darlinghurst. So, the Government is delighted to be involved with it to find a
place where young Australians can identify certainly a radio station they
can identify with, something that is not a bit provincial or parochial, that is
unmistakably Australian, and to see this development is a great pleasure for
all of us.
Last week I had the pleasure of launching what we call the Youth Training
Initiative, and this is about saying to young Australians that we in this country
care about them, we want to pass our sense of optimism on to them, that we
won't let them slip out of the school system to be unemployed, that we will
pick every one of them up and case manage them that is individually relate
to them and try to get them back into mainstream study or to work experience,
or into a job and that comes as well as the linkages now between secondary
school and TAFE, the building of a proper vocational education system with
TAFE, and the massive extension of the university system. But I think the
commitment which we have made to young Australians that nobody under
the age of 20 should basically drop out of the system without being cared for,
without being someone an individual person case managing them, talking to
them, finding out about their aptitude, their educational standards, their
interests, and getting them back into study or work is the sort of commitment
a country this wealthy ought to make to its young people. That was launched
last week, and I know that Triple J has a program of its own the Triple J
Extension which is about much of the same thing, and that is giving young
Australians a voice, and a role in the future.
So I can think of no better medium than Triple J to talk about issues which
affect young people, to let them listen to the music that they like, to discover
the Australian bands that in the past were there but incapable of discovery, 
3
and to punch out a peculiarly and authentically Australian mssage and
sound. This is a tremendously good development in our communications.
Let me congratulate everybody associated with Triple J and the ABC to
David Hill and his colleagues and to say that the Government will continue
to support the ABC and Triple J, and let's hope that by 1996 we see this huge
extension into provincial and rural Australia, and we see truly a national
network come from it. It is with great pleasure that I launch this shift to 22
regional areas this broadcast to 22 regional areas as a further affirmation
of our faith in Triple J and its message to young Australians. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINIISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TO THE NATIONAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE 7 DECEMBER 1994
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"*
It is a great pleasure to be able to address the National Trade and Investment
Outlook Conference again.
When I spoke at the inaugural meeting last year, 900 people were present,
representing 162 Australian companies. We were very pleased with that
response and we are even more pleased with this one.
This year we have 1500 delegates representing 450 companies.
And twice as many international delegates are attending the conference this
year. This is an excellent result. It reflects the growing interest among Australian
companies in going off-shore, in exporting, in looking at a global market rather
than a market of 18 million people.
A real change is taking place in Australian business culture.
Export performance, best practice, international competitiveness are all
increasingly central tothe approach of Australian businesspeople and
Australian workers.
Already, around one in eight Australian manufacturers is involved in exporting.
But the important lesson and one that is getting through to more and more
Australian companies is that, irrespective of size, these manufacturing
exporters outperform their non-exporting counterparts.
In fact, firms which operate internationally are 65 per cent more productive
than those which operate only in the domestic market and they consistently
invest more in new capital equipment. 
The people in this room understand this. There really is no more important
message for Australian business and for the Australian community at large. If
it was not apparent before, the APEC leaders' meeting at Bogor certainly
should have driven it home.
That is what I want to talk about this morning APEC, Australia and our trade
priorities. I have spoken a good deal about AP-EC.. over recent weeks, and I know you
have already heard from Bob McMullan on the subject, so I only want to put a
few simple propositions to you7
First, the commitments made at the Bogor meeting to achieve free trade
between the APEC economies by 2010 for industrialised economies and 2020
for developing economies will change fundamentally the way the countries of
the Asia-Pacific work together and the climate for business in the region.
Second, Australia is well placed to take advantage of this change.
Third, while APEC provides a tremendous framework for growth in the region,
the trade and commerce it facilitates will take place bilaterally. In other words,
we must not ignore our bilateral links with individual regional countries. And
when I say " our" I mean both of us governments and business.
And, fourth, while Australia's policy focus has been on the Asia-Pacific and
APEC, this does not mean that we will ignore the great importance to us of
other markets and other international relationships.
The term " historic achievement" is thrown around very loosely about
international meetings. But I think the Bogor meeting which President
Soeharto chaired was one by any measure.
The Declaration we agreed there commits us to establish free trade no later
than 2020 among a group of countries which already account for half the
world's production. It establishes an Asia-Pacific association which makes any
fracturing of the world into three contending trade groupings less likely. And it
offers an unprecedented opportunity to maintain dynamic economic growth in
Asia and the Pacific, while preserving strategic stability.
A good deal of work remains to be done as we fill out the details of the trade
liberalisation process in the lead-up to the next leaders' meeting in Osaka.
But the critical part getting the political commitment to trade and investment
liberalisation is now behind us. All the APEC economies have accepted that
we are working towards a common goal. 
And I am convinced that, as was the case when this Government began
dismantling the ring fence of protectionism behind which Australia had
slumbered for so long, the timetable we are now talking about will come
forward as businesses begin to factor the decisions we have made into their
planning.
Most of the public attention since Bogor has been focussed on the free trade
aspect of the declaration.
That is understandable because the benefits from APEC-wide free trade for
Asia-Pacific economies are huge according to our estimates, around three
times the size of the Uruguay Round outcome alone.
But it is important not to lose sight of the other part of APEC's work the trade
facilitation agenda.
In this area, a lot of work is underway which will be of real benefit to business,
especially as formal barriers in the region such as tariff rates begin to come
down. At Bogor, for example, we agreed on:
a set of common investment principles, a first-step in a region-wide
effort to make investment flows easier
a commitment to improve customs procedures, establish common
standards and lower administrative barriers to market access
a " standstill" agreement, committing regional economies to refrain on a
best endeavours basis from increasing protection measures
the need to examine a voluntary dispute mediation service which could
supplement the WTO's more formal requirements
and support for the growing economic policy dialogue taking place
under the auspices of APEC Finance Ministers
All these decisions, together with the trade liberalisation commitment, add up
to an agreed agenda which has set the pattern for regional co-operation over
the next twenty five years.
This is a fundamental change in the political, economic and strategic dynamics
of the Asia-Pacific region. It offers enormous opportunities to businesses that
are creative and flexible and understand the wider environment. They can
plan on access to an increasingly large and integrated regional market,
representing forty per cent of the world's population. 
The Bogor commitments have in my view changed the way business will have
to operate in the region. They will have to conceive of their operations in a
more integrated way. And, naturally, as they work to the new agenda, they will
do best if they work more closely with government. And the Government you
can be sure wants to work very closely with business.
Bob McMullan and Peter Cook and other Ministers will be consulting very
dro-sely with ' business -in thie period ahead.
And I have asked two distinguished Australian business people, Philip Brass of
Pacific Dunlop and Imelda Roche of Nutri-metics, to continue to represent
Australia on the Pacific Business Forum group, to which APEC leaders will be
looking for further guidance on what business needs from APEC.
The second point I want to make today is that Australia is very well placed to
meet these new challenges set by APEC.
By 2000 a full decade before Australia is required to achieve free trade under
the Bogor commitment our average trade-weighted tariff will be just 2.9 per
cent. Even in industries traditionally regarded as highly protected, such as textiles,
clothing and footwear and motor vehicles, tariffs will be low by 2000 only
per cent in the case of motor vehicles and between 5 per cent and 25 per cent
for TCF.
Much of our adjustment has already been made.
The effective rate of industry protection in Australia is now about one-third of
what it was in the early 1980s and yet our exports represent 22 per cent of our
GDP compared with less than 14 per cent in 1983.
Elaborately transformed manufactures, which now dominate world trade,
account for 21 per cent of Australia's merchandise exports. And services,
which will be increasingly important as economic growth in the region
continues, account for 20 per cent of our exports.
All Australian industries will benefit from lower barriers in a region where
formal and informal trade barriers have geine6-riily been' higher than our own.
This brings me to my third point:
Although APEC provides a structural framework for co-operation throughout
the Asia-Pacific, the actual business of commerce is conducted country-tocountry
and company-to-company.
When we talk about the opportunities which Bogor creates, that is what it
translates to on the ground contact between Australians and their Asia-
Pacific counterparts. 
APEC can be an important accretion to but never a substitute for the
development of strong bilateral links with individual regional countries.
The process is mutually reinforcing.
At the time of the APEC leaders' meeting in Bogor, for example, I was able to
have a very useful series of meetings with ten other heads of government to
discuss bilateral issues.
And good bilateral relationships, in turn, make it easier to do things cooperatively
in the APEC forum.
The Government will continue to look for ways of strengthening relations with
individual regional countries.
A good example has been Indonesia, where we have established the Australia-
Indonesia Ministerial Forum, which has helped broaden the whole focus of the
rela'tionship, and where the Australia Today promotion earlier this year was
such a success in getting the message through to business and the public.
We have been working on the same sort of pattern with other regional
countries, too.
During my visit to Singapore in 1992, for example, our two Governments
agreed to support the efforts of Australian and Singaporean companies to
develop joint business opportunities so-called strategic linkages elsewhere
in Asia.
When Prime Minister Goh visited Australia in September we agreed to
contribute $ 1 million each to establish a Joint Venture Feasibility Study Fund
under this program to assist companies operating jointly in third markets.
We also agreed to establish a Singapore-Australia Business Alliance Forum
which will play a strategic role in developing commercial relations between
Australia and Singapore and business partnerships in third country markets.
We will each be nominating a select group of CEOs to the Forum, representing
companies with strong track records in the Asia-Pacific region.
We will retain close stewardship of the forum to ensure it meets each country's
aims. At the Strategic Business Partnerships session here tomorrow, I hope business
people from Australia and Singap~ e will decide on a destination for a joint
mission next year which will be led by Senator McMullan.
Initiatives such as this can be applied to other countries. 
In Australia last month, both President Frei of Chile and President Kim of
Korea, expressed interest in developing linkages between their business
sectors and Australian companies. And I have also discussed such
opportunities with Prime Minister Mahathir of Malaysia.
My discussion with President Frei envisaged Australia as a gateway for
Chilean companies into Asia and Chile as a beach-head for Australia into
South America.
President Kim Young Sam and I also talked about the tremendous potential for
b6--o-perati-on betvween Australian and Korean firms in the science and
technology area.
We agreed to negotiate a new science and technology agreement and to
jointly invest in industrial technology projects in areas like the information
superhighway and clean energy.
These are just some examples of initiatives we are taking to develop bilateral
relationships in ways which facilitate closer private sector links as well.
The story here is being repeated with all our neighbours with China, with
Thailand, with Japan, with Vietnam and around the region.
The fourth point is one I want to make particularly clearly, because the
message sometimes gets lost.
It is that, despite the importance to Australia of APEC and regional economic
linkages, we fully recognise the continuing importance of our relationships with
other countries and other regions.
In other words, we are quite able to walk and chew gum at the same time.
That is why we particularly welcome the delegations here from France, India,
Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Mexico ( although Mexico is also a partner in
APEC). The message we hope you will take back is that this country has a lot to offer
you and your businesses through trade and investment, in Australia itself and,
through Australia, into the Asia-Pacific.
Because this is a very good place to do business an information-rich,
technologically advanced country, situated in the fastest growing region of the
world and with a highly trained multicultural workforce.
Business conditions here are the best they have been for years. The
Australian economy is growing strongly six per cent per annum over the past
twelve months. 
And inflation remains below two per cent, less than the OECD average. For
the first time since the early 1960s, we have seen inflation under 2% per cent
for nearly three years.
Wages growth has been very subdued in the past few years, and we have
seen significant improvements in productivity.
These favourable business conditions have been reflected in high profits and
high levels of business confidence. Corporate profits rose by over 11 per cent
through the twelve months to the September quarter. The profit share is now
at its highest level since 1985.
Business investment, especially in plant and equipment, is mounting a strong
recovery which will upgrade and expand the productive capacity of the
economy. This in turn will boost the prospects for Australian exports.
In 1993-94, our volume of exports of goods and services grew by 9 per cent,
more strongly than the Budget forecast, while exports of elaborately
transformed manufactures grew by 16 per cent.
And it is important to appreciate that although Australia is still best known
overseas as an efficient producer of agriculture and minerals, this is a
technologically sophisticated country with a first rate scientific research base.
The image of Australia is to some extent divorced from the contemporary facts.
To give you some random examples:
We have more computers and processing power per head than any country
other than the United States and have invested a higher percentage of our
GDP in telecommunications infrastructure than any country other than Korea
and Germany.
Hundreds of Australian information technology and telecommunications firms
are exporting successfully worldwide.
Australian software runs the tracking, reservation and booking systems for
Lufthansa and other airlines, for example.
Buses in the UK and Denmark use ' smart card' ticketing developed by an
Australian company.
In March I will be attending the CeBIT' 95 Trade Fair in Hanover where 130
Australian companies will be participating. 
Australian research and technology is leading the world in areas like gene
shears, which have huge benefits for plant, animal and human health; an antiinfluenza
drug which offers real hope of treatment for all strains of flu; and a
multibeam antenna, capable of communicating with twenty satellites at once
and which makes communications links more cost-effective.
A Co-operative Research Centres program linking universities and research
insfiflitions with industry is pioneering world-class technologies in Australia.
But although Australia has many great attributes, none is more important than
our people. The ethnic diversity of Australia's people gives this country a
natural network for doing global business.
All of the world's nationalities, cultures, religions and traditions are represented
here, but in a uniquely Australian blend.
Here again I suspect the image abroad is a little behind the reality.
Forty two per cent of Australians were either born overseas or have at least
one parent born overseas. Seventeen per cent of Australians speak a
language other than English at home.
We are implementing strategies to make effective economic use of our cultural
diversity which is becoming integral to our approach to industry and trade
development. There are more than 160 ethnic chambers of commerce and bilateral business
organisations around Australia, all actively engaged with Australia's
international commercial relations.
To help businesses get access to these networks, the Government recently
commissioned a study to identify the organisations and their networking
potential. I am pleased to announce that the associated database is available at this
conference for the first time. It is a resource which will help Australian
companies tap into global business networks by providing them with easy
access to people with inside knowledge of markets, first-hand experience,
fluency in their languages and an intimate knowledge of their cultures and
consumer preferences.
There are already many examples where astute Australian businesspeople
have drawn on this resource.
Among manufacturers, for example, Vulcanite and Utilux have utilised
Chinese-born Australian employees to capitalise on market opportunities in
China. 
Of the more than 90 international corporations who have set up significant
regional activities from Australia, a number including Data General, the Hong
Kong Jockey Club, IBM, Novell and Oracle have cited Australia's multicultural
population as an important factor in making a decision to locate their regional
headquarters in Australia.
The final point I want to make is about the relationship between business and
government. The world we are moving into is very different from what we have known in the
past. It is more integrated than ever, a globalised environment in which more and
more aspects of our national economy have an international dimension to
them, and in which our external interests economic, strategic, political are
intertwined in a way we have never seen before.
In this sort of world, it is increasingly important that business and government
each understand what the other is saying and work in a complementary way.
That is a very important aim of this Government.
For example, a major part of the work of Australia's overseas posts is now to
assist Australian firms take advantage of trade and investment opportunities.
The Government's overseas trade support network, particularly in China,
Vietnam and other key Asian countries is being strengthened.
Our overseas network is also now increasingly specialised to cater for the
specific needs of Australian exporters. As well as a wide network of Foreign
Affairs and Trade posts, and Austrade staff here and overseas, we have
education counsellors promoting the export of education services and industry,
science and technology counsellors stationed around the globe.
And nine investment commissioners are encouraging foreign firms to set up
operations in Australia, either independently or as joint ventures with
Australian firms.
Government officials here or overseas can't make your deal happen. They
can't write the contracts. But they can help you through their local knowledge
and put you in touch with the right people. Using them can save time and
effort, open doors to opportunities and remove obstacles to doing business.
You should use the next two days to meet with the Australian Ambassadors
and Austrade overseas officers who have returned to be at this conference.
Let them know how they can help in your chosen markets and keep in touch
with them when they get back to their posts. 
I hope all of you Australian delegates and international guests find this not
only an interesting couple of days but profitable ones.
Because, in the end, the purpose of this conference is not to listen to speakers
but to do business to help link our private sector with potential partners
overseas. As the theme says: to create networks for global business. 



0%
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR THE LAUNCH OF THE " WALTZING MATILDA"
CENTENARY, NATIONAL ART GALLERY, 12 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It is the parallels between the last decade of this century and the last decade
of the last century are almost uncanny as they reveal that in times of hardship
of economic change that in these times, the spirit of Australia and our
sense of ourselves, has become so much more obvious perhaps than at
times certainly in the 19th Century after the great growth and wealth in the
gold era of the 1860s, 70s and 80s, to the recession of the 1 890s to the
familiar problem of drought, to problems in the countryside. We saw in this
decade of the 1890s this great period of Australian social experimentation
which was, of course, snuffed out by the FIrst World War. But in this period,
as Ken (-Cowley) has just mentioned, we saw the pulling together of the
Federation, in the midst of all this difficulty those thinking through the screen
of troubles to see a nation emerging from the other side and not losing the
opportunity with the chance to federate. At the time this song was written
itself part of the ethos of the period the Labor Party was formed, and we
then see the quite amazing period of social change leading up to 1914. Now,
you would wonder it would take another century to do these things again, but
of course as we know, there was a bout of prosperity between the Wars, and
then the Second World War basically took the gloss off all that, and then we
had a period of gr6_ withiaiid Orosperity, but all set in the terms of the post-War
era, not particularly about us, but about us being part of the western world as
it then became. This is probably the first time, the 1990s, where the world is
returning to the sort of world it was before the First World War, with these
great states joining the world economy for the first time since then, like
Russia first time since 1917, but again partly a consequence of the First
World War and we are seeing these other great states joining it China,
India and South America. So we are entering a period again somewhat
similar, but we are doing it at a time when Australia's confidence about itself
pride in itself has I think coalesced and come together, perhaps as we might
not have expected a decade ago and it is that confidence and that 
expression of ourselves that is powering on now our national identity and
our place in the world, particularly the world we live in.
Now, all these threads tend to come together, and it is a most unlikely thing
that Ken Cowley from News Ltd well I think it is unlikely anyway is one of
the driving forces of the Stockman's Hall of Fame, and is the proprietor of
Australia's most famous riding boot and country shoe R M Williams and
that he is mixed up with Hugh Sawrey and the brushmen of the bush,
because that in itself is a celebration of the great ethos of rural Australia. But
here we are with Ansett one of our two great airlines celebrating the
centenary of this, what has become our national song " Waltzing Matilda"
and doing it with these painting so evocative of the time by Hugh Sawrey.
This is a very good thing to do it is an important thing to do in it's own right
because in this country where we for so long were left as an outpost of Britain
and the British Empire, the bits that were ours we tended to hug and keep,
and one of them of course is this song " Waltzing Matilda". Now, apparently
no-one quite knows who wrote the music, but we know that Banjo Patterson
wrote the lyrics, and Ken said he went out to a property, but apparently it was
sang at the North Gregory Hotel in Winton on the 6th April 1895. Now, I don't
quite know where that was recorded, but I am sure it's true. And it was
apparently sung throughout Western Queensland, but there is no doubt that
Banjo Patterson wrote the words, and famous words they have become. And
it is a sonl tfiat has been chosen by the Australian Olympic Federation as our
National Song at the Montreal Olympics, it has been recorded by over 400
artists I'm told, it has been sung by Harry Belafonte and Bill Halley I mean
for just trivial bits of information Tom Waites and almost every generation
has sung it and there is no doubt that all of us, where we are in a place where
it is sung are very moved by it. Now, the p! ace I was most moved by it was in
Ireland about eighteen months ago, where the whole stadium sang it and see
if that doesn't grab you. I can tell you it does. When they had mass bands
who then played it and apparently all of the verses are well known in Ireland
and they were all sung. Anyway, as they went from one verse to the next
nobody missed a beat and it was a terribly moving thing.
So, I think that it is, again, an evocation of the rural ethos of Australia and
Ken Cowley made the point about people doing it tough on the land now and
that is true probably never tougher this is without a doubt, I think, probably
the worst drought we have ever had. I think on of the great challenges for
Australia is to understand that the rural family, the farm family, the grazing
family have been so much the backbone of our country's way of life,
particularly outside of the cities, that we have got to do now those things
within our power to keep it together while this natural phenomena exists and
to give them a hand through it and to give them a hand out the other side and
that is why the Government has taken now the opportunity of announcing
particular policy packages to try to keep ahead of the problem and we can
only hope that widespread rains in breaking the drought solves the problem.
Because that, indeed in the end, is the only thing that will solve the problem,
but it is important, I think, that the people in the country understand that they
have the sympathies of all of us, especially those of us who live in the big 
' U 3
urban aggregations, the cities and the large provincial cities to say that we
haven't forgotten them and that we are with them.
So, to have the song this great song, this great rural song celebrated for its
centenary and to have it done with this spectacular array of pictures which
Hugh has painted for us. I had quite a bit of contact with brushman of the
bush because being the member for Blaxland around Bankstown in Sydney
they have a sister city relationship with Broken Hill and has a great contact
there and each year they have a great exhibition of the brushman of the bush
pictures. So, I am somewhat familiar with them and I have always thought
that they have been capturing, in a very contemporary way, that feeling of the
bush and that part of our history that might have started to fade or be it
somewhat lost to us.
So, let me first of all, congratulate Ken and Ansett for this initiative which is a
good thing to do in national terms and thank Graeme McMahon who runs
Ansett with Ken for that too. I would like to congratulate Hugh on his pictures
and, of course, also did the 737, the people of Winton, the Waltzing Matilda
Centennial Committee and everyone else associated with the e events. As I
say, this is a mood, I think, in the 1990s very much as we found it 100 years
ago and we should lose for a second the opportunity to drive home the fact
that Australia is a unique place, what we have created here ourselves is
completely different than what it was, what Australia has become in a country
with an enormous power about it and a huge sense of confidence. We have
got this debate now about the republic, we'd often say to people ' the republic
is not the instrument of our confidence or our identity, but rather the
manifestation of it'. It will be the cherry on the top rather than the cake itself.
The cake being our own confidence about ourselves and what we are and
who we have become.
So, this song has been right through these years, part and parcel of whatever
we are, because it always brings the hair up on the back of our neck most of
us. So, I would like to, again, thank Ken for inviting me to launch this today
and to officially launch the Waltzing Matilda Centenary at Winton in 1995 by
declaring this exhibition formally open and unveil the plaque which I will have
much pleasure in doing for the Ansett 737. Thank you indeed. 



.37
EMBARGOED 7.00 PM 18 JANUARY 1995
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
ARRIVAL OF HIS HOLINESS, POPE JOHN PAUL 11
WEDNESDAY 18 JANUARY 1995, SYDNEY
Your Holiness, Your Eminences, Your Excellency, Premier, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen
Your Holiness, it is my great pleasure to welcome you to Australia.
I welcome you as the spiritual leader of one billion people worldwide, and of five
million Australians.
Your Holiness, I welcome you on behalf of all Australians.
I welcome you as a man of faith and as a respected and admired international
figure one, surely, known to more people, Catholic and non-Catholic alike, than
any other Pope in history; one who has given moral leadership in the pursuit of
peace and justice; in the interests of the young; in defence of the family; and in
the cause of ecumenism.
We are honoured by your presence. We thank you for making the long journey
to Australia to bestow a great honour on an Australian woman whom we hold in
the deepest affection and regard.
You have come to honour Mary MacKillop for her goodness, her heroic virtue,
her dedication to the poorest of the poor. In doing so, you renew in all of us the
message she brought to those she encountered in her own lifetime.
In a great many ways she is a woman of our time.
In the last century as in this one, people came to Australia from all over the world
in search of better lives. In the remote areas of Australia, Mary MacKillop
helped the children of the poor to find them.
She established communities of hope. 
2
It is partly because she worked in the bush, in many ways the cradle of our
tradition, that she became a legendary figure for Australians.
Mary MacKillop's sympathies were with those we call the underdogs of society
which is where, by tradition, Australian sympathies lie.
If we have not succeeded in converting those sympathies to an entirely fair and
just society, they continue to constitute an ideal and an inspiration and Mary
MacKillop continues to embody them for us.
Through her work she spoke to all Australians and she spoke for the kind of
tolerant and diverse society we aspire to today.
She readily crossed denominational boundaries. Protestant and Jewish
Australians supported her and were her friends.
She was the daughter of Gaelic-speaking Scottish migrants, but her voice
became a distinctly Australian one. When she wrote to the Vatican she began
with the words: " It is an Australian who speaks".
Today, the Order she founded, the Josephites, continue to serve the children of
the poor. Today, they bring hope to those on the margins of society in the
suburbs of modern multicultural Australia, and, increasingly, to those in need in
the countries of the Third World.
Your Holiness, in the next two days, many thousands of people who have
journeyed from all over Australia and New Zealand, will gather in Sydney to
greet you and be present at Mass and the beatification of Mary MacKillop.
These will be great days in the lives of all who attend. They will be very
significant days in the life of our nation.
The presence of so many reflects both their continuing affection for Mary
MacKillop and the Josephites, and, Your Holiness, their great regard for you.
I said we feel honoured to have you here among us: I dare say many of us also
feel stronger.
Stronger for having among us a man whose steadfast defence and unremitting
advocacy of Catholic faith and Christian ideals is a source of comfort and a
guiding light.
Again, on behalf of all Australians, I welcome you.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
FAREWELL TO HIS HOLINESS, POPE JOHN PAUL 11
SYDNEY AIRPORT FRIDAY, 20 JANUARY 1995
Your Holiness, we are sorry to see you go.
Your visit will leave memories which millions of Australians will always cherish.
It is a pity that we were not able to share you with more of Australia.
But had you been able to travel more widely I can assure you that the warmth of
Sydney's welcome would have been repeated in every other city and community
across the continent.
I trust that you will leave us in the knowledge that Sydney welcomed you on behalf of
all Australia.
And I know all Australia will join with me in thanking you for making the long journey to
bestow a great honour on Mary MacKillop.
It is true that women as much as men pioneered this country, but their contribution
has not always been truly acknowledged.
The labour and love, the courage and perseverance, and not least the moral strength
that women brought to the frontier of Australia, and now bring to the modern
Australian community, have been fundamental defining forces in Australia's
development. In honouring this great Australian woman you have honoured all Australian women
and all Australians.
Your Holiness, you have also reminded us of where greatness in nations lies.
In Mary MacKillop the greatness was, as you said, in her openness and generosity to
others, in her sense of justice and in the unconquerable courage which she brought to
the task of seeing justice done. 
We recognise that it is much the same with nations: that the promise and potential of
Australia principally lie in these great human qualities.
In other words, the promise lies in our people.
When you spoke of the need for harmony and solidarity with one another we heard
you very clearly.
This is a country of deep democratic traditions. It is also a society of many cultures.
These days we are very conscious of the need to marry our traditions and institutions
with tolerance and openness towards others.
This is what we mean by multiculturalism in Australia.
In recent years we have concentrated our efforts on developing policies of inclusion,
by which we mean policies which draw all Australians into the mainstream of our
national life.
This has driven our response to the challenge of Aboriginal Australia, in which you
expressed particular interest yesterday and on your last visit.
The same sentiment drives our approach to building a culturally diverse but cohesive
society. We recognise that we will not create a more cohesive and stronger Australia without
creating a fairer and more just Australia.
When we talk of inclusion, therefore, we mean that the poor and disadvantaged must
not be left without care. We mean the basic comforts and opportunities to lead
fulfilling lives must be extended to them.
We do not say we have done enough, but these are our priorities and we know very
well what you mean, Your Holiness, when you say that our response to such human
needs now will largely determine the kind of society we pass on to future generations
of Australians.
We know that there is no greater challenge facing us than the challenge of our youth.
There have been developments in the modern world which have the potential to
greatly improve the lives of people and yet those same developments have the
potential to impoverish them.
We know that technological progress, like the wealth that will flow from our economic
growth, will never be enough. 
Experience tells us as the lesson of Mary MacKillop tells us that our young people
need both a sense of purpose and a sense of belonging.
They need what Mary MacKillop understood so well they need hope. And they need
what she had so abundantly they need faith.
We recognise the truth in what you say when you speak of " a growing sense of the
need for a moral and spiritual renewal".
And we know that it demands of all of us in positions of influence from political
leaders to parents and teachers that we address the spiritual needs of our children.
Your Holiness, you leave us conscious of the great honour you have done us on this
brief visit and mindful of the message you have brought.
On behalf of all Australians I thank you and wish you a safe return. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIA DAY 1995
ADDRESS GIVEN TO THE AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS, SYDNEY,
JANUARY 1995 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
* EMBARGOED UNTIL 8. OOPM, 25 JANUARY 1995*
This last year has been a good one for Australia and for Australians.
Think of the individual success: in sport, the unprecedented triumphs at the
Commonwealth Games, great performances at the World Championships,
Kieran Perkins, Cathy Freeman, the Kangaroos, the wallabies, the cricket team;
and in the arts, the Australian Ballet triumphing in Washington, the Australian
Opera in Edinburgh, Priscilla and Muriel's Wedding in Cannes, Toronto, New
York, everywhere.
Meanwhile the Australian economy grew faster than that of any other developed
country.
And whatever necessities of careful management such growth may impose upon
us, growth is without question what we want.
We want it to get unemployment down and employment up; and we managed to
do that, too. In fact we have seen 450,000 jobs created in the past eighteen
months, and long term unemployment has fallen and fallen much faster than
after any other recession in our history.
Our obligation to unemployed Australians and those who will be seeking to enter
the workforce in the next few years obliges us in turn to keep the growth going. 
We must also remain true to those principles of fairness and equality which we
have always held to be definitively Australian.
The truth is Australians do hold to them and that fact continues to shape the
way we are. It shapes policy. The Australian community would not let an
Australian government leave the unemployed behind: the radical steps that
were taken to bring them with us in last year's White Paper, Working Nation,
were taken in response to that sentiment.
This remains one of the great things about Australia: the weight of public opinion
continues to come down on the side of that broad set of values we summarise as
the " fair go".
Through all the changes in the shape of our economy the imperatives of
international competition, and against the ideological tide of unrestrained selfinterest
which pervaded the 1980s, in Australia the notion has persisted that the
pursuit of personal success ought to be balanced by care for others, self-interest
by the common interest.
We have had a perfect example of this in the last year.
The extraordinary public response to the drought was a heartwarming reflection
of Australia's national consciousness; it was also a persuasive reply to anyone
who believes that individualism and materialism, or global mass culture, or state
parochialism, or multiculturalism has replaced our sense of belonging to one
nation and with it our national identity and national feeling.
It was also reassuring'evidence that a common sentiment continues to flow
between the city and the bush, that the legend lives on, that the bush and its
recurring themes her beauty and her terror, as someone once said still grip
our imagination.
The bush is undoubtedly one of our great challenges: probably our most
profound duty to the Australians of the next century is to leave the land both
more productive and intact.
That means we have to establish a regime of sustainable development across
the country: the process has started and, what is most satisfying, the impetus is
coming in large part from farmers and farming communities from the regions.
Sustainable development clean profitable Australian industries for the twentyfirst
century allied to a concerted effort to conserve and restore the natural
environment will need to be a national effort, and between now and the end of
the century that is what we can make it. 
Regional Australia has an essential role to play.
In fact, this seems to me one of the most significant contemporary developments
in the life of Australia: the regions are developing a life and identity of their own.
They are developing futures of their own.
They are defining themselves in terms of their unique advantages and the niches
they can find in the modern Australian and international economies.
It is a development we certainly should encourage; not only because it will be to
the nation's economic advantage, but because the more varied and vibrant the
regions become, the more people will be drawn into our national life and the
richer and stronger will be the cultural and social fabric of Australia.
A revitalised regional Australia has the potential to enliven and enlarge our
national life in ways comparable to the role played by immigration and
multiculturalism.
The lesson is the same there is strength in diversity: and in the tolerance, care
and imagination required to build and maintain it; in the mixture of mutual aid
and self-reliance on which modern multicultural Australia has been built; in other
words, in our best traditions.
It seems to me that in this era of unprecedented and necessary change change
which we must make ourselves and changes which will inevitably be foisted on
us it is essential that we hang on to these traditions, remind ourselves of them,
teach them to our children.
Nothing has ever served us better, and or will serve us so well in the future, as
these things which are grown from our own experience.
I need hardly say that that is why, I think, we should be teaching these values in
our schools; why Australians of every generation and every national and cultural
background should know something of Australian history and tradition; why our
national symbols and institutions should more unambiguously reflect them; why
we really must, before the end of this century, appoint for the first time an
Australian as our Head of State.
There has always been a dark side to Australian egalitarianism, of course: we
have had this tendency to hack at tall poppies.
It is hard to say whether in general this thwarts ambition or makes it burn all the
fiercer. Those Australians I mentioned who have succeeded so brilliantly in the
past year, suggest the latter. 
Better still, perhaps it means the tendency is fading.
The crucial thing is to keep up the ambition of Australians, encourage their
creativity, delight in their invididual efforts and acheivements and not just in
sport and the arts, but in science and technology, business, in service to the
nation and its people and yet maintain the ties that bind us to this country, to
our communities, our families, our human values.
In the next year, as in every other one, we may expect to hear daily examples of
where we are failing, where we are going wrong, where we should do better.
In all this criticism there will be one consistent theme the voice which, in
various guises, urges us to abandon our collective egalitarian values in the
name of liberating the forces of rugged individualism.
We will hear it in debates about unemployed Australians, Aboriginal Australians,
Australian women. We will hear it in debates about the economy, the
environment, the arts, health and education.
We should of course heed all reasonable criticism and never lapse into
complacency. But nor should we forget that very few countries have managed so well in the
difficult art of balancing individual freedom with collective responsibility and
collective strength. And we should not forget that, largely as a result of this, few
countries are so good to live in and have so much potential to get better.
That might be the lesson to draw from our commemmoration this year of the end
of World War II. For all the countless individual acts of initiative, heroism and
sacrifice, what we remember most of all is a great collective effort a communal
effort in a common cause.
I think that is always the way in the end real success depends on finding what
we have in common, because in the end it depends on all of us.
So in congratulating the Young Australians of the Year and the Australian of the
Year I am inclined to say that perhaps tomorrow all Australians might take a bow
and resolve to make this year even better than the last. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
TO THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL TRAINING AUTHORITY CONFERENCE,
BRISBANE, FRIDAY 10 FEBRUARY 1995
I am very grateful for the opportunity to speak to you,
at this first Australian National Training Authority
conference. The National Training Authority has a special
significance for me: I might say a special place in my
heart and in my mind.
Vocational training is like that warm hearts and cool
heads are what we need.
And I don't think I have to tell you I'm a TAFE person.
I was an early leaver a normal leaver in those days
and I picked up a formal qualification at Belmore
Technical College.
ANTA was one of the first major creations of the Keating
Government: prefigured in One Nation of which
vocational education and training initiatives were a $ 720
million centrepiece and announced at a Youth Summit
later in 1992.
It seems an eternity ago three Budgets, a major
economic statement, the White paper on Employment, the
statement on the arts and the new media, an election,
three Opposition leaders and much else.
Even in those three years there have been quite
remarkable changes in the lives of our people, in our
national life: changes both in our economy and society,
and in our understanding of ourselves and the world
around us.
Unemployment is at last falling, employment growing more
strongly than ever before in our history, we have the
fastest growing economy in the OECD, investment is
booming. Our perspectives and expectations have changed. our role
in the region has materially altered and appreciation of
it is deeper and more sophisticated. 
The information highway is upon us. Much more than we
did three years ago, we talk about information
technology, information highways, new media, Internet.
Because it is happening before our eyes, we are more
aware that our children will learn things we never knew,
by means we never had and I fear we will never really
understand. The same goes for work: the revolution in work we are
living through, particularly the rise of knowledge-based
industries, is changing much more than our working lives
it is changing the structure of our society.
And if we do not address and facilitate these changes, we
will disastrously fail the generations of the next
century. That is why ANTA is so important it was created to
address and facilitate the changes. Its success is
crucial to our future.
That is why I said ANTA has a special significance for me
and for the Government: because there is nothing more
gratifying in a political life than to have created
something for the times ahead.
Governments do not always discern the currents of change.
This time I know we have.
When we do these things there is a buzz of approval and
enlightened interest and it lasts about 10 minutes and
fades.
But the reality doesn't fade with it, and nor do the
challenges which face us.
And now, three years later, we have in ANTA a body to
meet and confront them.
I think of AI4TA as a bridge by which Australians can get
from the old to the new into the realm of new
opportunities, into the new jobs, into the new
technology. From fading industries to the industries of the future.
It is a bridge, but not an unchangeable, inflexible one,
I hope not an impregnable bureaucratic edifice.
It needs to reflect the change it is dealing with. That
means it must be adaptable, flexible, portable,
approachable. It has to get women across, working mothers, new
migrants, poor Australians and their children, Aboriginal
Australians. 
It has to be a bridge f or people in the growing number of
industries where retraining of various kinds is necessary
as often as every two years.
It is not the only bridge we have, but it is an essential
one. It provides the framework for the journey.
As our economy and society changes it has to give
Australians the training they will need to keep up, to
make the transition from unskilled to skilled, from
manufacturing industries to knowledge-based industries,
from school to work, from unemployment to employment.
In the last Atlantic Monthly, Peter Drucker declared that
in future there would be " no poor countries. Only
ignorant countries.",
Australia simply cannot afford to be an " ignorant
country". Nor can we afford to stand still. We can't afford to let
old ways of thinking govern our response to present
needs, or let old institutions administer to the future.
Remarkably enough there are still influential people in
Australia who tell us that the 1950s was a period we
might usefully try to imitate. There were so many jobs
in the fifties, after all.
For once a bureaucratic answer is the right one. " Not
applicable".
Certainly there were jobs in the fifties.
I can personally vouch for it I left school to take
one. But, I hardly need to tell this audience that my job and
most of the others of that era have gone gone as
emphatically forever as those in farming, which a century
ago were still the most numerous of all.
I may not need to tell this audience but it is very
important that all Australians know the way the wind is
blowing. It is likely that by early in the new century a third or
more of jobs in Australia will be in the so-called
knowledge-based industries.
That does not mean our manufacturing industry will shrink
quite the opposite.
In the past ten years our manufacturing output has
increased by over thirty per cent, but the number of
people directly employed in manufacturing is actually
less than it was a decade ago. 
In manufacturing, we produce more vastly more but
with fewer people.
Increasingly those people need skills and training. And,
of course, so do the people in the industries where the
new jobs are the service industries, the
knowledge based industries.
The unmistakeable fact is that, if we are to serve this
and future generations, we need ANTA; we need the
initiatives in Working Nation; we need NETTFORCE; we
need a vocational education and training system as good
as any in the world.
We need more of these things to be a competitive and
efficient country, a country in the front rank of nations
and a fair and equitable social democracy.
ANTA is more than a bridge between old industries and new
ones, old lives and new ones it is a bridge between the
past Australia and the future. It will be an essential
underpinning of our success as a nation in the 21st
century. I said before that there had been dramatic changes even
in the three short years since ANTA was first proposed.
One of those changes has been in education and training
itself.
We pledged those $ 720 million dollars in One Nation
because we had reached an impasse: schools and
universities had grown rapidly, but TAFE was actually
declining. And budgetary problems left the States unable to expand
the system.
The changes have been remarkable. We all might take a
little uncomplacent pride in them, and even allow
ourselves to think that, if we can do these national
things in vocational education, we can do them in other
spheres of great national importance.
In short, we now have national strategic planning of
vocational education and training; cohesion and
cooperation in place of the dislocation and
inefficiencies of the past.
We have certainty of funding for the States triennial
funding and through-growth funding.
We have two spheres of government working through a
ministerial council; employers and unions working
together on an industry-controlled board.
And, in what may one day be seen as a landmark in our
national development, we have ANTA established in 
Brisbane, one of the dynamic regions of Australia: one
of the regions of the future, with many of the industries
of the future.
Over the period 1993-97 the Commonwealth will have
contributed $ 1.5 billion to vocational education and
training.
We have more than doubled our expenditure since 1989.
Most importantly of all, by the end of this year we will
be able to say that in the last four years the number of
people enrolled in TAFE has grown by 25 per cent that
more than a quarter of a million Australians have entered
the system.
This expansion of training will soon be transforming the
Australian workforce.
To illustrate this: in 1986, 45 per cent of Australian
workers held post-school qualifications. In 1995 we are
on track to a figure of 65 per cent by 2001.
In other words, from a country where a significant
majority of workers held no post-school qualifications to
one where two-thirds do.
In addition, ANTA is now spearheading the implementation
of Australia's new entry-level training system the
Australian Vocational Training System which will
combine education and training with experience in
workplaces. This will mean a more integrated framework for existing
training pathways, such as apprenticeships and
traineeships; and it will enable young people to combine
more traditional academic school subjects with vocational
education. I think we can say now that we are well on the way to
making a reality the concept of an employment, education
and training entitlement for young people leaving school.
And I might say in passing, that while Governments bear
the ultimate responsibility for achieving that objective,
we should set ourselves the complementary goal of seeing
it become a community value one held by parents,
schools, employers and, of course, young people
themselves. Nor should we forget that in the modern economy the need
for retraining among older workers and older unemployed
people can be as profound as that of our young people.
The process of workplace reform and enterprisebargaining,
and the drive to high quality and best
practice, is generating demand among companies demands 
and opportunities f or people in occupations regarded in
the past as semi-skilled or unskilled.
You have clients who have had no formal education and
training for perhaps fifteen or twenty years.
Many will have had no education or training in this
country. There can scarcely be a greater responsibility than the
one which is placed on those who provide it and I
suspect that, whatever short term frustrations you may
encounter, in the long run fulfilling that responsibility
will be a uniquely rewarding experience.
You are involved in a quiet revolution, one which is
recognised and admired abroad; and, more importantly,
one which will significantly shape the Australian economy
and society in the next century.
Now I could spend the remainder of this speech listing
further achievements like the fact that today almost
the same number of young people are studying at TAPE the
year after leaving school as are going to university.
Or I could instance some of the many benefits of growth
in the training sector.
The kinds of benefits which flow from the Vehicle
Industry Certificate which has been developed at Ford.
Or the on-site training which is providing skills
and learning opportunities to workers in food processing
companies in the Murray Goulburn area.
I could itemise the progress and talk at length about
some of the more remarkable achievements of recent times.
I could, for instance, talk about the initiatives in
Working Nation the most comprehensive response to the
aftermath of the international recession of any country
in the world.
But it is mandatory on occasions such as this to point
out that there is still a great deal to be done and many
obstacles to overcome along the way.
Mandatory and necessary.
We have made tremendous progress, but not yet as much as
we made in expanding secondary and higher education in
the 1980s.
We transformed the university sector from an elite to a
mass education system, and we doubled retention rates in
secondary schools. 
We need a revolution of at least the same proportions in
vocational education.
If it is true that, as Peter Drucker says, " knowledge is
the only meaningful resource today", we have to deliver
knowledge to the workforce as a whole.
The imperatives of economic success demand it. The equal
imperatives of social equity and cohesion demand it.
To provide it, we will need to dissolve the boundaries
between schools and training, and between training
institutions and industry.
We are competing with countries like Germany, Sweden and
France, which have well developed links between employer
associations, training institutions and schools.
Asian economies like Taiwan and Korea are rapidly moving
in the same direction. We must move just as quickly.
If we want a high wage/ high skills economy with high
levels of employment, a world class training system is
absolutely essential.
Let me, then, briefly address three areas which it seems
to me, we will need to tackle if we are to develop and
maintain such a world class system.
First, we will need to improve the quality and
responsiveness of the system.
Second, we will need to expand it expand it to the
point where vocational education and training is the
norm, not the exception.
And third, we will need to get the balance right the
balance between different types of education and
training.
Quality, understandably enough, is often measured by the
standard of buildings and the qualifications of staff.
Given the standards of a few years ago compared with the
world class facilities and teachers we now have, we could
be forgiven for thinking that we are rapidly approaching
our quality goals.
Ultimately, however, the quality of our training system
has to be measured by its responsiveness to clients its
responsiveness to industry and students alike.
I am well aware that over the last few years industry has
sometimes complained that the training reform agenda is
hard to comprehend, and that the system assumed a
knowledge of industry's requirements instead of taking
steps to actually find out what they are. 
The skill needs of industry and individuals are changing
so rapidly there must be mechanisms to ensure that
training and industry are moving hand in hand.
Consider for a moment just two statistics: in the German
metals engineering industry knowledge turns over every
five years, and in the German information technology
industry it turns over every two years.
We need to ensure that training reform keeps up with the
astonishing rate of industrial change. We therefore need
to ensure that training reform is industry driven.
Working Nation set us on that course and since then ANTA
has undertaken its own review of the reform agenda.
I am pleased to say a number of key reforms are in train.
For instance, an Enterprise Stream has been developed to
cater for the special training requirements of larger
enterprises. And ANTA will be undertaking a series of pilots of
userAchoice which will allow firms to choose the provider
for off-the-job training.
The second great challenge is to expand the coverage.
By 2001, 95 per cent of 19 year olds will have completed
Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification, or be
participating in formally recognised education and
training. That is the goal agreed to by all Australian governments.
In Working Nation we announced a series of measures to
extend the coverage:
The Youth Training Initiative, to enable fifteen to
seventeen year olds to get into education, training or
work through individual case management;
The Australian Student Traineeship Foundation to
enable Year 11 and 12 students to receive vocational
training and work experience; and
The National Employment and Training Taskforce
NETTFORCE which, under the leadership of Bill Kelty and
Lindsay Fox, has already approved the establishment of 21
industry training companies and consulted with State
training authorities to streamline their accreditation
arrangements. These reforms will make a difference, but they need the
support of other players.
Employers will have to take on more trainees, and State
school systems will have to become flexible enough for 
students to combine vocational training with academic
study. It seems to me we should consider moving towards a
European model where employer associations take a key
responsibility for training.
It may be possible to encourage larger employers to pool
their incentive payments with an employer association, so
that projects can be undertaken to improve training
within an industry.
When we speak of coverage, we also need to recognise that
the current system is not doing enough for women.
Women are woefully under-represented in trade training.
And only half as many women as men receive financial or
other support from their employer when they undertake
education. No doubt there are complex reasons for this imbalance.
But one thing is perfectly clear we will not be able to
say that we have reformed training if we have replicated
the inequities of the old system.
It may be that we should give priority to developing new
training arrangements for industries which do not
currently train their employees.
We know that it is in these industries, like community
services, that the largest number of women work women
who have not had access to recognised training.
It may also be possible to encourage the establishment of
group training companies for women only. Such companies
might coordinate the placement of female trainees and
apprentices between small businesses, and give trainees
the support they need to enter training and see it
through.
The third great challenge might be expressed as a
question: have we been expanding universities at the
expense of vocational education and training?
Parenthetically, I might acknowledge that there is an
irony to this in Queensland which has a deficit of higher
education places a deficit, I can assure you, which we
intend to rectify.
Nationally, however, the figures are a cause for some
satisfaction. Commonwealth funding available to higher education has
risen from $ 3 billion in 1983 to $ 4.8 billion in 1995
an increase of more than 60 per cent. 
In the same period, student numbers have increased by
more than 70 per cent.
There is no question that over the last two years, across
Australia, it has become much easier to get into a
university. The fact is we need more entrants to the labour force
with trade and vocational qualifications.
In every recovery up to now we have found ourselves
importing trade qualifications and vocational skills.
To reverse that phenomenon we probably need to reverse a
popular attitude: we need to raise the status of
vocational training both in reality and in the minds of
our young people.
For, while some surveys show us that more than half of
Year 12 students aspire to professional status, only 14
per cent of the workforce have professional status.
The point is vocational skills and the teaching of them
should have a comparable status.
There is every reason to believe that the perception and
the reality are both changing.
Unmet demand for TAFE places is now 36 per cent higher
than unmet demand for higher education.
ANOP surveys show that the proportion of students who are
choosing TAFE over university entrance has increased from
to 25 per cent.
There is no question that TAFE is gaining acceptance as
one of the two major pathways in tertiary education.
So, by way of coming to a conclusion: we are doing well,
no one should doubt our resolve or our belief that the
direction we are taking is the right one.
But we are also very conscious of the size and complexity
of the task and the hurdles we have to negotiate.
Of all the points I might stress this morning, I would
choose this one: the issue of vocational education and
training transcends all other loyalties whatever they
might be to States and Territories; regions; social
groups; gender, race or ethnicity; and personal political
affiliations. It is truly a national issue.
It is in the first place, a national issue of equity. 
Expanding vocational education to the degree that we are
expanding it, is very likely to assist those among our
young people who are relatively disadvantaged.
And it is certainly the case that once individuals
acquire post-school qualifications, their lifetime
incomes and opportunities are significantly increased.
Without doubt, it will be the best investment they ever
make. In other words, the challenge we have taken on all of
us in this room is probably the single most important
policy initiative we can take to redress lifetime income
inequalities in Australia.
Vocational education and training is, in the second
place, a national issue of efficiency.
There is a parallel here with the Job Compact. The Job
Compact works by assisting the long-term unemployed back
into the mainstream of the workforce, a move which helps
not only some of the most disadvantaged in the community,
but the economy itself to reach its collective full
potential. In the case of vocational education and training, we have
to recognise as a nation that we are not just
increasing the life chances of the disadvantaged, but
guaranteeing our economic competitiveness.
Technological change does not drop from the sky or emerge
from the mind of a particularly brilliant professor of
physics or sociology.
We now know that, in the main, technological change comes
from the adoption of innovation in ways that suit
particular workplace environments.
And there is now considerable evidence that the level of
training of a firm's workforce substantially determines
how efficiently new processes are converted into
productive output.
That is to say, skill formation begets technical change
and we all know that technical change begets
productivity, and productivity begets prosperity and
material well being.
That is what I mean by saying we need warm hearts and
cool heads.
So this is a great enterprise: not so much a
revolutionary one, as one which must keep pace with the
revolution which is already taking place. 
I think we all know that there is going to be no end to
the challenge, and that success itself will present new
challenges. We should tell ourselves that this is in the nature of
our era.
The reward will not be a day when we can say the task is
done. Rather, it will be knowing that by our efforts countless
Australians of this and future generations will have
opportunities that would be otherwise denied them.
That they will have crossed the bridge to the 21st
century and Australia will have too.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
POW CEREMONY, AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, 14 FEBRUARY 1995
I am honoured to speak to you today at this commemorative service for
Australian Prisoners of War.
This year we are commemorating the 50th anniversary of the end of World War
II. In Europe they are commemorating the liberation of their countries from
occupation and tyranny; the end of a war which took the lives of millions and
wrought devastation on a scale unequalled in history.
They are celebrating freedom and honouring the dead including those 6 million
Jews who died in the Holocaust.
Because many thousands of Australians fought in Europe and the Middle East,
we in Australia are sharing in this commemoration.
We are also commemorating the end of the war in Asia and the Pacific, which
was no less a fight for freedom over tyranny, and the price in death and suffering
was just as high.
It was also, for a time, a fight to save Australia.
In all, more than 27,000 Australians died in the Second World War. Their
sacrifice, like those who have died in every war, will never be forgotten.
We pledge this as Australians.
Here at the Australian War Memorial and at memorials in communities
throughout Australia we remember those who made the supreme sacrifice.
They are also remembered at memorials overseas. 
In the past three years I have visited some of them in Britain and France, New
Guinea and in Thailand.
In Thailand last year, at Kanchanaburi. I attended a service for the Australians
who diedi as Prisonprs of War on the Rpijrmp-Th qi land Railwav. Their story is
legendary.
Thirty thousand Australians were POWs in various parts of the world. It is they
who we are honouring today: the Australians who died in captivity.
We are paying tribute to the Australians whose desire to serve their country and
the cause of freedom led them to leave their country and / ose their freedom.
Their privations were profound.
To remember the sacrifice of our POWs today we need to imagine not just the
physical suffering they endured, but the psychological suffering the terrible
loneliness and the sense of loss, the homesickness and the helplessness they
had to live with.
And we need to ask ourselves what gave them the faith and courage they
needed to live with the adversity and fight off the despair.
How did they keep hope alive?
We know from accounts like those of Barney Roberts and Weary Dunlop, and
from what Max Jagger has said this morning, that paramount among the
sustaining values of Australian POWs were those indefinable bonds between
them which we call mateship.
Today we should remember the basis on which those bonds are built the love
of freedom and fairness, the pragmatism, resourcefulness and perseverance and
above all the love of this place. The love of Australia.
They are sustaining values for this generation too.
Perhaps, then, we should bring two messages to this commemoration.
One is the message of faith and courage, the victory over adversity which can
teach us and inspire us now.
The other is that we should never forget the evil that was done in these prison
camps. 
3
The outrage we feel about what was done on the Burma-Thailand Railway or on
the Sandakan Death March should never fade.
Our children should know about these things.
We must not forget.
Yet, as the life of Weary Dunlop tells us, we must allow the wounds to heal.
If Australians sacrificed their lives and freedom so that we could be free, we owe
it both to their memory and our children to see that Australia is kept free of old
hatreds and bitterness.
Today, and throughout this year, these are the messages I think we should
convey we honour the sacrifice of that heroic generation and we give meaning
to it by making real their hopes for us and those who follow. 



N
1~*
'' 4
S
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 9.00 PM 15 FEBRUARY 1995
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TO THE CHINESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE " AUSTRALIA AND ASIA:
THE NEXT STEPS", PERTH, WEDNESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 1995
It is a real pleasure to be at this coffee shop forum and to see so many
people here.
This is now a Perth institution. And I hope groups like it will soon be an
Australian institution. Because all of you here are participants in a great and
important enterprise the shaping of our involvement with Asia.
I have said before that this engagement with Asia is not a take-it-or-leave-it
affair for Australia. Asia is not a target of convenience for us. It is not a
fashion, or a flavour-of-the-month, or a political gimmick.
I have long believed that Australia's relationship with Asia has to lie at the
very centre of our external interests.
I am convinced that we came perilously close in the 1960s to marginalising
ourselves in the world. The White Australia Policy and the barrier of
protection and regulation behind which our industry and financial institutions
slumbered were all of a piece. Both were the product of the same defensive
and inward-looking cast of mind.
Just in time, I believe, we saw the need to open ourselves out to the world, to
break through all those protective barriers which held Australia's economy
and our minds in check.
A sea change has since taken place in the views of all sorts of Australians
and I am very glad of it.
It has been common in some quarters to hear Australia's interest in Asia
portrayed as a simple example of economic determinism: the charge,
crudely, that our policies have been foisted on us by the realities of our
markets. 
Of course it is true that our economic links with Asia are vital. The
percentage of our exports going to Asia has risen from around one third in
1965 to about 63 per cent in 1993. And Asia's importance to us will continue
to grow.
But it is a profound error to see that as the whole story. For me and for this
government our interest in Asia has a much broader focus and a much wider
purpose. Success in the efforts we make in Asia will affect not just Australia's
prosperity but our security. As the Government's recent White Paper on
defence made clear, strategic partnership with regional countries will be an
increasingly important part of our security policy.
And, more than that, closer engagement with Asia is already helping to
transform Australian society: the face of our society, as anyone who has
looked around the streets of our major cities knows. But also the heart of our
society.
Asian culture and Asian values will, in a very short time I believe, begin to
work their impact on mainstream Australian culture just as earlier waves of
European migration have done.
It is not surprising that this Chamber, which is part of this whole process, has
flourished here in Perth.
On this side of the continent, more than almost anywhere else in Australia, a
strong sense exists of Asia's proximity and its relevance.
Western Australia has long provided the sinews of our great trading links with
Japan and China. Over a quarter of our exports to Japan and more than
per cent of our exports to China come from this state.
And both Japan and China have major investments here, ranging from mining
interests to food.
We should never lose sight of the importance of our traditional commodity
exports, but it is also important to keep the economic relationship moving into
new areas.
We need to continue the push into manufacturing exports, services, tourism
and investments.
But for success to come in these areas we will need to depend much more on
personal contacts, on the creation of denser networks of contact across all
areas of our society business, education, government, culture.
The role of groups like yours will be critical to this process. 
Your 450 members and supporters have already formed contacts with a
whole network of Chinese Chambers of Commerce and business groups
throughout Asia.
You have taken business missions to Vietnam, Indonesia, Laos, Hong Kong
and China and have hosted incoming groups from countries in the region.
And in the long tradition of Chinese philanthropy you have also been trying to
put something back into Australian society with your Foundation to support
exchanges of junior executives in the region.
In other words, your Chamber is an outstanding example of the advantage
that cultural diversity gives Australia.
It used to be argued that the appropriate image for Australia's policies
towards newly arrived migrants was that of the melting pot, simmering away
the differences of our ethnic communities until they became part of one great
Australian soup.
But if we need a culinary metaphor for Australia's approach to migrants in our
society, a much better one is the Chinese wok, in which all the ingredients
retain their own distinct identity but become part of a harmonious and
balanced whole.
Contemporary Australia thrives on difference. It imposes few conformities
beyond the one that says the first loyalty of all Australians is to Australia and
to its fundamental democratic values including, especially, tolerance.
One of the most significant productivity reforms this country can make is to
make full use of the knowledge and energy of all our ethnic communities.
To take an example relevant to all of you in this room, the East Asia
Analytical Unit of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade which the
Government established to increase our store of expertise on Asia will soon
be publishing a comprehensive report on Chinese business networks in Asia.
The report will provide a compendium of information for Australian business
people to help them use these networks to do business in China.
The report points out that overseas Chinese are the largest source of
investment in China. Around 98 per cent of all foreign investment in
Guangdong province, for example, is from Chinese investors living overseas.
Clearly, one of the best ways of getting into China is by having an overseas
Chinese partner.
I know your members have been involved in the preparation of this report and
will recognise the sense of its conclusions.
Groups like yours are critical to developing commercial relationships, and
State Governments also play a complementary trade and cultural promotion 
role. But in the end there are some things that only the Commonwealth
Government can do and that it must do well if Australia's national interests
are to be properly protected.
It alone can establish the environment of trust with neighbouring governments
within which business can flourish; it alone can create the structures which
will support the development of a more prosperous, more secure region.
And that task has been central to the Government's foreign policy efforts over
the past couple of years. It has been a period as busy and productive as any
Australia has experienced.
I wanted to take the opportunity this evening to reflect on how far we have
come over the past twelve months or so and to look ahead to the next stages.
Because our agenda in Asia is far from finished.
With the end of the Cold War, the structure of the international system has
changed as profoundly as at any time in modern history. Technological
developments, particularly with information and communications, have
magnified the force of that change.
And although the changes have been most immediately obvious in Europe,
with the break-up of the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc, developments in
Asia are in some ways more remarkable. The economic growth of Asia is one
of the dominant themes of the late 20th century.
In the twenty years from 1970, East Asia's share of world GDP rose from 12
per cent to 25 per cent. It is inevitable that over time this economic shift will
bring with it strategic changes as well.
To take the most obvious examples: China's weight and influence in the
world will inevitably increase; Japan will continue to seek a political influence
more commensurate with its economic importance ( one reason we support its
permanent membership of the UN Security Council); the inevitable
reunification of Korea will change the political dynamics of Northeast Asia;
and Vietnam's membership of ASEAN will just as significantly affect
relationships in Southeast Asia.
In these circumstances, it is vital that we have in place structures which give
Australia and the region a sense of certainty, which keep countries talking
about their common concerns, which provide a framework for the containment
or management of tension.
That is why I have placed such importance on APEC, which encompasses all
the most important regional economic and trade links.
And it is why I suggested in 1992 that we should give APEC a bit of
horsepower by establishing meetings between the leaders of the APEC
economies. 
President Clinton took up this idea in Seattle in 1993 and then President
Soeharto hosted a second meeting last November at which leaders of all
eighteen APEC economies were present.
That meeting at Bogor, and the visionary Declaration of Common Resolve
which it produced, has permanently changed the nature of our region. It has
cemented APEC's status as the key regional body and has ensured that we
maintain a trans-Pacific approach to the region. This avoids the danger of
the world dividing into three contending blocs in Europe, Asia and the
Americas. The central element in the Bogor declaration is a firm commitment to free
trade and investment in the region by 2010 for industrialised countries and
2020 for developing countries. This will create a dynamic and integrated
market of 2 billion people.
The leaders' meeting also decided to expand the trade and investment
facilitation program, on which a good deal of progress has already been
made. This will become increasingly important as tariffs decline and services
trade is liberalised.
Also at the regional level, we began last year the process of discussing
possible links between the ASEAN Free Trade Area and the Australia-New
Zealand Closer Economic Relations arrangement, following a suggestion
from the Thai Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Supachai, which I discussed during
my visit to Thailand in April.
In the security area, Australia has played an important role in the
establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum which held its first Ministerial
meeting last year. The ARF engages the countries of the broader region for
the first time ever in a dialogue about security issues.
And we made similar progress in our bilateral relations with regional countries
over the past twelve months.
To take just a few examples.
With China, in addition to a steady stream of high-level Ministerial visits, we
had a visit in November from Mr Qiao Shi, the Chairman of the National
People's Congress and the third most senior member of the Communist
Party. In June, the largest ever Chinese trade and investment delegation
came to Australia.
Qiao Shi's remarks at the end of his visit that Australia-China relations have
" extremely good potential" are ones I can only endorse. China is now our 6th
largest trading partner and China has more foreign investment in Australia
than in any other country. 
Both Hong Kong and Taiwan, the other two Chinese economies represented
in APEC, remain very important to Australia. Taiwan is our seventh largest
trading partner and Hong Kong our tenth largest. The Government is
committed to building our commercial relationship with both. The Australian
Commerce and Industry Office in Taipei has been expanded and last year my
colleague Michael Lee made an unofficial visit as Tourism Minister. Hong
Kong will lose none of its importance to Australia after 1997.
I visited Tokyo for the second time as Prime Minister in September last year.
Japan remains, of course, overwhelmingly Australia's largest economic
partner. I was struck by the fundamental nature of the political and economic
change Japan is undergoing. As this change progresses, Australia's broad
policy dialogue and partnership with Japan will become even more important
to both of us.
I have said before that there is no relationship more important to Australia
than that with Indonesia.
I visited Indonesia twice in 1994 and the Austral ia-I ndonesia Ministerial
Forum, which President Soeharto and I established during my first visit to
Jakarta, met for a second time.
Our purpose with the Forum has been to broaden the relationship into new
areas of activity.
And it is quite clear that this is happening. In areas like energy, defence,
education, health, trade unions, transport and communications, the
environment, science and technology even sport we have never found so
many areas for cooperation.
Our trade has trebled over the past six years to more than $ 3 billion and we
are one of the top ten investors in Indonesia. A number of West Australian
companies Clough Engineering, the John Holland Group, Heytesbury
Holdings, Environmental Solutions International are all major forces in the
Indonesian market.
The very successful Australia Today Indonesia ' 94 promotion, at which 200
Australian companies and the West Australian Government were
represented, was another step in broadening the relationship.
We were also very glad to receive Vice President Try Sutrisno in Australia
last September, the most senior Indonesian to visit Australia since President
Soeharto in 1975.
Our burgeoning relationship with the Republic of Korea reached a new high
point with President Kim Young Sam's visit to Australia last November.
Korea has just passed the United States to become Australia's secondlargest
export market. 
President Kim and I have been determined to find ways of consolidating and
broadening this relationship.
Among the outcomes of his visit were an agreement to establish a joint fund
to support technology projects in areas such as the information superhighway
and clean energy.
We also agreed to upgrade science and technology cooperation and to hold
a Ministerial-level symposium to look at long-term energy issues, one of the
issues at the core of our relationship. We are also committed to building up
people-to-people contact between Korea and Australia.
The relationship with Singapore also made rapid progress last year. Prime
Minister Goh visited Australia in September and I was able to meet him again
at the APEC summit in Jakarta.
We established during his visit here a high level Singapore-Australia
Business Alliance Forum to assist business and investment in both countries
and also in third markets.
And both governments have put money into a fund to support feasibility
studies for joint participation by our companies in third markets.
Prime Minister Goh and I agreed to look at ways of further encouraging
Singaporean investment in tourism especially ( and I was very pleased to
support this) in providing opportunities for young Singaporeans to come to
Australia. Already the number of nights spent by Singaporean visitors in
Western Australia grew by 33 per cent in 1993-94.
Links between Australia and Malaysia are also growing. Our two-way trade
increased by 26 percent in 1993-94 to reach almost $ 3 billion. And our
exports have been growing by an average of 17 per cent over each of the
past five years.
One of the particular strengths of our relationship has always been in
education. More than 100,000 Malaysians have been educated here no
doubt some of them are in this room tonight and this provides a broad base
of understanding and goodwill which is unique in our regional relationships.
Malaysian companies, including the Malaysian Mining Corporation, are active
players in the Western Australian economy.
And local companies such as SBF Shipbuilders, John Holland and high-tech
companies like Working Systems, are performing well in the Malaysian
market. I had a couple of useful meetings with Prime Minister Mahathir at the APEC
meeting last November. Each of us saw considerable potential for further co-
operation between Australia and Malaysia, particularly in areas like the
environment and in scientific and technological research. I would like to see
some practical steps forward on this during the year.
Our relationships with Thailand, Laos and Vietnam also offer substantial
opportunities to Australia. I visited all three countries in April 1994 and have
since had further discussions with Prime Minister Chuan, when we met again
at the APEC meeting in Jakarta. And I was glad to be able to talk to
Vietnamese Foreign Minister Cam during his visit to Australia last week.
We have now opened a new Consulate in Ho Chi Minh City which will help
expand the commercial and consular services we can offer Australians there.
So we have been making very good progress on all these fronts. But the task
does not end. This year's agenda is equally heavy.
In the APEC forum, the challenge this year is to put real flesh on the
commitments entered into at Bogor.
We have already set the end point for APEC trade and investment
liberalisation comprehensive free and open trade in goods, services and
capital. So, unlike the lengthy trade negotiations in the Uruguay Round, we
will not be haggling about the extent to which we will reduce barriers.
What we will be addressing at our Osaka meeting and what we expect to
come out of the meeting is a comprehensive action agenda for getting to
free trade and investment
This action agenda will set out the key principles to guide APEC trade
liberalisation and put up some signposts along the way to 201 0/ 2020
No one pretends this will be easy. But I am confident that the hard
commitments we made in Bogor will be translated into action.
Japan, as this year's APEC chair, will have a key role in this task and officials
have begun a whole series of preparatory meetings.
Australia is ready to assist Japan in whatever way we can over the next 12
months.
At Osaka, we want to be able to announce some commercial ly-relevant
results on issues of concern to business such as standards harmonisation
and conformance and customs simplification
Australia strongly wants APEC trade liberalisation to feed into and fuel further
global trade liberalisation
So I hope APEC leaders will spell out at Osaka how they will accelerate the
implementation of their Uruguay Round commitments so that by the time 
World Trade Organisation ministers meet in Singapore, probably in late 1996,
APEC will have established a very solid trade liberalisation agenda.
And I hope that the rest of the world will enthusiastically take up the
challenge. Next month, the first informal consultations between Australia and New
Zealand and the ASEAN countries about possible links between CER and
AFTA will be held in Jakarta. Our first step will be to explore with the
ASEANs how we can promote investment links and closer business ties and
develop practical trade facilitation measures.
I also want to explore in the year ahead ways in which Australia can
consolidate our co-operation with our Southeast Asian neighbours in areas
like science and technological co-operation, and medical education. A great
deal is already happening in these areas, but I believe more can and should
be done to strengthen these ties and to ensure that we are drawing on the
mutual advantages we can offer each other. I will be working on some
specific proposals.
Bilaterally, we have a heavy agenda of follow-up work with individual
countries. I will be meeting Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong again in Singapore on
March for a further round of discussions about regional developments and to
monitor the progress we have been making with the bilateral relationship.
Our defence relations with Singapore, for example, are a first-rate example of
strategic partnership with regional countries at work. On Friday, I will visit the
Singapore Airforce Flying Training School at Pearce RAAF base, and we
have other areas of possible defence co-operation with Singapore under
discussion. This year is the fiftieth anniversary of Indonesia's independence. Australia
played a role in that process through the international support the Australian
Labor Party Government gave to the independence struggle.
The Indonesian people have much to be proud of. Over the past quarter of a
century, Indonesia's economic growth rate has averaged almost 7 per cent
per annum, and the number of Indonesians living in poverty has decreased
from over 60 per cent of the population to just 13 percent. This is expected to
fall to 6 per cent by 1999. We will want to mark this important anniversary in
an appropriate way.
China is likely to go through a leadership transition this year. When Deng
Xiaoping dies, a degree of uncertainty will no doubt enter Chinese politics.
But Australia and Australian business need to be clear that we are engaged
with China for the long haul. 
Its importance will only grow. But doing business there will be an
increasingly complex task. The reforms which Deng Xiaoping unleashed
mean that the simple days in which businesspeople could deal with the
central government have gone. More and more decisions have been
devolved from the state to the private sector and from the centre to the
regions.
That is why it is important to sustain the ties we have in China. More than
100 Chinese corporations and organisations have opened representative
branch offices in Australia and the number is increasing rapidly. We need to
encourage that and the reverse process of Australian investment in China.
I want to say something about India, too. There is probably a clearer sense
here in Perth than anywhere else in the country of the potential for closer
economic links with India.
The Government is enthusiastic about building this relationship. India's
economy is growing around 6 per cent annually and our own exports have
grown by about $ 300 million in the past five years.
I was planning to visit India myself next month, but domestic developments in
India have unfortunately forced the visit's postponement.
Even so, Senator McMullan has been in India this week, leading a
trade mission with a very strong West Australian component, and Senator
Evans is also planning to visit later this year. So we will be keeping up the
momentum. For this reason, I am pleased to announce that we will be holding a major
promotion in India in the second half of 1996.
We will be putting our finest arts, scientific, technological and educational
achievements on show in order to build Australia's profile in India and
promote our trade and investment links. India's selection as the venue for
this promotion underlines the importance Australia attaches to the bilateral
relationship. More broadly, there is growing interest in exploring possible areas of cooperation
around the whole Indian Ocean rim and the Government will be
holding an important conference here in Perth in June to look further at these
options. Ladies and gentlemen,
Foreign policy can no longer be isolated from other aspects of public policy.
Australia's success internationally depends not just on skilful diplomacy but
on our having in place the right economic policies to make our country strong
and competitive, and the right social policies to ensure that we make the best 
use of all our people and that our children are educated with the knowledge
and skills they need.
On all these fronts we are making significant progress.
Economically, we are the fastest growing of all major industrialised
economies and forecast to remain so throughout this year. Business
investment is expected to grow by 24 per cent in 1994-95 and the profit
share has seldom been higher.
And despite this growth, underlying inflation has remained steady at around 2
per cent.
Employment is expected to grow by 3 3/ 4 per cent in 1994-95 an increase of
300,000 jobs through the year.
This is an enormously strong foundation on which to build sustainable growth
and it makes us an increasingly attractive partner in growth for the countries
around us.
We need also to ensure that we are making the very best use of our people.
I have already spoken about the need to unleash the economic capacities of
our ethnic communities. We will be discussing this whole issue more broadly
in April when, as part of our contribution to the 50th anniversary celebrations
of the United Nations, we will be hosting in Sydney a major international
conference on Global Cultural Diversity.
We have also put in place major reforms to Australia's training system to
ensure that our work force is prepared for the new, more intensively
knowledge-based, world we are moving into.
That is why the Commonwealth Government is spending $ 68 million under
the National Languages Strategy to improve the teaching of Asian languages
in Australian schools, focussing in particular on Chinese, Indonesian,
Japanese and Korean.
The demand is already there. Between 1987 and 1991 enrolments in
Australian languages increased by 86 per cent. In 1969, 429 primary and
secondary students were studying Chinese; the figure today is more than
25,000.
All this is very good news for our children's future in Asia.
Finally, another dimension of our domestic policy which will shape our
international standing relates to our constitutional arrangements and national
symbols. 
In my view, it is important that Australians are able to represent ourselves
overseas in ways that are appropriate to the twenty first century. I have no
doubt that this means moving to have an Australian as our head of state.
In its report released just last month, Western Australia's own Constitutional
Committee considered the changes needed to provide for this. It should be
no surprise that the committee confirmed that there need be no concern that
any changes would affect Western Australia's position in the federation.
I take issue with those who say that this question does not matter in our
dealings with Asia.
Of course our current constitutional arrangements do not prevent our
business people from making deals or the Government from developing
cordial and productive relations with our neighbours. And the reason we
need to make these changes is because they are important to our sense of
ourselves as a people, not because of the sense others have of us.
But it is totally wrong to imagine that the fact that we share with a number of
other countries a Head of State who resides in Europe does not have an
impact on the attitude which our Asian neighbours have about the
fundamental direction of this country.
The Singapore Straits Times, for example, wrote recently that one of the
things Australia had done right in its drive towards becoming an integral part
of the region was ' preparing the people for a constitutional break with the
British sovereign to become a republic' President Kim Young Sam of Korea
made the same point in an interview after his return from Australia.
We have, of course, many foreign policy interests outside Asia, many
relationships of substance and importance. In a globalised world, that it is as
it must be. I am looking forward, for example, to visiting Germany and the
Netherlands early next month.
But, as I have said before, the simple truth for Australia is that unless we
succeed in Asia, we succeed nowhere.
The challenges we face are great. But it is as exciting an enterprise as
anything Australia has ever been involved with. And on its outcome depends
nothing less than the future of this country as we enter the twenty first
century. Australia's Asian community will be a key to that process. But I want to
emphasise that I do not see this as the only role of that community, or the
sole preserve of that community.
What is needed, above all, is for Australians of Asian background to take
their full place in all aspects of our national life in politics, in the arts, in 
St 13
entertainment and communications, in business and the professions. This
process is already well underway, but it has further to go.
Only when it is complete will we be able to say that the contribution of the
Chinese and other Asian communities to Australian life matches its enormous
potential. ends 



ñ 4
PRIME MINISTER
*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE SOUTH METROPOLITAN ( WA) ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT REGION, WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SPECIALITY ALLOYS
PTY LTD, CANNINGVALE, WA, 15 FEBRUARY 1995
It was with real excitement that I accepted the invitation to come here today
and ' launch the region', the first in the West.
This is a first step, taken by some very industrious people, to contribute to
their community by applying certain of the ideas articulated by this
Government in the White Paper, Working Nation.
One of the landmark initiatives in the White Paper was the Regional
Economic Development Program.
Many of this nation's economic problems, and the solutions to those
problems, are to be found at the regional level.
The idea behind the Regional Economic Development Program is simple, but
ambitious. The idea is to take a region and empower it.
To isolate its talents, to harness its energy, to coordinate its resources, to
bring together its people.
The Program is not about plying regions with extra funds, but allowing
regions to articulate their own visions and helping them to achieve those
visions, through business collaboration and development of regional
strategies, priorities and projects.
This agenda can only be achieved if the local stakeholders have a high
degree of participation in the regional institutions, and ownership of the
regional processes. 
That is what differentiates this Program from the failed 1970s concept of
regional development based on urban growth centres. In those days,
economic strategies were dreamed up elsewhere, and imposed on regional
communities. The decision makers misread local conditions, and lacked local
support. By contrast, the Regional Economic Development Program has been
developed on a platform of broadly-based community participation. The
strategy is anchored in the regions themselves, and draws heavily on their
resources. Ideas and initiatives derive from the regional communities.
And as we see today, they are springing forth.
That's not to say the Commonwealth Government is a mere passenger.
In the initial stages, the Commonwealth is a catalyst a spark plug. It draws
all the parties together, and focusses community dialogue.
Where a core group of regional leaders emerge and form a Steering
Committee, the Commonwealth will establish a Regional Economic
Development Organisation ( a REDO) to help with directions.
Where required, and at the request of Steering Committee, the
Commonwealth will fund regional conferences to identify the strengths and
resources of the region, the capacities of its institutions, and possible bridges
to other regions. We will help to enhance those capacities, and build more of
those bridges.
The development and implementation of strategies to increase employment
and investment requires both vision and the commitment of resources. The
Commonwealth will commit up to $ 240,000 over three years to fund the
operation of a REDO, to support that vision.
Where infrastructure bottlenecks are impeding regional economic
development, the Commonwealth will help overcome them.
We will do it either by direct funding or by Infrastructure Bonds which
encourage private sector investment through Commonwealth tax
concessions. To accomplish all this, the Commonwealth will spend $ 150 million over four
years under the Program.
And this does not represent the totality of Commonwealth assistance to
regional economic development. 
The Regional Economic Development Program will be a vehicle for the
delivery of other Commonwealth assistance and services to the regions.
These services will be channelled in focussed and imaginative ways, and
their impact will be profound.
I said on Australia Day that the development of regional Australia along these
lines has a potential comparable to our immigration programs.
It can make Australia more dynamic, adventurous and outward-looking; more
diverse and much stronger.
If we can get regional economies going with a place in the mainstream of the
national economy and indeed the global economy we will get stronger
communities in every other sense, including the social sense.
Above all, of course, we are going to get jobs and jobs with a future.
The Commonwealth Government's regional development strategy boasts an
ambitious agenda.
Such an agenda is only achievable if we work in concert with local and state
governments, as well as with business, unions and education research
bodies. The Commonwealth does not seek to duplicate or usurp the economic
development programs undertaken by other governments. Rather, we seek
to build on and add value to these already-existing programs.
Deputy Premier Cowan and his department have cooperated in the initial
steps. I am also pleased to hear that these initiatives in the metropolitan area have
been supported by the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, the Western Australian Municipal Association and the Trades and
Labour Council of Western Australia.
So this region, embracing the municipalities of Melville, East Fremantle,
Fremantle, Cockburn, Kwinana, Rockingham, Gosnells, Armadale,
Serpentine-Jarrahdale and the proposed municipality of Shepperton, now has
an opportunity to work more effectively towards employment and investment.
To Kyle Abbott, thank you for making this venue available today. A most
appropriate venue for a program promoting Australian exports.
To the business and industry leaders of the region, thank you for accepting
the responsibility of leadership. 
Your investment of knowledge and skills in the community is an investment in
the future. It is like applying the old agricultural axiom return to the soil what
has been taken from it.
The most extraordinary resource of this region is clearly its people. The
South Metropolitan Region is fortunate in having a very dedicated group of
community leaders who form the Steering Committee:
Mrs Charlotte Stockwell of the South West Corridor Development and
Employment Foundation;
Mr Jay Hardison of the Heritage Country Development Agency;
Mr Lyn Metcalf of the City of South Perth;
Mr John Hardwick, also of the City of South Perth;
Ms Lorraine McKeig of the Kwinana office of the Chamber of
Commerce and Industry;
Professor John Wood of Notre Dame University; and
Professor Peter Newman of Murdoch University.
To this pioneering Steering Committee, I offer you my congratulations and my
Government's support.
As tangible proof of this support, I am pleased to announce a major
Commonwealth Program Delivery Initiative in this region a result of
recommendations made in the Kelty report, subsequent studies by
government officials, consultations with regional communities and a study by
Price Waterhouse.
A group of Commonwealth officials will be formed here to assist with your
regional strategies, to search for partnership opportunities and help address
problems impeding the region's growth strategy.
This group will consist of the senior officials from key Commonwealth
agencies involved in the region such as the Departments of Employment,
Education and Training, Housing and Regional Development, Social Security,
Defence, Industry Science and Technology, the Australian Technology,
Science and Industry Council, and Austrade.
As this Initiative is progressively established it will provide ballast for your
regional strategy, broadening and deepening the region's capacities. 
I am pleased to hand over a cheque for $ 23,800 to fund the regional audit
and search conference process to help the Steering Committee to identify the
region's strengths, possible social and economic linkages between the
various municipalities and to develop a proposed structure for a REDO for
your region.
I wish you well in your endeavours. 



06/ 03 * 95 15: 07 V06 273 2923 P IESOFC
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO ROCKINGHAM HIGH SCHOOL, PERTH, WA
16 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I'm always delighted to speak to young people particularly at schools but
young people in Australia anywhere, because you often wonder what a Prime
Minister does. Well let me tell you what this Prime Minister does most of the
time, most of the things I am doing are about you, because I have
tremendous faith and great excitement about young Australians. I believe in
them 1 believe in you. And I know if we give you the opportunities, you will
make this a more interesting and exciting country than the rest of us have
made it. So, the greatest thing we can do for you is to give you the cOance to
show what you can do for the rest of us and that means instilling ' in you a
faith in this country, a belief that you have a unique opportunity, and the
enthusiasm to go out and do things that when I was old as you I could only
have dreamt about. In this country we have I think a unique opportunity,
because there is one thing unique about us we are the only people in the
world that have a continent to ourselves. And given the pressures of
population, and the problems of ethnicity, the conflicts and the problems we
have seen over the years, to have a continent to yourself gives you a chance
as a nation to fashion a life and a future that few peoples have ever had. And
we're not just about that continent, and how we develop it with all the
opportunities to have a focus and a conscientious about the environment
which gives us a style of living perhaps in the future unique among nations.
But also, because we're a society with a well-developed set of values we
should be putting a marker in the sand to say that in this continent of ours, we
will be unique, and that we will create a unique social democracy.
Now, you may say " well what does a unique social democracy mean?" What
it means is that we will relate to one another, and have values about one
another, that will lift the quality of this society above most other comparable
societies. That is, we will reject the notion of a dog-eat-dog society, that the
strongest take the best and the Devil takes the hind-most, and that we will
together go forward as a society not with an underclass or sub-groups, but
as one group. In other words, we have a loyalty to Australia, to the notion of
what it has become, and a loyalty to one another. And through that strength
we go on. PM PRESS OFFICEQ00 97
P4" i
( ic 
2
and now with the ASEAN regional forum we are starting to look in strategic
terms at the region. Australia is becoming much more a supplier of defence
material, both in the maritime area with destroyers and frigates and
submarines and as well as that we are working on some quite revolutionary
other products such as over-the-horizon radar and we are also looking at
some of the guided weapons as well.
So, Australia is going to be a more significant force in the defence equipment
area and, I think, this has now been recognised in south-east Asia and what
better way of demonstrating it than to have you here being involved with us.
So, I am absolutely delighted that you are here and that things are working
well and I know how well this transition is taking place and how well you feel
about it.
So, I look forward to this becoming a bigger and better thing between us and
these first tentative steps in your new facilities being here, we can sit back a
bit and watch it grow and see these exercises together and see what we can
do in the future. Defence relationships are always a tremendous friendship
building thing because if the defence forces of various countries feel
confident and relaxed with one another it just means that the whole
background environment is better and so for that reason and no other, I am
glad this is working. But, I appreciated being shown over the FAI Bs. To be
buzzing around in one of those for most of the week probably beats the hell
out of being Prime Minister I don't know although there is always
somebody wanting my job you can never shake them off.
But be that as it may, could I again, thank you very much for the hospitality,
for coming to meet me, I have enjoyed having a chat to you. I'll talk to a few
more of you before I leave and I couldn't think of a nicer way to end a West
Australian visit than to come here. Thank you very much indeed.
06/ 03 * 95 15: 06
ends 006 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICEQ0O02/ 007 



06/ 03 ' 95 15: 05 % Y06 273 2923 MP SSOFC
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS AT THE PEARCE RAAF BASE, PERTH, 17 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I would like to say how much I have enjoyed coming here and having a look
at the base. I have had a long interest in the development of the Australian
Airforce and from my first years in Parliament 25 years ago I used to go to the
Commonwealth aircraft factories and the Government aircraft factories in
Melbourne when we were still putting together the Mirage and the Macchi and
I have taken an interest in the defence procurement issues over the years
and I am always, I suppose, keen to see the new types of equipment and
listen to what people have to say about them, about their capability and about
which particular aircraft they like and why. Even though we can took at a
technical specification of what they can do there is always that pilot feet that
you can only get by talking to people who fly them and use them.
Here in Perth, this is a major base in Australia for flying training and it is
another one of those things which, I think, impacts well upon the economy of
Western Australian. That is, the fact that we have a substantial defence
presence here in Western Australia, both maritime and the presence here at
Pearce and this is good for the economy and given the fact we have now
transcontinental east coast and west coast defence bases and bases across
the north of Australia, we can see the sophistication of the Australian
Defence Force and its capabilities becoming evident to anybody that takes
even a cursory interest.
I am particularly delighted to see our friends here from Singapore with the
Singapore Flying Training School. We are delighted to be able to be hosts to
Singapore in the area of flying training and, I think, this has to be a
forerunner of further defence co-operation between us and that we can in the
future see with not simply the amenity of this field and the facilities here for
Singapore, not just getting them to work right, but getting the relationships
working completely and fully and co-operatively between the members of our
airforce and your own. This means, I think, we can then take those next
steps because we are both members of the Five Power Defence
Arrangements, we have a lot in common we do joint exercises together
PM PRESS OFFICEQ00O1/ 007 
08/ 03 ' 95 15: 09 eY06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE It 0 04 / 1177
2
Now this year we are celebrating remembering the 50th Anniversary of the
end of the Second World War. VP Day Victory in the Pacific, and of course
in Europe it is VE Day Victory in Europe: 1945 1995, half a century later.
But it is not only a celebration of the democracies over fascism, it is a
celebration of the combined community values and effort of that period of the
War. We are celebrating the fact that as a nation we did something together,
and they're celebrating in Europe that as nations they did things together.
So, it is the action of communities together that bring the memorable social
phases, and the memorable social changes. So that is why we say we move
forward together we have values and considerations of one another, as a
group, as a community and it is these cultural values which mark out the
quality of our social democracy.
So that goes to things like giving young people a chance to a full education,
opportunity, inclusion. So university for instance and we just had Mr
Flannagan tell us about Murdoch. When I was a young man, Universities
were there for basically an elite a small elite. Now, as result of the policies
of this Government, it's more generally available but I will come to that in a
moment. And it is those opportunities, and the other thing about our social
democracy is to say that in all of these things like access and equity access
and fairness to health, to education, to aged-care, to support for the young
that we have a community which has something nice about it something
sweet about it that isn't about only giving the values to the values to the
smart ones, or the rich ones and leaving the poor ones or the
disadvantaged ones behind. In other words, again the sense of inclusion,
the sense of community. Now, that's what we have a unique chance to do,
and one of the reasons we can do it is because in this country we have
strong rates of employment. In Western Australia, in the last year, we have
had 5% employment growth. If we compare that, say, to any European state,
they would be having 1 So you have got this huge growth and employment
coming from the recovery which the Federal Government has sought to
induce. And in the economy in this state this year it grew 10%. Now, you
may say " well, is that a lot?". WellI I say to you that it's a real lot. Because of
we kept it up for 10 years, we would on 10 years replicate that which has
taken 150-200 years to produce. So, if you look at Western Australia over a
century and a half, it has taken us that long to get this big, but in one year we
have got 10% bigger. So if we did it for 10 years, we would actually
reproduce the whole thing in terms of wealth in 10 years. That phenomenal
growth, and phenomenal opportunity and phenomenal employment is the
thing which gives us egalitarian values. Because you can't believe that you
have a right to that sort of society without everybody having a right to a job.
So, we have this great chance I can't think of any time when any young
group of West Australians would have ever faced a period as exciting as this,
or with opportunities like this. We're now for the first time in our history
closest to the fastest growing markets of the world, that's in the Asia Pacific
near us. When I was your age the markets we sold to were Western Europe
and North America. We were a long way from the markets of the world. Now,
the markets have shifted, and two-thirds of all we produce goes to Asia, and
is right on our doorstep. So, all of you have that opportunity which I didn't 
06/ 03 ' 95 15: 10 IM06 273 2923 P RS FIEt 0/ 0
3
have, or most of us up on this stage didn't have, and as well as that, you have
got the opportunities of education to go out into a clever country and take
clever opportunities here and abroad. Ten years ago, only 3 young people in
completed secondary school. That was an appalling statistic for any
country that prided itself as being a smart country with good opportunities
only three in ten completed secondary school. This year, it is 8 in 10, which
has been a revolution in Australian education, and 40% of those young
people are streaming their way into University. Forty per cent did also in
1983, but it was 40% of 3 in 10, not 40% of 8 in 10. This Government has put
around the country the equivalent of 16 Universities, the size of the major
city universities, to take up the extra intake. And now we're reforming
vocational education or TAFE through the Australian National Training
Authority because the numbers speak for themselves. If 40% are going to
university, what were the other 60% doing what were the majority doing?
Well only a small proportion were being trained. But if we can train young
Australians, and give them the chance through university, or through TAFE,
then you could participate more fully in this country, and you can go out into
the world and do it too. Now, none of that was available some of that was
available to me but not all of that was because we never had these markets
in this proximity to Asia, in terms of our trade, at that time.
The other great change that makes this possibility, I think, the excitement of a
social democracy of quality, is the participation of young women in education
the high participation of young women in education. And it is a matter of
great pleasure to me that in this year more young women have gone to
universities than young men. Because always, it was young men who had
that title, by a long margin. It is a measure of how far we have come. And
the notion used to be, in families, that the boys or the young men were the
ones who had to be the breadwinners, and where the opportunities and the
effort and the family effort was given, but not so young women, or the girls.
Now, there is something intrinsically unfair about that blatantly unfair. Why
shouldn't the life opportunities and the excitement that this country can offer
be equally available to women as to men, to young women as to young men.
So, this huge participation in secondary schools from young women, and now
them going into university is a measure of out social democracy. It is a
measure of our fairness it's an essential fairness. It is a measure of the
opportunities we must extend to our community as a whole.
So, if you look at where we have come 10 years ago this was basically a
country locked up by what are called tariffs protection for manufacturing.
Western Australia was a mining and agricultural state we sold minerals
because the Japanese needed it for steel. Had they not needed it for steel,
we wouldn't have sold minerals. We would have basically been relying on
agriculture with a few services in the city. The employment opportunities
would have been vastly limited the chances of a full participation in
education would have been simply a dream. But now you can see that
because this Government has opened Australia up taken away the tariff
barriers, opened up the financial markets we now have in Western Australia
sophisticated manufacturing yesterday I was at a business that makes alloy
steel for the Pratt and Whitney Jet Engine company for Boeing 747s. Could
you imagine that there 10 years ago? Or making world-classed aluminium
PM PRESS OFFICEQ 005/ 007 
06/ 03 * 95 15: 12 0' 0' 6o 22733 229223 MPESOFC
4
ferries for the world? It just wouldn't have happened 10 years ago. Or a
sophisticated tourist industry, with high quality tourism services? All of these
things have come because Australia has opened up and we are richer and
smarter and better for it. But we can't drive this sort of change without an
educated, trained population. And you know I gave some numbers for
Germany the other day in Germany, for instance which is a highly
developed country the information base of manufacturing lasts 5 years and
then it is obsolete. And in information technology it lasts 2 years and then it
is obsolete. So every 5 years, or 2 years, you have got to turn it over. This
will be the same in Australia, which means that training will be the essence
training and education will be the essence of your life opportunities, as
technological change speeds up. But we are ready, and we have got the
effort and the commitment and the financial commitment to give you that
education, and that change.
But one of the other thing I think it is important for you to know is this: I have
always felt somewhat sad for young people who try and get their tertiary
entrance examination, and then find they miss and they lose out on a tertiary
education. Or worse, they have no vocational education. What we have in
place now, with the Australian National Training Authority and vocational
education or TAFE, is that you can go off to TAFE and do a course, and get
accredited units to return to the mainstream of a university campus. In other
words, it's not sudden death it's not a case of missing the TEE and missing
out for life you can actually stream your way back as a mature student a
couple of years later. You can say " look, I didn't do as well as I should have
done with the Western Australian Certificate of Education, I haven't got my
TEE, but what I'll do is I'll get into TAFE, and I'll get those marks, and I'll get
that accreditation, and I'll go back to university". Or, alternatively, you will
say ' look, in TAFE there are better courses for my place in the workforce than
there are for me in university, so I am going to get a Diploma from a TAFE
college". Now what we're trying to do the Federal Government is to keep
the resources up to the university system and with the states to TAFE, so
that you have got that chance. It is one thing us saying to you stay in
secondary school, complete Year 12, but then after that we haven't got
enough places for you. What we have had to do is build not only your
participation in school, but the places for you. Now all that is there, and we
have seen this great change ahead of us where you can participate.. . where
you can go straight into university or to TAFE, or to TAFE and work your way
back to university, or to open-learning and learn at home and those of you
who have got a PC and given the fact that as we extend the fibre-optic cable
network we are going to have PCs in many Australian homes you will be
able to do the open-learning course at home. And that won't be for people
just in remote areas, but actually for people in cities as well. So the
educational opportunities are going to be profound, and then if you can get a
link to somewhere like Murdoch University or the Maritime Industries, or the
Navy, where you have got a particular focus as you have here in
Rockingham on the Maritime Industry, and work associated with it and study
and learning associated with it, then you have got another string to your bow
another life opportunity. PM PRESS OFFICEQ~ 006/ 007 
06/ 03 ' 95 15: 13 006 273 2923PM PH PRREESSOSF COFFICE
So, let me recap on all that. What do we face? We face a high growth, high
opportunity country with low inflation. You have got opportunities in school
and in post-school education that no generation before you ever had. You
have got proximity to the fastest growing markets in the world, you have got
the chance of learning another language in school, you have got a chance of
using that language in Indonesia or Malaysia or Hong Kong or in China or in
Japan or in any of these countries around us, and you can do it in the
context of knowing that when you leave school, that huge employment growth
that is just coming through is going to give you a fairly good chance of finding
an interesting job. And doing it in the context of a society that cares about
itself and has mutual commitments to one another where we actually say " if
you're sick, we will look after you, if you're aged, we look after you, if you're
from a low-income family, we give you income support. If you're a young
person, we encourage you to stay in school, if you drop out, we give you
training and work opportunities. If you are long-term unemployed, we pick
you up and give you a job subsidy and we get you back into work'. In other
words, policies that produce a society that has a kindliness about it, and a
sense of decency about it.
I think one of the great challenges for Australia is to infuse our young people
with that sense of excitement to let you believe that the future is as exciting
as I think it is. And to stay that we won't let any of our young people down,
and we won't let them drop out of the system. Because a country that doesn't
love its children has no soul at all. So, this is the future we are speaking of
for you one which is about you, because the rest of us most of us we've
had our corner of the action already, and their is already someone ready to
pension us off, particularly in public life. Mind you, we resist it and fight it, but
the fact is the wave that matters is you, and that's why your faith in Australia,
and its ideals, become central to the sort of life you will have in the future. It
is my pleasant duty here today to not simply talk to you, and have a chance to
meet you, but to also underline this link you have with the Maritime Industries
and with the Navy, and just to remind you of what a great opportunity that is.
Now, Richard Flannagan asked me to unveil a plaque to make this point, and
remember this event, and that for me, of course, is going to be a great
pleasure, and which I'll do in a moment. But before I do, let me say the
greatest pleasure here today for me is to talk to you because I always look
forward to every opportunity to talk to young people, because you have got
an open mind, you're hard thinkers, you're hard assessors you are not
interested in nonsense and fairy floss, you want some real facts and some
argument, and you're listening and you're hoping, and what more could any
national leader want? Thank you very much indeed, and I will now unveil the
plaque. ends. IQj007/ 007 



P9,! ME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO HOPE VALE COMMUNITY, QUEENSLAND
24 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you members of the Hope Vale Council, other distinguished members
of communities in the Cape, my colleague Peter Dodd and mostly of course
members of the Hope Vale Community, men and women, and boys and girls.
It's a great pleasure for me to come to Hope Vale I'm very much in your debt
for opening up your community and your hearts to me and my colleagues, to
get to know you, and to get to understand you, and to, see how you are living
here, and what your aspirations for yourselves and your community are. This
is a valuable thing, and one which I have taken an opportunity... . which I have
taken on earnestly. Notionally, I came to lend support to the Cape York
Health Council. For all the reasons that Noel ( Pearson) just said, that to make
a health strategy work or any strategy work it can't be just the leadership or
the Government it has to be everybody. And just as we are speaking about
health, the non-Aboriginal community has seen a dramatic change. For
instance in the incidence of heart attacks in the last 20 years. That change
didn't come simply because there were more doctors in each suburb, or that
people were more likely to go them, it came because of a change in the way
Australians have responded to their health needs as a community. They have
changed their diet, they have changed their exercise, they have changed their
levels of stress, and they have sought to live longer. So they have been given
leadership by the medical community, but they have followed it through as the
broader community.
This is the central point the, Noel made to you, and the point that I
would endorse that whatever we do in Aboriginal Australia, has to be done
between the Government, the Australian community, and you as a community.
In other words, it will never be done simply by one group only it will always be
a group effort. It is about basically cooperation and organisation, as
Gerhardt ( Pearson) made the point. And it is about all of you being a part of it. 
Now, great changes have been made. In 1967, Aboriginal people didn't have
the right to vote in this country they were not recognised in the Constitution.
That changed. There was an enhanced consciousness about that. There has
been progress since more recently, you have seen the Commonwealth
Parliament enact the Mabo legislation, coming from an important decision that
said that your customs and tradition were not just something that the
Australian community had to assimilate and accommodate, but that it was
actually a source of the Common Law. That your traditions and customs were
a source of Australian Common Law. That was a declaration, but for it to be
law, the Government had to make a law. Anid we passed that law with the
help of a lot of you a year ago" We are now trying to.. . this week I
will introduce the Bill for theiL and Fund, that gives you the chance
to buy land that formerly has been . anated from you, and that you can't
secure under Mabo. Now why are we doing these things? Simply because
we feel that a wrong has been done yes, we do. There was the historic
denunciation of your rights, the removal of your land, the attack upon your
population this community is seeking to right those wrongs, and we are
seeking to right them in land. Land we know is important to you, because it is
a part of the course of empowerment of Aboriginal people. That because of
this spiritual connection you have with your lives and the land, the land is
important to you. For us to make a reconciliation with you, the land must be
part of the parcel it must be part of the package.
But part of that is also about giving you the right to live a traditional lifestyle.
That is, having the capacity to use that land. And as Noel said eloquently,
" living long enough to use it as well" That is, not just having it but living on
it, enjoying it, and living lone this is what I think most Australians
wish for you as a Community thtse things are possible. And I think that
while it is entirely true that the Mission stations have now become Aboriginal
Communities and they do have their leaders, and you do have your
strategies, and you are getting your land we know that whenever Aboriginal
people move towards a traditional lifestyle, their connection with the land not
only empowers them, but changes their psychology, and it also changes the
quality of their life. It changes their health, and it means that their health
improves, their well-being improves their sense of well-being their sense of
mind, and so the out-station movement is an important movement in the return
to that traditional style of life which the land gives you the capacity to create.
So, can I say that as Prime Minister, I see the whole story of Aboriginal
Australia and the reconciliation as being in a number of parts. The
recognition, the vote, the land, the helth, the leadership, the empowerment,
the enjoyment the happiness. ~ i~ use the whole point of public policy is
human happiness, and what greatsr cbjective could we have for you that you
are happy and well?
Now, health is a problem. It is a problem because of congregation in part, it is
a problem because of inadequacy of resources, and we know crowded
accommodation in communities, former mission stations areas produces all
sorts of health problems. And we have not seen the public facilities there in
the environmental health: like the roads, the sewerage systems, the hospitals,
the immunisations, the various things that the non-Aboriginal community has. 
But we are also seeing a less than complete understanding on the part of
Aboriginal communities about the way they live their own lives about their
diet, about how they actually.. . about their hygiene, about how they actually
diminish the incidence of infection, about prevention once infection comes
along. None of this, of course, can be separated from education, and one of the
things I was delighted about today was to see in this school which has
produced now so many quite famous people, and articulate people, leaders
indeed of the Australian community to see so many young Aboriginal
Australians learning those skills: literacy, numeracy and empowerment. It is
that education which is going to underpin any community understanding and
strategy about how Aboriginal people join with the Government of the
Commonwealth and the Government of the States and Local Government in
improving their health and life opportunities. So, I come here to Hope
Vale... . first of all I come to a community which is welcoming, I come to one
which is open, I come to one which has a sense of enjoyment and pleasure in
its own company, and I come to one that is trying to grapple with its change of
its history, and its' opportunities, and to do something about the problems of
health. And I have been told about the problems that you can't get the Flying
Doctor in if the airport is bad. That there is no point in trying to protect
yourselves from things like scabies, or from diseases of the kidneys, or
nephritis, if in fact there is a run-over of sewerage. So the sewerage system
has to work it has to be adequate. It's not good for Aboriginal women to be
leaving their communities to have their children none of our women do that.
Why should you? Because you have the nurturing and you have the support
that you need but you don't have the midwives, you don't have the facilities,
and you don't have the doctors when you need them, because you don't have
the facilities to get the doctors here, and they won't work here. All this implies
to me that there is a reasonably comprehensive strategy to take this on.
First of all, a recognition of the problem. This is what. the Cape York Health
Council is doing it is recognising the problem. It knows that the solution is in
all of you adopting it. It knows solution is in better coordination with
the Commonwealth, and the iid. Local Governments. And it is not a
matter, as I think Gerhar' tther it is ATSIC or the Commonwealth
Health. Department, or: .1 ueensland or it's the Local Government or the
Health Council, or the Lancu Council it is a case of everybody coming together
in the delivery of a coordinated strategy. That is what we are seeking to do
here. But we can't do it without you. None of us can do it without you. If you are not
interested in health in a primary way and when I say primary, I mean in terms
of your own personal health to the point where you are part of a strategy, just
as any community works to alleviate disease or the likelihood of certain
complaints we can perhaps help you if you help yourselves, in joining in a
strategy that actually tries to make it work. And so that health and hygiene,
and that the strategy is to if you like ease the congregational pressures on
communities by moving from towns to out-stations, or taking positions on the
periphery of Aboriginal comminutes, all these things which lower the
temperature of infection and disease and maladies are the things which are 
going to make the difference. It is not going to be simply an immunisation
program. It is not simply going to be lights on the runway. It is not simply
going to be the mid-wife. It is going to be the whole combination of things.
So, I think this is a period of great opportunity for all Australians, because I
have said and I mean it that when we are as a nation together, we are
stronger. When Aboriginal Australians and non-Aboriginal Australians are
together as a nation, we are stronger. And there is no doubt that the passage
of Mabo has made the Australian community feel better about the Aboriginal
Communities futures, and better about themselves as a community for making
this opportunity and this gesture in land. We have now got to do another thing
another perhaps more complex thing. And that is, to weave into our health
strategy the life and lifestyles of Aboriginal people, and to join with the
administrators of the Commonwealth and the States in -seeing those strategies
come to pass. It is not simply a matter of money -if the Commonwealth
Government wrote a cheque tomorrow morning in the Budget, it will not solve
the problem. It may help in particular ways, but it will not solve the problem.
So I think one of the lessons I would learn from this very welcoming visit to
Hope Vale is that you understand here in Cape York the problem. You
know it is a sophisticated problem which means all of you every one of you
have to be part of the solution. That your leaders can articulate it, but you
have to be part of the solutic then have to develop those strategies
out for housing, for health p , for access and transiting, for medical
support but we have to be aware of all of the dangers and incidents of the
traffic of disease, and to do the things which are customary in developed
societies to deal with scabies with ointments. To deal with nephritis. And to
do these things which can be done, and which should be done.
So, I am delighted by the sense of community I have found here I am
heartened, buoyed by the sense of community that I found here, by the
vigour and the intelligence and the verve of your young people which I could
see today in school, by the dedication of those who teach them, and inculcate
these truths and this learning to them, who can provide this future on-going
understanding and leadership to the community. And in seeing that, knowing
that all of you want to live, and want to recapture that traditional lifestyle, that
was denied to you for such a large part of our history. I think this is now a
possibility not everybody will take it, not everybody should. But those who
do, will have the benefit of it both spiritually and environmentally, and in terms
of their health and longevity, the challenge therefore is to deal with the
communities. So, I would like to take this. opportunity of saluting what has
been done in recognition of this problem with the Cape York Health Council, of
all the Communities of the Capc' no to say that the Commonwealth
Government will be cooperating in seeking to find the right course and
strategy to get the problem solveo.
Some of them are location specific and they can be done. And you have got
to wonder why they haven't been done whether it Is the road through from
here that should have been tarred. I mean dust is a problem dust is a
problem for respiratory complaints, of which Aboriginal people have many.
Access through strips and things like that through airports these are simply
a matter of funds and the doing of it. 
These things can be done but what has to be done is to put the strategy
together, and not be territorial about it. So for my part, I said in Redfem in
1992, we this community of Australia want a new relationship with the
Aboriginal Community. We understand the history, we understand the sins,
and we want to make reparations, and we want a reconciliation. Of these we
have now sought step-by-step to do. Mabo, the Land Fund, now health. And
with health will be the environmental issues housing, sewerage etc. We
should be able to do it together, but together is the only way to do it. And I
think that is the message of this visit. Thank you very much for having me,
and for the welcome.
ends. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP f
LAUNCH OF " NETWORKING AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE", THE FINAL REPORT
OF THE BROADBAND SERVICES EXPERT GROUP, FILM AUSTRALIA,
LJNDFIELD, SYDNEY, I MARCH 1995
It is a great pleasure to be here if not quite among visionaries, then at least
among those who speak the language of the future, and who see as the
authors of this report see the shapes and patterns of the future in an
information age.
That age, of course, Is already upon us.
If I might offer an Image from the past the future at our doorstep is a bit like the
encyclopaedia salesman, standing there proffering solutions to our educational
shortcomings; entreating us to invest in knowledge of the things we never
learned or had in life, but can now render to our children; tempting us with
worldliness. The children, mind you, know more about it than we do. The chances are
they've been clicking away at Interactive media for years. Chances are they're
playing a virtual reality game while we are standing at the door.
tut the game has really just begun, and we can't leave them stranded with a few
scraps of technology which by Christmas will look like something from the Dark
Ages. So, despite our reasonable doubts about the capacity of technology to change
the things which really matter like love, laughter, life and death we say ' Yes".
We're not sure that technology gives us much more than a stress-related illness
and a sense of inadequacy but we say " Yes". I Mar .95 13-: 516_ P40.012 P. 01,, 11 
T C L-a. 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 02/ 11
2
Al Gore says the-new information age is the equivalent of the Gutenburg Bible,
but we know his emphasis is not on the Bible, but the technology which printed
it. We know it is no substitute for belief.
We know in our bones that it will not, of itself, give us knowledge or happiness.
It will no more change our essential human needs than it will alter our bodily
functions though I've met a few zealots who would have us believe that it will
do these things.
But for all our reservations, we look at the kids, and we think we cannot irt
conscience deny them these things. This is their future. It's what the salesman
says it is it's the best investment we can make.
Now I don't know if there exist any reliable statistics to show that those who buy
encyclopaedias end up with happier and more successful children than those
who don't.
But it is pretty obvious that merely buying them is not enough.
It depends on buying, if not the best, then the best we can afford, and the one
which is most appropriate to our needs.
It also depends on whether we use it and, if we do, what we use it for as an
icon of our learning for visitors to admire, or for the practical education of
ourselves and our children.
So long as we buy it for the content and not just the leather binding: so long as
we bought it for what it says Lo us, rather than about us: so long as we were
interested in the content rather than the appearance I think the chances are
that with the encyclopaedia we q~ make an investment in the future.
And I think the same is true about the new communications technologies.
We really do have to embrace them now, so that we, our children and future
generations of Australians will not be left behind.
Lo that Australia will enter the 21st century where it should be, in the front rank
of nations.
And, when we do it, we should not be under any illusion that the act of embrace
will, by itself, create the future we want.
The technology itself is marvellous, of course; but it is only the means to an end. 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 36 No. 012 P. 03/ 11
3
Like the encyclopaedia, it is a beautiful thing.
Like the encyclopaedia, it contains the means to worldly knowledge; to useful
practical knowledge.
Like thle encyclopaedia, it can be the means of self-improvement, it can bring
people from the margins into the mainstream.
But, of itself, it is not a better education; or a better health service; or a better
life.
This technology will not teach us how to think. It will not teach us logic or
argument or how to put a case, or how to work effectively in the world.
It will not teach us how to write but all these things will be as Important in
information age as they have ever been.
In fact, of itself, technology contains a few serious risks. It presents us with a
great challenge.
The initial excitement might be in the technology, but what matters is what we do
with it.
The real excitement is not in the highway Itself, but in where it can take us.
It can, for instance, take us to a more democratic and equitable society, or one in
which injustice is intensified by unequal access to knowledge.
The same can be said of the global context.-it can help to bridge the gulf
between the developed and the developing world, or it can make the gulf wider.
It can strengthen our national culture and those of other countries, or, by the
flood of homogenised " global" product, it can fatally weaken them.
There is a lot at stake nothing less, in fact, than the shape of the society and
the world we inhabit in the 21 st century.
411-The great challenge is to make sure that the new communications technologies
enrich and strengthen us.
For instance, they can be a powerful educational tool.
We now have the opportunity to fully realise the educational potential that
television never delivered. 
TEL 4
We can link schools to share information.
We can make it possible for schools in regional Australia to share the vast
resources of our great institutions,
We can expand the realms of these institutions.
There are possibilities we have not yet thought of.
The technology has the ability to help us meet our education and training needs
in a world in which the turnover of knowledge in industry will soon complete a
cycle every five years and sooner in the so-called knowledge-based induslies.
If Australia is to get the vocational training system we need, the effective
deployment of the new technologies is essential.
We can teach history, brick-laying, civics, hairdressing, physics and football
around the clock, around the continent.
We can deliver better health services to all Australians all the time: better
diagnosis, better staff training, better care.
We can deliver rehabilitation programs national rehabilitation programs into
homes and community halls right across the country.
We should be able to surely make the delivery of government services more
efficient. Both the operation and our understanding of government should be improved by
the application of these technologies.
Again we can see the challenge: if we let it, the technology can be alienating, but
if we are clever we can strengthen the bonds between us and raise our level of
mutual understanding.
We have to decide, as from now, that access to the national information
4: infra structure will be no less a general right than access to water, or public
transport or electricity.
It must not and need not be in any way the preserve of business, or the better
off, or those who live in the major population centres, or who attend better
schools. It has to be a fundamental right of all Australians. TE. L: M ar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 04/ 11 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 05/ 11
We should recognise it as being to the 1990s what the railway and the telegraph
and the mechanics institute were to the 1890s.
The only difference need be that, unlike the railway, the information highway will
not run through the seats of influence and privilege and you won't have to
change trains at Albury.
It goes without saying, of course, that the more rapidly and effectively we take on
these technologies, the more competitive Australia will be.
In fact, our competitiveness crucially depends on it.
These days we talk about knowledge being the principal source of a nation's
wealth. With the new information technologies, we must recognise that we are talking
about more than the distribution of that wealth we are also talking about Its
creation. We can use this technology to greatly increase the productivity of our existing
industries, and we can develop industries which produce or adapt the
technology. We can export the technology.
We are doing this now.
But the greatest potential lies in content.
An educated, English-speaking, multicultural, outward-looking country in the
fastest growing region in the world has enormous advantages In the information
market place.
All those new channels and services and networks and systems will need
programs and ideas and software.
Australia can be a significant provider.
Creating content for our own channels will be an essential part of protecting and
enriching our national life.
It will also be an export industry.
We can trade In Ideas and culture as well as minerals and manufactures. 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95' 13: 56 No. 012 P. 06/ 11
6
That Is why this is a very appropriate place to launch the Report.
Film Australia is creating product for the highway and exporting it the potential
to do more is virtually unlimited.
It is a reminder that we are already engaged in the new technology.
Australia is not simply receiving the new technology and the product it carries,
but actively creating and shaping them.
Last week In Brussels the G7 held an information society summit. f
Among other things, they concluded that realising the potential of the global
information society depended on governments promoting:
the universal provision of and access to serv ices
equality of opportunity
diversity of content, Including cultural and linguistic diversity, and
open access to networks.
They also stressed the importance of " defining an adaptable regulatory
framework",
" To succeed", they decided, " governments must facilitate private initiatives and
investments and ensure an appropriate framework aiming at stimulating private
Investment and usage for the benefit of all citizens".
Most of what they said, we have been saying in Australia for some time.
Much of it we have been doing.
And, of course, there is no better example of this than this Report by the
Broadband Services Expert Group.
BSEG's work rivals, and in most cases surpasses, the work being done by any
other government in the world.
The work of BSEG in the past year has helped to put Australia in the best
possible position to take advantage of technological development particularly in
their social applications. 
TEL: I. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012
7
The Report recommends the implementation of a national strategy: a strategy
based broadly on the joint development of technical and creative infrastructure.
i ne tecrnroai inrasiructure is aireaay on tne way. vur teiecommunications
networks provide the platform for new interactive services to operate, and offer
access to networks like Internet.
Teistra and Optus are investing billions of dollars which will guarantee a firstrate
telecommunications network in Australia next century.
Later this year, a new dimension will open as optical fibre cable networks begin
to reach substantial numbers of Australians. T
It is no less a significant advantage that the Australian population is computerliterate.
More than 40 per cent of Australian households own a personal
computer, which, with the exception of the United States, is the highest rate in
the world.
Last year we went a long way to developing the creative infrastructure when we
produced the cultural statement, Creative Nation.
A substantial part of that statement and a substantial part of the money it
provided was directed at information technology and the new media.
A significant precursor of Creative Nation was the decision to combine the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts in other words, to link the
technologies of the future with the creativity of our people.
In giving a substantial boost to Australian cultural development, the statement
recognised the need to encourage the growth of industries producing content for
the now media.
The creation of AME the Australian Media Enterprise whose board will be
announced by the Minister within the next few weeks, carries the process
significantly further.
The BSEG Report recommends a " whole of government" approach. I am
' pleased to say that that Is the direction we have taken.
Last year I wrote to Ministers seeking Cabinet Submissions on the effect of new
technologies on key portfolios.
I'm expecting those submissions to be discussed in late March at a special
Cabinet meeting which will be dedicated to government use of information
technology. P .07/ 1 
TEL: 1. Mar-. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 0~' 11
8
Information technology concerns education and training, it concerns industry; it
obviously concerns telecommunications and the arts.
It Is, therefore, a major interest of Simon Crean's, Peter Cook's and Michael
Lee's. It is a major interest for Ministers and Departments of Health, Human
Services, Social Security, Administrative Services, Finance, Trade and others.
it is certainly an Interest of mine.
That is why I want to implement the BSEG recommendations as quickly as
possible. f
The fundamental recommendation is a national strategy for new communications
networks.
We have in part commenced that work.
However, to take it further, I have decided to establish a National Information
Services Council as the Report recommends.
The Council will comprise Ministers and leaders from relevant fields, and will be
established under the auspices of the Prime Ministers Science and Engineering
Council.
The members of the Council will be announced within the next few weeks.
It will meet in April and October this year and, following the meetings, Cabinet
will be convened to formally coordinate the Government's policy responses.
By the end of the year we will have a blueprint for the next century.
There is a great deal more I would like to say: but I don't want to sound like a
zealot. Like all new technology and new encyclopaedias for that matter this new
information technology does inspire a sort of messianic passion in the early
stages of conversion.
Yet, as the Report makes so patently clear, we need most of all a very
considered and rational approach.
So I will limit myself to saying this the opportunity for Australia is probably
unprecedented. TEL 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 08,, 11 
TE : L 9
We have the chance to dramatically improve the performance of our existing
Industries while creating a plethora of new ones.
New industries which will integrate us with the region and the world and, at the
same time, strengthen our national life, culture and identity.
We have the chance to deliver services more equitably and efficiently than ever
before. In other words, we have the chance to make Australia significantly wealthier an
more democratic: culturally richer and socially more cohesive.
It is an extraordinary opportunity and it can be truly said that we are superily
placed to take advantage of it.
Coming as it does, between the G7 meeting in Brussels and the CeBit Fair at
which Australia is the partner country in Hanover next week, this launch of
BSEGs Report is also well-placed.
Let me close by congratulating Brian Johns and everyone who served on the
Group and contributed to the Report.
Above all, I want to thank them.
They have made a very substantial contribution to their country.
We know what the challenges are. We know that we can meet them, and that
when we do, we meet our responsibilities to our children and the Australians of
the 21 st century. I. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 09/ 11 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 10/ 11
ANNEXURE 1
P-7 CONFERENCE ON THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
Government ministers of the Group of Seven ( G7) industrialised nations and
representatives of leading technology companies met in Brussels over last weekend at
a conference on developments on the information society.
Summary of principles agreed by ministers of G7 nations:
The smooth and effective transition towards the information society is one of
the most important tasks that should be undertaken in the last decade of the
century;
Our action must contribute to the integration of all countries into a global
effort...;. To succeed, governments must facilitate private initiatives and investments and
ensure an appropriate framework aiming at stimulating private investment and
usage for the benefit of all citizens;,
In order to realise the potential of the global information society in the future,
the G7 partners agreed to collaborate in the areas of:
-promoting dynamic competition
-encouraging private investment
-defining an adaptable regulatory framework
-providing open access to networks
while: -ensuring universal provision of and access to services;
-promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen;
-promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic
diversity; and
-recognising the necessity of worldwide cooperation with particular
attention to less developed countries.
In addition, the G7 launched I11 projects aimed at stimulating and promoting the
application of information technology. The projects encompass education and training,
electronic libraries museums and galleries, global health care applications, environment
and natural resources management, government on-line services, and broadband
networking. 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 11/ 11
ANNEXURE 2
HANOVER
CeBIT is the world's largest information technology and telecommunications trade fair,
held annually in Hanover. It has grown at an extraordinary rate since its inception in
1986. In 1993, the fair was attended by over 660,000 visitors, with 5,800 exhibitors
from 45 countries.
One partner country is selected each year this year, Australia has been selected to fit
that role. The partner country is given the opportunity to create an exhibit featuring:'
Information Technology
Network computing
Computer integrated manufacturing
Software
Consulting and services
Office technology
Banking technology
Security equipment
Research
As partner country, Australia will present a conference program to promote our
technological achievements and potential, and the opportunities for investing and doing
business in Australia. Australia's exhibit will also include economic and trade
development agencies, industry associations, consulting firms, investment and
technology brokers, and banks and other financial institutions.
The theme " InTelligent Australia" has been chosen for the partner country
involvement. It is aimed at highlighting the following benefits.
Australian skill in creating and using IT applications: in finance, banking,
mining, education, health, environmental management, transport, hospitality
and government.
Australia as a source of innovation through federal and state programs of
research and development.
Australia as a destination for investment by overseas firms whether they seek
equity interest in leading edge companies, or partnerships to access new
markets. Australia as the ideal location for US and European firms to establish their Asia
Pacific regional headquaters.
Australia as a gateway to Asia, combining proximity with stability, competitive
costs and a sophisticated telecommnuincations infrastructure. 



V S
4 PRIME MINISTER It
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF " NETWORKING AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE", THE FINAL REPORT
OF THE BROADBAND SERVICES EXPERT GROUP, FILM AUSTRALIA,
LINDFIELD, SYDNEY, 1 MARCH 1995
It is a great pleasure to be here if not quite among visionaries, then at least
among those who speak the language of the future, and who see as the
authors of this report see the shapes and patterns of the future in an
information age.
That age, of course, is already upon us.
If I might offer an image from the past the future at our doorstep is a bit like the
encyclopaedia salesman, standing there proffering solutions to our educational
shortcomings; entreating us to invest in knowledge of the things we never
learned or had in life, but can now render to our children; tempting us with
worldliness. The children, mind you, know more about it than we do. The chances are
they've been clicking away at interactive media for years. Chances are they're
playing a virtual reality game while we are standing at the door.
But the game has really just begun, and we can't leave them stranded with a few
scraps of technology which by Christmas will look like something from the Dark
Ages. So, despite our reasonable doubts about the capacity of technology to change
the things which really matter like love, laughter, life and death we say " Yes".
We're not sure that technology gives us much more than a stress-related illness
and a sense of inadequacy but we say " Yes". 
Al Gore says the new information age is the equivalent of the Gutenburg Bible,
but we know his emphasis is not on the Bible, but the technology which printed
it. We know it is no substitute for belief.
We know in our bones that it will not, of itself, give us knowledge or happiness.
It will no more change our essential human needs than it will alter our bodily
functions though I've met a few zealots who would have us believe that it will
do these things.
But for all our reservations, we look at the kids, and we think we cannot in f
conscience deny them these things. This is their future. It's what the salesman
says it is it's the best investment we can make.
Now I don't know if there exist any reliable statistics to show that those who buy
encyclopaedias end up with happier and more successful children than those
who don't.
But it is pretty obvious that merely buying them is not enough.
It depends on buying, if not the best, then the best we can afford, and the one
which is most appropriate to our needs.
It also depends on whether we use it and, if we do, what we use it for as an
icon of our learning for visitors to admire, or for the practical education of
ourselves and our children.
So long as we buy it for the content and not just the leather binding: so long as
we bought it for what it says to us, rather than about us: so long as we were
interested in the content rather than the appearance I think the chances are
that with the encyclopaedia we did make an investment in the future.
And I think the same is true about the new communications technologies.
We really do have to embrace them now, so that we, our children and future
generations of Australians will not be left behind.
So that Australia will enter the 21st century where it should be, in the front rank
of nations.
And, when we do it, we should not be under any illusion that the act of embrace
will, by itself, create the future we want.
The technology itself is marvellous, of course; but it is only the means to an end. 
Like the encyclopaedia, it is a beautiful thing.
Like the encyclopaedia, it contains the means to worldly knowledge; to useful
practical knowledge.
Like the encyclopaedia, it can be the means of self-improvement, it can bring
people from the margins into the mainstream.
But, of itself, it is not a better education; or a better health service; or a better
life.
This technology will not teach us how to think. It will not teach us logic or
argument or how to put a case, or how to work effectively in the world.
It will not teach us how to write but all these things will be as important in
information age as they have ever been.
In fact, of itself, technology contains a few serious risks. It presents us with a
great challenge.
The initial excitement might be in the technology, but what matters is what we do
with it.
The real excitement is not in the highway itself, but in where it can take us.
It can, for instance, take us to a more democratic and equitable society, or one in
which injustice is intensified by unequal access to knowledge.
The same can be said of the global context: it can help to bridge the gulf
between the developed and the developing world, or it can make the gulf wider.
It can strengthen our national culture and those of other countries, or, by the
flood of homogenised " global" product, it can fatally weaken them.
There is a lot at stake nothing less, in fact, than the shape of the society and
the world we inhabit in the 21st century.
The great challenge is to make sure that the new communications technologies
enrich and strengthen us.
For instance, they can be a powerful educational tool.
We now have the opportunity to fully realise the educational potential that
television never delivered. 
We can link schools to share information.
We can make it possible for schools in regional Australia to share the vast
resources of our great institutions.
We can expand the realms of these institutions.
There are possibilities we have not yet thought of.
The technology has the ability to help us meet our education and training needs
in a world in which the turnover of knowledge in industry will soon complete I
cycle every five years and sooner in the so-called knowledge-based industries.
If Australia is to get the vocational training system we need, the effective
deployment of the new technologies is essential.
We can teach history, brick-laying, civics, hairdressing, physics and football
around the clock, around the continent.
We can deliver better health services to all Australians all the time: better
diagnosis, better staff training, better care.
We can deliver rehabilitation programs national rehabilitation programs into
homes and community halls right across the country.
We should be able to surely make the delivery of government services more
efficient. Both the operation and our understanding of government should be improved by
the application of these technologies.
Again we can see the challenge: if we let it, the technology can be alienating, but
if we are clever we can strengthen the bonds between us and raise our level of
mutual understanding.
We have to decide, as from now, that access to the national information
infrastructure will be no less a general right than access to water, or public
transport or electricity.
It must not and need not be in any way the preserve of business, or the better
off, or those who live in the major population centres, or who attend better
schools. It has to be a fundamental right of all Australians. 
We should recognise it as being to the 1990s what the railway and the telegraph
and the mechanics institute were to the 1890s.
The only difference need be that, unlike the railway, the information highway will
not run through the seats of influence and privilege and you won't have to
change trains at Albury.
It goes without saying, of course, that the more rapidly and effectively we take on
these technologies, the more competitive Australia will be.
In fact, our competitiveness crucially depends on it.
These days we talk about knowledge being the principal source of a nation's
wealth. With the new information technologies, we must recognise that we are talking
about more than the distribution of that wealth we are also talking about its
creation. We can use this technology to greatly increase the productivity of our existing
industries, and we can develop industries which produce or adapt the
technology. We can export the technology.
We are doing this now.
But the greatest potential lies in content.
An educated, English-speaking, multicultural, outward-looking country in the
fastest growing region in the world has enormous advantages in the information
market place.
All those new channels and services and networks and systems will need
programs and ideas and software.
Australia can be a significant provider.
Creating content for our own channels will be an essential part of protecting and
enriching our national life.
It will also be an export industry.
We can trade in ideas and culture as well as minerals and manufactures. 
That is why this is a very appropriate place to launch the Report.
Film Australia is creating product for the highway and exporting it the potential
to do more is virtually unlimited.
It is a reminder that we are already engaged in the new technology.
Australia is not simply receiving the new technology and the product it carries,
but actively creating and shaping them.
Last week in Brussels the G7 held an information society summit.
Among other things, they concluded that realising the potential of the global
information society depended on governments promoting:
the universal provision of and access to services
equality of opportunity
diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic diversity, and
open access to networks.
They also stressed the importance of " defining an adaptable regulatory
framework". " To succeed", they decided, " governments must facilitate private initiatives and
investments and ensure an appropriate framework aiming at stimulating private
investment and usage for the benefit of all citizens".
Most of what they said, we have been saying in Australia for some time.
Much of it we have been doing.
And, of course, there is no better example of this than this Report by the
Broadband Services Expert Group.
BSEG's work rivals, and in most cases surpasses, the work being done by any
other government in the world.
The work of BSEG in the past year has helped to put Australia in the best
possible position to take advantage of technological development particularly in
their social applications. 
The Report recommends the implementation of a national strategy: a strategy
based broadly on the joint development of technical and creative infrastructure.
The technical infrastructure is already on the way. Our telecommunications
networks provide the platform for new interactive services to operate, and offer
access to networks like Internet.
Telstra and Optus are investing billions of dollars which will guarantee a firstrate
telecommunications network in Australia next century.
Later this year, a new dimension will open as optical fibre cable networks begin
to reach substantial numbers of Australians.
It is no less a significant advantage that the Australian population is computerliterate.
More than 40 per cent of Australian households own a personal
computer, which, with the exception of the United States, is the highest rate in
the world.
Last year we went a long way to developing the creative infrastructure when we
produced the cultural statement, Creative Nation.
A substantial part of that statement and a substantial part of the money it
provided was directed at information technology and the new media.
A significant precursor of Creative Nation was the decision to combine the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts in other words, to link the
technologies of the future with the creativity of our people.
In giving a substantial boost to Australian cultural development, the statement
recognised the need to encourage the growth of industries producing content for
the new media.
The creation of AME the Australian Media Enterprise whose board will be
announced by the Minister within the next few weeks, carries the process
significantly further.
The BSEG Report recommends a " whole of government" approach. I am
pleased to say that that is the direction we have taken.
Last year I wrote to Ministers seeking Cabinet Submissions on the effect of new
technologies on key portfolios.
I'm expecting those submissions to be discussed in late March at a special
Cabinet meeting which will be dedicated to government use of information
technology. 
8
Information technology concerns education and training; it concerns industry; it
obviously concerns telecommunications and the arts.
It is, therefore, a major interest of Simon Crean's, Peter Cook's and Michael
Lee's. It is a major interest for Ministers and Departments of Health, Human
Services, Social Security, Administrative Services, Finance, Trade and others.
It is certainly an interest of mine.
That is why I want to implement the BSEG recommendations as quickly as
possible.
The fundamental recommendation is a national strategy for new communications
networks.
We have in part commenced that work.
However, to take it further, I have decided to establish a National Information
Services Council as the Report recommends.
The Council will comprise Ministers and leaders from relevant fields, and will be
established under the auspices of the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering
Council. The members of the Council will be announced within the next few weeks.
It will meet in April and October this year and, following the meetings, Cabinet
will be convened to formally coordinate the Government's policy responses.
By the end of the year we will have a blueprint for the next century.
There is a great deal more I would like to say: but I don't want to sound like a
zealot. Like all new technology and new encyclopaedias for that matter this new
information technology does inspire a sort of messianic passion in the early
stages of conversion.
Yet, as the Report makes so patently clear, we need most of all a very
considered and rational approach.
So I will limit myself to saying this the opportunity for Australia is probably
unprecedented. 
9
We have the chance to dramatically improve the performance of our existing
industries while creating a plethora of new ones.
New industries which will integrate us with the region and the world and, at the
same time, strengthen our national life, culture and identity.
We have the chance to deliver services more equitably and efficiently than ever
before. In other words, we have the chance to make Australia significantly wealthier and
more democratic: culturally richer and socially more cohesive.
It is an extraordinary opportunity and it can be truly said that we are superbly
placed to take advantage of it.
Coming as it does, between the G7 meeting in Brussels and the CeBit Fair at
which Australia is the partner country in Hanover next week, this launch of
BSEG's Report is also well-placed.
Let me close by congratulating Brian Johns and everyone who served on the
Group and contributed to the Report.
Above all, I want to thank them.
They have made a very substantial contribution to their country.
We know what the challenges are. We know that we can meet them, and that
when we do, we meet our responsibilities to our children and the Australians of
the 21st century. 
ANNEXURE 1
G-7 CONFERENCE ON THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
Government ministers of the Group of Seven ( G7) industrialised nations and
representatives of leading technology companies met in Brussels over last weekend at
a conference on developments on the information society.
Summary of principles agreed by ministers of G7 nations:
The smooth and effective transition towards the information society is one of
the most important tasks that should be undertaken in the last decade of the
century;
Our action must contribute to the integration of all countries into a global
effort To succeed, governments must facilitate private initiatives and investments and
ensure an appropriate framework aim-ing at stimulating private investment and
usage for the benefit of all citizens;
In order to realise the potential of the global information society in the future,
the G7 partners agreed to collaborate in the areas of:
-promoting dynamic competition
-encouraging private investment
-defining an adaptable regulatory framework
-providing open access to networks
while: -ensuring universal provision of and access to services;
-promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen;
-promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic
diversity; and
-recognising the necessity of worldwide cooperation with particular
attention to less developed countries.
[ n addition, the G7 launched I11 projects aimed at stimulating and promoting the
application of information technology. The projects encompass education and training,
electronic libraries museums and galleries, global health care applications, environment
and natural resources management, government on-line services, and broadband
networking. 
ANNEXURE 2
HANOVER
CeBIT is the world's largest information technology and telecommunications trade fair,
held annually in Hanover. It has grown at an extraordinary rate since its inception in
1986. In 1993, the fair was attended by over 660,000 visitors, with 5,800 exhibitors
from 45 countries.
One partner country is selected each year this year, Australia has been selected to fill
that role. The partner country is given the opportunity to create an exhibit featuring:
Information Technology
Network computing
Computer integrated manufacturing
Software
Consulting and services
Office technology
Banking technology
Security equipment
Research
As partner country, Australia will present a conference program to promote our
technological achievements and potential, and the opportunities for investing and doing
business in Australia. Australia's exhibit will also include economic and trade
development agencies, industry associations, consulting firms, investment and
technology brokers, and banks and other financial institutions.
The theme " InTelligent Australia" has been chosen for the partner country
involvement. It is aimed at highlighting the following benefits.
Australian skill in creating and using IT applications: in finance, banking,
mining, education, health, environmental management, transport, hospitality
and government.
Australia as a source of innovation through federal and state programs of
research and development.
Australia as a destination for investment by overseas firms whether they seek
equity interest in leading edge companies, or partnerships to access new
markets. Australia as the ideal location for US and European firms to establish their Asia
Pacific regional headquaters.
Australia as a gateway to Asia, combining proximity with stability, competitive
costs and a sophisticated telecommuincations infrastructure. 



TEL: 3. Mar. 95 17: 21 N0.013 P. 01/ l'
L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF SUE ROBINSON'S CAMPAIGN, ALP CANDIDATE FOR
CANBERRA, ERINDALE LEISURE CENTRE, CANB3ERRA
3 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It is a pleasure for me to be here with Sue Robinson, opening this campaign,
because we are at at the most about a year away from the election. And
let me assure you, I am going to make this the hardest year of John Howard's
life I can tell you that. And that shell of an organisation they call the Liberal
Party, we are going to put more stresses and strains on that creaky old thing,
on that remnant of Australia's failed upper class, that organisation that
thought it had it's dead hand on Australia and did for so long they will need
more than a bit of political engineering when we put some stresses and
strains on that thing. TFhey will need every technique they have got push
polling, the lot to try and save their miserable political hides. Because, here
we are John Howard he's here as the Liberal Party's third choice. John
Hewson took them to a poll, lost, and Howard contested an election against
him, and they said " no we don't want you" because it was only in 1989 that
they defeated him for Peacock, and then they had another chance, of course,
when John Hewson basically lost his way, and they knew they had to change,
and so they had to think long and hard about their future. And they said " no
we're not going back to the past, we can't go back to Howard, he's a man of
the past, his views are of the past, his whole mindset is of another age, we've
got to make a new break and go for a new team the Dream Team. Downer
and Costello." But they made a conscious decision to reject him. Of course,
Downer came to nothing, and they went around looking around, and they
have given us John Howard because he is now the only thing they have left.
And we're supposed to say " oh here he is reborn and remade". They have
got to be joking.
And I said in the Parliament a week or so ago, if you look at Australia now
an open, competitive, confident, country, much more of an inclusive society
than ever, and much more confident I think about itself I mean, we are
coming to terms with our identity, coming to terms with our indigenes, finding
a place in Asia, making the leap out there and you have got to say to 
TEL: 3. Mar. 95 17: 21 " o. 013 P. 02/ 1lU
2
yourself what possible use could Australia have at this time for a man who
describes himself as the most conservative leader the conservative parties
have ever had. Is this the time in our history as we come to the next
millennium to in the closing years of this century to say " well what we need
is somebody who, in the 1 970s was comfortable with the policies in the
1950s"? And he was. It's not mis-representing John Howard to say that
when he was a minister between 1977 and 1983, he was looking for his guide
to the Menzies years and the Menzies Cabinets, and the policies, and the
views. And I notice some commentator said last week which I thought was a
terribly pithy fine he said " when John Howard talks about one Australia, he
means one Wollstonecraft". And he is right the Edwardian houses, and the
picket fences, and the big off-street alignments, and the old trees, it's an
older version of old and central Canberra. That's his view of the world.
And I see him up yesterday it said it all against him he said " I'm against
anything in politics that's regarded as unacceptable by the Australian
community". In other words, " you tell me what you don't want, and that's what
I'll give you. You lead and I'll follow". It's a bit like the republic he said
" look, don't ask me about the republic ask me in 5 years time and I'll tell you
what I think about it. If I think the Australian people believe there should be a
change, then I will maybe modify my position" it is really code for " if that
Paul Keating will get out there and lead them and convince them, I might
follow. If he will lead, I will follow"'. It's just another version of the same thing
against anything in politics that is regarded as unacceptable". So, " if
push polling is unacceptable even though I tried it on if it's unacceptable, I
will give it away. If the community don't believe there ought to be a racial
basis in the selection of migrynts, I'll give that up. If they think our industrial
relations policy is too hot, I'll give that away, too". In other words, " I'll dovetail
in I won't lead, I will follow".
Now, yesterday was an instructive day about Australian politics. We are in
the Labor Party because we believe in things, and we get things done. We
have a touch with the society, I mean Sue described herself correctly as
somebody who likes people, who talks to people, is of the community, talks to
the community she is, as a Labor person, is and should be. We are a Party
that is in touch with the community. This is not true of the Coalition. The
Coalition has got no community sense. John Hewson walked out of that
Parliament the other day is he going to go away with any sense of sodality
with the Liberal Party? Any sense of longevity of his sort-of comradeship with
them? Well of course not. They just drift into the thing like a sort of a minor
business organisation, and they drift out of it again. In other words, there is
only one real political party in this country, and it is the Australian Labor
Party. That's right the other thing is an organisation that picks up the non-
Labor party, the non-Labor forces. that's how they always used to describe
themselves the non-Labor party. Always in the negative they know what
they are against, not sure what they are for. Or, as Arthur Calwell said' " the
Labor Party is a party of conviction, the others are parties of convenience".
And, here they are, now out of office for a very long period of time, no sense
of binding, no sense of cohesion, no touch with the community, and definitely 
ILL 3
not a national party. Isn't it ironic, here's John Howard wandering around
Canberra in the shopping centre trying to address himself as a national
leader, but he leads a party which is not a national party. It is a party of six
state complexions. And when they are always talking and every one of
them does the same a new deal for the States means a bad deal for the
nation. That's the flip side of that coin a new deal for the States is just code
for saying a bad deal for the nation for the federation. And then we get all
this stuff federation was a set of arrangements to protect the States, It was
no such thing federation was an act of creation of the nation. That's what it
was. And this notion that we then fracture a nation of 18 million who have
been given the great oood fortune of inhipritinOi A crntinont of giving uo thio
unique place in the world, as one nation in a continent, to ourselves they
said " oh no we are not going to take that advantage we will slice it up like
a big sponge cake you know, cut it into 6 pieces, and they will all have their
taxing powers, and'they will all run their provincial governments" why?
Because they know the national character of the country, and the national
parliament, moves the common weal forward moves the society on and
that's what they are against. They are against these progressive changes
that's why they describe themselves as conservatives, and John Howard an
arch-conservative. So, it is ironic that here they are in the national capital
the seat of the nation campaigning for an important constituency, when their
policy is basically to try and fracture the place, and hand back powers to the
States, and remove that sense of nation, which we have all fought for, and
which we now have. And of course Canberra. if you look at the difference
with their icon Menzies who never gave taxing powers back to the States
and thought that one of his achievements was the building of Canberra this
mob actually want to smash Canberra. And if people think now they are
running through a sort of a d~ in-property cycle, well they have seen nothing
yet if the Liberals got hold of the national Parliament they would flatten this
place like a flap-jack. By the time they hop into the public service, and push
people onto individual wage contracts, and then cut the numbers, and cut the
Government spending while this is a more complex economy than it used to
be, and it has got now a private sector of some substance, give the public
sector a very large hit and the ricochet through this community I think
would be very obvious.
And just don't ask John Howard what he might do, look at what he did.
Between 1977 and 1983, the only building in this city under construction was
Parliament House. The construction sector was absolutely dead dormant.
There was no building, the housing sector had dried up, the business
community was shrivelling away and moving back to Sydney and Melbourne
this is what they did between 1977 and 1983. Now, this Government is a
growth government we believe in growth. And that growth has, in a very full
measure in the nation, attached itself to the ACT. And over these years
1983 til now there has been a lot of growth in the ACT, a lot of employment
growth, and a lot of prosperity and that is what this Government will
continue to provide. We are sort of going through a reality by-pass at the
moment we have got 5.5% GOP growth, and 2.5% inflation. But you have
these little pumped up tories running around saying " oh, the mess in the
economy" a mess? 5.5% growth and 2.5% inflation they have never seen
. Mar .95 17: 21 No .013 P. 03' 1 
TEL 3. Mar .95 17 : 21 No. t) 13 P .04,' 1
4
numbers like that in their history. 4.5% productivity growth, 500,000 jobs
since the last election, 4% employment growth a year we are the fastest
growing country in terms of employment in the Western world. In terms of
growth and inflation, we are on the top of the league table of the 21 member
states of the OECD. But, all this doom-saying they go around with John
Hewson was telling us at the end of the last election campaign that we were
going into a double-dip recession, then a depression. And John Howard
endorsed his remarks about the recession.
And here we are now growing as we have been so strongly, and the
challenge for us is to make this growth sustainable and to keep inflation in
its place, after having put it there after so much effort and we all know what
that's about it's about wages, it's about having a relationship with the trade
unions, it's about our Accord, it's about our whole co-operative model these
are the things we can do and these are things which are now happening. But
the Current Account Deficit is high for the moment it is absolutely laden with
capital goods. We are a country of 18 million we don't produce capital
goods, we don't produce mainframe computers, we don't produce the big
pneumatic or digitally operated machine tools which come from countries like
the United States and Germany, so whenever we start adding to that capital
stock after a few years of paucity of investment, of course this will reflect in
the Current Account. But are we going to build our capacity and keep on
growing, or do we lay dead in the water? So they are saying " oh hang on,
let's chop that off", and we say " all right, chop it off but you chop off all the
equipment that lets you fight the battle". And it's just worth reminding people
-as I did in the House yesterday of a few things: 10 years ago we were
exporting 14% of our product, this year it is 22%, which puts us right in the
middle of the OECD league 41 proportion of ) xports to GDP. Our capacity to
service our debt has fallen that is, the proportion of our exports which we
devote to paying the interest and outgoings on external liabilities was 21%
of our exports, and is now 11 In fact the numbers were out today they
confirm it again at 11 In other words, that growth in exports and our
capacity to service our debt and pay our way like anyone's capacity to
service a mortgage you know, you say " well, I have got a mortgage of
$ 1 50,00 that's pretty big". But if earn $ 150,000 a year, then you are fine.
So it all depends on your income. And our income has risen. In other words,
if you are in a problem, you fight your way out of it you invest and work your
way out of it. But they want to close it down " the growth is too much", they
say. Their charge against us in the election was ' not enough growth and not
enough employment", so the Government earnestly and honestly said " OK,
that will be our priority growth and employment". We were re-hired by the
country to get the place growing, and to get employment going again, and we
have done that. They said, " oh no, that wasn't the trick at all we didn't really
mean that, what we really meant was that we need really a pool of
unemployment around to keep downward pressure on wages, and we don't
want to see the Current Account moving up". This is Howard this is a
person who presided over the industrial archaeology of the 1 970s, when the
factories closed, when that other great economic genius John Stone was
saying " you can't have a competitive manufacturing sector sitting beside an
internationally competitive primary export sector. If you want minerals and 
TEL: liar .95l 17 : 21 No .013 P. 05/ 11
agriculture, you can't have manufacturing". Now this was the creed this was
around he signed Howard up to this.
So, here we are, with a burgeoning primary export sector, and a burgeoning
manufacturing sector manufacturing exports have tripled in the last
years. The fastest growing component of our exports are elaborately
transformed goods, and we now have a very large internationally traded
sector in services which didn't exist when John Howard was the Treasurer. It
has all happened because of us. And yet here we are, with 5.5% growth and
inflation, and he's saying " No good. No good", and in Europe you say
" what is the average growth rate in the European Union?" and
maybe 2.25% next year." And you say " is that right?" " Oh yeah". " What's
your employment growth rate like?" " 0.75% 1 what's Australia's?"
They have got to be joking. Now, I know all new leaders get a free ride for a
while, but faced up to a bit of fact and argument other than rhetoric does
anybody think there is a better substitute than these sorts of policies? Of
closing the place down to a low growth economy again because a low
growth economy simply means those who are doing well stay doing well, and
those not doing so well do less well. And that sort of unfairness is what we
don't need.
And I'll tell you this about Howard he stands for nothing. He was a weak
Treasurer, and he was a weak Leader, and he has no policies. And we saw it
yesterday with the Aboriginal Land Fund. They said... . he had a chance he
was out putting the spin all around the galleries, on every radio station, doing
that sort of Jimmny Cricket number, bouncing up all over the place " yabba
yabba yabba yabba yabba, yabba yabba yabba yabba" everywhere. As if the
glib, clever line will.. he re~ ons he can say " yes" but mean " no" and
someone reading the transcript can't quite work out what he means... . he was
trained in the John Carrick school of cynical politics. This is where push
polling came from, and all those other sorts of things in his days, he had the
big red arrows from China, and they were coming to get us in the sampans,
and remember all that? And he was Howard's mentor. And this is the sort of
cynicism that you get from this guy he had a chance to say to the Senate
and to his party " look, you selected me because you have got nobody else,
and these are my terms I want to make a new start with Aboriginal Australia,
I don't believe we can be an inclusive society without that happening. So I
am out of all these amendments that my predecessor was going to consider
in the Senate", trying to suggest for instance that we can make judgements
about the degrees of dispossession, or try to invest individuals with the land
and then give them the right to sell it, so that they actually leech away any
fabric of an inheritance in land. All these mangy tricks that they wanted to
write into the Bill. He could have said ' look, I am a lucky fellow, I have been
given a second chance in public life simply by dent of hanging around long
enough, and at least I am going to do the right thing and start clean.' And
what does he do? He sends the Bill back from the Senate full of all of these
compromising provisions. And some people said to us, ' well, look, maybe
you better take the Bill as it is, at least it is a Land Fund Bill.' To which we
said ' well, do the Aboriginals really I mean we have got the Native Title Act
and Mabo, but it is really available to people who still have a traditional 
TEL: 3 Mar .5 17 : 21 No. 013 F'. ub'' I
association with the land. For those dispossessed, the Land Fund was a
central ingredient to justice in land for Aboriginal people. So, if we let this
through it is just another shabby compromise, so we said ' no, no we won't'.
So we put the second Bill, the new Bill back into the House on Tuesday, our
original Bill with some of the procedural amendments we were able to accept
from the Senate rejecting all of the tawdry ones and said to Howard ' knock
this over and we have got a double dissolution trigger and we will propose at
an election that this issue be resolved by a joint sitting of both Houses there
after, giving the Labor Party the option of a double dissolution. He went
straight to water. He goes around saying ' oh, I'll have an election any time'.
Pigs he will. And, all this puffery in the polls he knows it is just like a little
helium balloon, you stick a pin in it and away it goes. He knows in the hard
tack of an erection that we are going to be right on his tail, so he didn't want
to be fighting any elections now.
So, he dropped off. But, instead of dropping off saying ' well, look, I will let the
Government's Bill through', trying to suggest he did turn over a new leaf with
Aboriginal Australia, what did he say ' I'll let it through, but if we become the
Government we will put all the bad amendments back into it'. Because they
don't want to give black people land. That is the long and short of it, You
can take all the science out of this and in the end what sits underneath it is a
deeply seated prejudice against them,
So, don't doubt this Government's strength or its principles or its resolve or its
sense of purpose or its capacity because we will, as we have, take on all of
these big block problems in Australia. Be it Australian competitiveness, be it
opening Australia up, be it the rights and prerogatives of Aboriginal people,
be it the status of women, you name it, we are the ones that have been doing
it and those opposed to us still stand for the same old tripe, the same old
conservative nonsense that they have always stood for.
I said in Caucus the other day, think of some issues in the last 15 years. On
the environment Howard said when he was Leader that the states would be
left to decide the future of forests and wilderness areas. On Aborigines, you
can't think of one positive thing he has ever said or done for them. On the
republic he is the Colonel Blimp of the Liberal Party, the staunch monarchist.
On Asia his only position was that he thought too many Asians were coming
to Australia and that there would be a social backlash against them. On
South Africa he corrected me the other day by saying ' no, it is not true that
Nelson Mandela would still be in goal if it were left to my view. I called for his
release in 1986'. That is 25 years after he was goaled. He opposed the ANC
and he opposed the sanctions. I mean, this guy is from another age and here
they have this obscurantist being proposed as the leader that can take this
modern, confident country of ours into the next century. Well, of course, it
would be a terrible shame for Australia and an unjust thing to do to the place.
I want to make a couple of extra points about the ACT and the labour market.
I made this point yesterday about their industrial relations policies. A week
ago Peter Reith said we now believe in an evolutionary policy. We believe in
gradualism and incrementalism. That's so, the average person says ' oh, well, 
.7M 0517: 21 No. 013P. 07/ 11
MMMMMMMMMMMTEL: Q. I'O
7
they have changed their tune a bit. Before they had individual wage
contracts and they were going to slot us all, now they are just going to move
on something and they believe in minimums.' But, when John Hewson
resigned the other day and the speech that John Howard made following his
departure he said ' well, there has been great changes in Australia' said
Howard and he gave the Government credit for them in opening up the
financial markets, in opening up the product markets with lower tariffs, he
said ' but, the great reform yet to be done is in the labour market'. So, the
week earlier Reith is saying ' don't worry, it is incrementalism and gradualism.'
Howard is saying ' we have got the big block buster policy change for you.'
Now, it is one or the other and we all know what it is. It is the big one,
The thing you have got to know about the labour market is that it is not like a
pool, it is more like a river. There are people changing their jobs every year.
Last year 1.7 million Australians changed their jobs or entered the workforce
out of eight million. When they do, they lose all of the award protections,
they lose overtime, penalty rates, and it means that a lot of people in society
are going to lose $ 100-$ 150 a week on low and middle incomes by losing
those capacities and they will take either the contract or they won't be
employed. So, if you look at that policy after four or five years, most
Australians would be on contracts and they would be out of any enterprise
bargaining framework or any set of award minimum protections which have
got, of course, ajustments there for cost of living or protection for cost of living
and the maintenance of these other things like overtime et cetera.
Now, interestingly, in the ACT, 15 per cent of the labour force about 25 to
30,000 people change their jobs each year or people join the labour market
from school. So, give that over the life of one Parliament, you are talking
about 75,000-90,000 people. Now, they will have the guts cut away from
their working conditions and that will mean, of course, that if you start putting
pressure on the whole industrial relations system it starts to degrade in that
respect. Couple that with, of course, the fact that they are going to cut
government spending and cut aggregate employment and you can see how
quickly that would change the society here. Yet, they are running around
saying to what is a very large public service town ' look, basically our policy is
to cut you to ribbons and to put you on contracts'. And people are supposed
to say ' oh, thanks for that, we will give you a vote, thanks a million.'
We saw Kennett do it with the Victorian public service and we would see
Reith and Howard do the same.
So, the thing is, I think, that in looking at this election I mean, here we are
standing on the very platform that we said we would in 1993 at the election
growth with employment, with productivity, with the country growing. And, we
have done all the things we have said. We said we would do justice to the
Mabo decision, we have done it with the Native Title legislation, yesterday we
did it with the Land Fund legislation.
They are out there now on the environment trying to represent themselves as
being in some way, I mean, they have opposed as I said the Gordon below 
TEL: 3. Mar .951 1~ LN o
Franklin would have been flooded had it been left to John Howard and the
Coalition. All the great changes in the environment we have made they have
opposed and McLachlan came out as their environment spokesman saying
he is opposed to clear felling of trees in this country and immediately Fischer
came out and said we won't have a bar of that policy, in fact that will not be
our policy, he said, very firmly.
So, they have no credentials and, I think, it is very important for people in this
country to know that the only party that has the interest, the commitment and
the strength to protect the environment is the Australian Labor Party there is
no other. Now, we have seen the two Greens from Western Australia up to
their chicanery on the Land Fund Bill as they were in the Native Title
legislation. They are not going to be doing anything for the environment and
Bob Brown and the Wilderness Society, there are some good people in the
Wilderness Society, but Bob Brown is now running for a seat in the Senate
because he thinks he can play corner politics with the continuing low quotas
that the Senate is offering under the proportional representation system.
So, people have got to put a big discount through the things he says. He try's
to misrepresent my position and he knows that without my support the
Daintree reservation which Graham Richardson put together wouldn't be
there. In th e last year, just in the last year, this Government has put aside for
ever, for this country, Shoalwater Bay one of the most attractive areas on
the Australian east coast, one of the most attractive areas in the world
Jervis Bay in New South Wales, by spending $ 30 million locating the
armaments depot to Victoria so that we could leave that pristine. And, we put
million in the Budget to buy back the hole in the heart of the Daintree that
disgraceful subdivision Bjelke Petersen let through which is sitting there now
in the forest, but all cut up into quarter acre lots, to buy that back. No credit
did we get from that none and we have got this year's quota of logs and we
are now seeking to establish the coupes and the quality in the stands and we
have had a deluge of attacks on us by people who, frankly, should know
better and who want to reach the same position we want to reach and that is
to see that we are preserving our best stands of trees, our pristine forests,
but at the same time having a sustainable forest products industry.
These are things governments have to do. A lot of noisy people on the
outside think they can do other things, but governments have to do serious
things and we can do it. So, our environmental credentials won't be found
wanting and I don't think can you imagine any year when the Liberal's put
away something like Shoalwater Bay and Jervis Bay or protected Daintree,
just in one year. This ; Government has got a long and, I think, proud
environmental record and one of the things that we have never really had
adequate credit for is the saving of Antarctica. Let me just say one little thing
because Bob Brown runs around saying ' I saved the Gordon below Franklin'.
Well, I was principally involved in securing the protection of Antarctica. Let
me just tell you a little story.
In 1986 I went to see Michel Rocard, who had become a friend of mine over
the years and he had just become Prime Minister of France and I called on
rii-z 0 00/ 11 
TEL: ' Mar-S No UI hU'
9
him six weeks after he became Prime Minister and we discussed the
Matignon Accords in New Caledonia. At the end of it he said President
Mitterand and I want to do something next year of an international flavour to
celebrate the bicentenary of the French Revorution. Not something simply
French, but something international. He talked about an environmental
protection agency and I said to him ' look, it is a good idea, but we will be both
old men before we ever see it, you know, getting a world environmental
protection agency together.' He said ' well, as a fraternal party you might
think about what we might do'. I said ' well, I have got an idea right now, but I
must tell you that I am in a minority of two in my Cabinet about it', and my
sole supporter was Peter Cook and he said ' what's that?' I said ' it is not to
sign the Minerals Convention in Antarctica'. So, he asked his officials when
they were going to sign this and they were to sign it in seven days from the
time of our conversation. This came from the OPEC oil price rises when they
decided to put a Minerals Convention into Antarctica to go drilling for oil, but
since the oil pressure had gone, the foreign affairs departments of the world
kept grinding away with the Minerals Convention. And, I said ' they will make
a mess of Antarctica and were you to join us we have a reasonable chance of
stopping it and put Antarctica away for 50 years as a wilderness park'. Now, I
said ' I would have to convince Bob ( Hawke) about this, but if you give him a
suitably flattering letter, I'm sure I could get him into it'. He did and then it
was the Bob and Michel show from there on, but we gradually worked on the
Japanese and the Americans and we saved Antarctica from being ripped to
pieces. So, when Bob Brown says he saved the Gordon below Franklin, we say ' yes,
and we saved a continent'. Don't worry, we will have the political amalgam
back together, all the people in this country that have got some ticker. I
noticed at the Australian Creative Fellowship Awards recently, John Olson
said ' look, there is only two kinds of people lovers and others', and we all
know what to think of the others don't we'. Now, the lovers are the people
that have got an interest in this country, that have got good will towards their
fellows, a sense of compassion, a sense of inclusion, a sense of commitment.
That is where we are. We are on the lovers side of Australian politics and we
know where the others are.
So, let's kick off a long hard year for John Howard with this campaign
opening today. And, say to Sue Robinson that with courage and decency
and style she has washed off all this dreadful unAustralian behaviour with
push polling and that the worst instincts of the Liberal party won't get the
better of her. And, they won't get the better of the people of the seat of
Canberra either and let them know that if the Liberals get up that this won't be
the city that it is now and it won't be the country t -' at it is now and that there
can be no substitute to continuing the great reformation of Australia its
economy, its society, its place in the world. And, while the going gets a bit
hard on or -, asions and it gets a bit complex we must, we owe it to ourself to
press on and we don't want to go back down the time tunnel to reactionary
politics and one Australia and one Wollstonecraft and one Menzies and one
dead hand, we want to keep this progressive change coming through. 
I am happy to begin this fight for this election with Sue Robinson and a
victory here in Canberra because the thing we must know in this country, you
get social progress by victories, like we did in the Land Fund Bill yesterday.
You get social progress by wins, you don't get it by unseemly compromises,
So, let's not compromise here in the ACT and lets have an unambiguous
victory for the lovers in Australian politics and we will leave the others to their
miserable brand of politics and their miserable approach to this country.
Best wishes to you, Sue, and the campaign.
ends 



TEL ?. Mar. 95 16: 14 NO. 009 P. 02/ 10'
44 ** Embargoed Until 8.3.95
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH VY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OFFICIAL OPENING OF CeBIT
HANOVER 7 MARCH 195
I am very pleased to take part in the opening of
It is a particular pleasure to be in Hanover a3 the first
Australian Prime Minister to visit Germany wince
reunification. We are good friends, with a long history
of close co-operation and ties which go well beyond the
commercial. You are, however, also one of our ten
largest trading partners and investors.
The relationship with Germany means a lot to us. I hope
my visit this week will lay the foundation for
Australia's co-operation with Germany well into the next
century. I could have faxed this speech, of course. or used the
modem. I could have E-mailed it: or, as some remote
Aboriginal communities do these days in outbaCk
Australia, I could have video-conferenced it.
I could have used the highway Instead of the aeroplane.
E-mail is quicker, cheaper, more comfortable and doesn't
separate us from our families.
But for all its extraordinary power and convenience, all
its seemingly limitless potential, there will always be
some things the information highway cannot do.
Among them is the need to make personal contact of the
kind I will make in Germany Inl the next few days, or the
kind you are making here at CeSIT 95. Nor will it ever
relieve us of the need to make judgements and decisions
and to have the will1 to act upon them.
In fact, right now, no decisions are more important then
the ones we are reaching in regard to the revolution In
information technology and communications which is
transforming our lives.
CeBIT 95 is taking place at a time when policy makers all
over the world are having to grapple with new and complex
issues raised by Information technology, 
TEL: 7. Mar-. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P. 03/ 10
2
Last week, I launched the final report of an Australian
Government inquiry into the technical and commercial
preconditions for the delivery of broadband services to
homes, businesses and schools throughout Australia.
There is a striking similarity between the Issues we have
been investigating and those considered by the G7 at its
summit on the Information Society in Brussels last week.
The G7 meeting addressed the social consequences of the
revolution in communications technology: the democratic
imperatives. They asked the question what sort of
Society will the information society be?
Among other things, they concluded that government3
around the world must promote the universal provision of
services; diversity of content, including cultural and
linguistic diversity; open access to networks and
equality of opportunity.
In Australia vie have been saying things for some time.
In fact, wie have been doing the.,
The G7 Conference Theme Paper spoke about the " enticing"
potential rewards of the global information society:
" better social integration: the recovery of our sense of
community; enhancing the progress of democratic values
and sharing as wiell as preserving cultural creativity,
traditions and identities; improving the quality of life;
a stimulus to economic growth, job Creation and higher
economic efficien'cy 1 and so on.
In Australia, vie know what these things mean. The
Communications revolution suits our ambitions.
It suits our social ambition~ s which are social democratic
egalitarian and -inclusive.
It means that vie can deliver soc'i program5 more
efficiently and that we can reach the margins with them.
That is another amoitlon wie can pursue with the new
technology: we can overcome the vast distances which
separ-ate Australians and deliver, even to the most remote
areas, education, training and health services, including
medical teaching, rehabilitation programs and rapid long
distance diagnosis. we can deliver employment programs.
The new technology will enable us to take to the more
remote communities of Australia the nation's arts and
heritage.
Australians live in a relatively loose federation on a
continent the size of western Europe. ' We have a
population of just 18 million an extraordinarily
diverse multicultural population the vast majority of
whom live in Cities on the coastal fringe, we see In the.
Communications revolution an opportunity to effectively
reduce the physical, social and cultural distances 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P.
3
between Austral ians and to r-reate a more equi tablea and
cohesive nation.
If the distances between Australians have always been a
concern, so too have the distances which separate
Australia from the rest of the world.
Some years ago an Australian historian coined the term
" 1the tyranny of distance" to describe the way in which
our isolation from each other and the world has shaped
our national development,
Overcoming this " tyranny of distance" has been, if not
Quite a national obsession, a powerful theme in the story
of Australia. Information technology and the
communications revolution is bound to be a decisive
Chapter in the story.
It will be all the more decisive because it Complements
another ambition of ours that is to integrate Australia
with the global economy and, in particular, the fastest
growing economies in the world those of the Asia-
Pacific. I know that this region is Of growinji interest
and importance to Germany.
For Australia, Asia is not the Far East but the Near
North. Our economic integration with the region has been
growing fast: a decade ago less than half of Australia's
merchandise exports went to north east and south east
Asia. The figure is now 60 per cent.
Nine of our twelve largest export markets are in Asia.
Australia supplies almost half of east Asia's Coal, iron
ore and beef and over hal f of i ts, wool and al umi n ium
ore. Australia has, to a very substantial extent,
literally fuelled east Asia's economic boom.
But although these commodity exports remain very
important to us, exports of elaborately transformed
manufactures to the Asia-Pacific have more than doubled
in the past decade. And we expect services exports to
double over the next five yea-s.
In the Asia-Pacific we are seeing the emergence of a
sense of community, an understanding among the countries
of the region that we need to work together if we are to
maintain high rates of economic growth.
This is what nas beer) driving the development of the Asia
Pacific Economic Co-operation organisation APEC.
In fact, the proportion of trade between the APEC
countries Is greater than that within the EU, In
Indonesia last November, leaders from the 18 APEC
economies committed themselves to the goal of free trade
and investment in the region by 2010 for industrialised
economies and 2020 for developing economies, 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 N0.009 P. I
4
When we meet again 11M Osaka later this year, APEC
Government leaders will be talking about the best ways to
implement their free trade goals anti working together oil
Issues like the harmonisation of standards and customs
regulIation.
ror both Australia and for the region the potential of
APEC is vast. Yot it is important for more than the
materi* 1al benefits it will deliver: It is important for
the message it contains. It is a watershed in the
region's history; and in Australia's history it marks a
change of the same dimensiaons it encapsulates the
effort we have made in the past decade to transform our
economy, redefi~ ne our independent identity and re-Orient
ourselves towards that part of the world in which -we live
and our future very substantially lies.
The communications revolution plays a defining role in
this Australian revolution,
Wo are very conscious of the fact that it offers us the
chance to dramatically improve the performance of our
existing industries and create new ones new industries
which will integrate us more thoroughly with the world
economy, and at the same time strengthen the fabric of
our national life, culture and identity.
Information technology is already a major Australian
industry and one of the most rapidly growing sectors of
the Australian economy. It is a significant export
earner now and the industry has set itself a target of
quadrupling those earnings by the year 2000.
That Australia has been chosen as Partner Country for
this year's CeBIT Exhibition, we regard not only as a
great honour, but as a very w'elcome testimony to
Australia's advanced capabilities in information
technology and communications.
I am 3ure that the 170 or so Australian companies
represented here will not mind if I say that their
presence speaks for more than the excellence of their own
operations and their own success it speaks for the now
Australia. Their presence speaks for a country which has radically
transformed its economy in the past decade and is
competing successfully in the modern global economy.
We hvpe, of course, that this Exhibition will1 help these
companies to expand their operations in Germany and
Europe. But more broadly we hope that our participation
at Cebit 85 will help the international perception of
Australia to catch up with the contemporary reality.
we are under no illusions about this: many Europeans
continue to think of Australia as a remote country -I
remote not only in the geographical sense, but removed 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P. iC
also from the modern international market place of ideas,
innovation, technology and industry.
It is true, Australia is a long way from Hanover. It is
also true that we live in a country whose unique phySical
characteristics, along with its pas~ toral and mining
industries, have long been its defining characteristics.
And so long as those traditional industries continue to
flourish, and tourists come from all over the worldincluding,
I am happy to say, Germany to see the
outback and the rain forests and the beaches, we will not
be discouraging these perception5. J
Rather, we would like to add to them an appreciation of
the change that has taken place the change to an
outward-looking sophisticated manufacturing economy,..;
I could point to any number of examples of that change.
But none is more striking than that in information
technology and communications the field in which the
Australian companies represented here at CeBIT 95 are
excell1i ng.
It is to detract not at all from the energy and efforts
of these companies to say that they now work in a
domestic environment that could scarcely hav. e been
imagined a decade ago a much more favourable domestic
envi ronment.
Lot me state a few of the facts as briefly as possible.
One way of summ'arising our position is simply this: at
present, vith the exception of Germany. no country in the
EU meets all the convergence criteria set out in the
Maastricht Treaty for Economic and Monetary Union.
Australia does.
Modern Australia is a deregulated environment of low
tariffs, low tax rates and low inflation.
Last year~ the Australian economy grew by 6.4 per cent and
we forecast growth of 5.5 per cent in 1994-95. Labour
productivity increased by 4 per cent in the year to
September 1994, employment grew by 4 per cent and the
inflation rate was 2.5 per cent.
Over the last 10 years exports of goods and services As a
proportion of GOP have grown from around 14 per cent to
22 per cent. Cur international competitiveness has
increased by 36 per cent.
Over the last 5 years exports have grown by more than
7 per cent per annum. Our exports of elaborately
transformed manufactures have grown at more than twice 
TEL: ?. Mar. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P. 101
The export base is diversifying rapidly in 1993-94, for
instance, exports of Australian-made computers and office
machinery, parts and accessories increased by almost
per cent. Exports of telecommunications equipment
increased by 34 per Cent in the same year.
Australia has a 540 billion IT and telecommunications
industry, with more computers and processing power on a
per capita basis than any country other than the United
Exoort earnings from our information industry at present
total $ 2.6 billion, and the industry expects the figure
to reach $ 10 bi llion by the year 2000 equal to our
annual exports of iron ore and coal.
Australia is indeed a remote continent. We are
accustomed to vast distances. But this has had its
advantages: it has taught us to innovate.
A century ago, for instance, it made us pioneers in the
science of refrigeration so that we could get our meat to
European markets. it put us among the pioneers of
aviation.
And in more recent times it has led us to develop one of
the most advanced telecommunicat ions networks In the
wiorld: networks which connect nearly all the households
and business premises in Australia.
Australia has more telephone lines per head of population
than Germany, Japan, Britain or the United States. One
in eighteen Australians use mobile telephones, the second
highest per capita rate in the world.
The Australian telecommunications 5ector is the eighth
largest in the world on per capita basis it is the
second largest.
These figures need to be understood in the context of the
Australian services sector-, a major user of IT and
telecommunications products, which accounts for 70 per
cent of the total output of the Australian economy and
employs three quarters of the workforce. As much as
per cent of the value content of everything Australia
exports involves services.
After Japan, it is thes largest services sector in the
Asian region, arnd Asia is a major user of Australian
services.
AS I said before. Asia is basically where Australia's
future lies.
what is equally important, Australians now recognise this
fact and, with the shift in perception1 has come a
rapidly expanding awareness of the potential to do
business in the fastest growing markets in the world. 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 N. 0,
So too are there Opportunities for overseas companies to
establish their businesses in Australia as a gateway to
Asia and as a site for Asia-Pacific regional
headquarters.
Over a hundred international organisations have already
done this, including such European companies as Hella of
Germany, Ericsson, Vodaphone, SITA and Thomson CSF.
They have found In Australia that Government policy is
directed to maintaining a competitive domestic
environnrt, a strong international orientation and, in
particular, an intensified engagement with Asia,
They will find one of the lowest company tax levels in
the world; generous depreciation allowances on plant and
eqwipment; exemption from dividend withholding tax; and
1.50 per cent tax concessions on research and development,
They will also find that Australia has a standard of
living with very few equals in the region, or the world
for that matter, and a quality of life which is second to
none. Europeans w'ho choose to move there will find that
Australians have become familiar with Asia-Pacific
markets and skilled at doing bUSiness there.
And if these advantages do cause international companies
to decide to set up in Australia, they will find
streamlined immigration procedures for their employees
and tax deductions for their relocation expenses.
They will also find that there are considerable
advantages in working with Australia In areas of
information technology and communications.
For a nvmber of years now, we have been actively seeking
co-operative relationships with multinational companies
as a means of developing the expertise of Australian
firms.
Today, more than 40 multinational companies participate
in a program through which they invest a percentage of
their Australian sales in local joint ventures with
Australian research centres, in new product development,
and in assisting Australian technology firms to enter
International markets,
Overseas com~ panies coeitemplating a move to Australia
should also bear in mind that Australia is the second
biggest market for information technology and
telecommunication$ in the Asian region, and that
Australian governments are major customers for
international IT companies. 9 
07/ 03 ' 95 17: a
when overseas companies come to Australia, they will find
that we have decided that IT and communications will be
one of the nation's great industries. They will find
that we are very confident of our technological
capacities. In rural communications, airport design and equipment, or
the design and management of nationwide telephone
systems, Australian engineers number among the preferred
suppliers throughout South-East Asia.
But it is not only in Asia that we aim to succeed.
Many of you may not be aware, for example, that
reservations, tracking and booking systems for Lufthansa
and other airlines are run by software developed in
Australia.
Or that telephone systems in Germany and other European
countries rely on Austral ian-developed switching systems.
Those systems are a product of expertise in ISON and data
communications technology which Australia implemented at
a very early stage. Indeed, we now have a highly
sophisticated network with one of the most extensive
optical fibre netwrorks in the world.
Australia's demographic pattern is almost certainly a
reason why we excel in remote communications, electronic
data interchange, geographic information systems,
computer systems for mining and mineral processing and
satellite navigation systems.
Far from the IT development centres of Europe and the
United States, Australians have had to develop
sophisticated solutions of their own.
As a result, wie have built powerful and flexible software
applications in areas such as banking, transport and
retail markets; and Australian accounting, banking,
insurance and treasury management packages, have become
world standards.
We discovered quite some time ago that living in the
Southern Hemisphere had the advantage of enabling us to
supply primary products to the Northern Hemisphere in the
off-season.
Today, the fax and modem have made us consciou5 of a
different fact: that the time zone difference between
Australia and Europe, which has always seemed to work
against us, can now work for us because now Australian
software firms can analyse problems while their European
clients sleep, and send the solutions before the start of
business in the morning,
03 fAb ( I a -j [ 001oI
Ir 0 4.) rX PRESS OFFICE 
TEL: 7. Mar2~ 5 16: 3~ No. 012 P. 01/ 01
9
There Is perhiops iso better aymbol of how change3 ' in
informatio~ n technology present themselves As
possihilities for Au3tralia.
Autstralia is nlow integrated with thin global economiy in
wAyR which unil now have always LUvvii denied u4. We see
uur-future in Asia, but not cxclusively. It is surely a
truism that in the inforn'atinn agp no-one's future will
be exclusive, if % mere is u blfilyle salient fact about
the information 3oc'mety, it is that our futur* is shared
it can be and it nuaght to be.
Our " A3ian futurc" can serve yours: Germany and tho
other eoikintriAX cit Europ2e can Use Australia as a bdse
from whiCh Lu einLer' thce V&amp; 3t new niarketu.
Moreovpr you wil I ino Australia is a market Iii iiel, 1r
and a uredLive partner In develooing new tcchrmologies.
A-the Australian companies at CeP&amp; TT 95 hear witness, you
will tirid that we are very deterrnine(. 1 Lo be a
p~ layIer in the information age.
We are very ConScIous that vie t. diiivt ;, Iaim to have
succeeded without succceu in Europe. That is why we pre
hera. It iS why Thc; 170 Australian companies are here.
And it i3 why I am very pleased to join in the opening o'f
C&amp; BTT 9A. TEL 7. Mar. 95 16: 38 No-012 P. 01/ 01 



TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 01/ 05
"* EMBARGOED UNTIL 6.3Opm
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TXI! WON P J KIATING, MP
OPENIN43 OF AIJSTRAUAN STAND AT
HANOVIR 8 MARCH 1995
It Is a Pleasure to be in Hanover opening this Australian stand at CeBIT'
it Is also a source of pride which I trust Is shared by all the Australian
companies represnted here.
We are sharing tha exhibition with sorme of th'e world's best companies, in
some of % he word's most competitive Industflex.
It Is a signal honour that Australls has been chosen as tis year's Partner
Country for CeaIDT, and Aumtrlia's information technology and
telecommunicationa companies have responded with unprecedented
enthusiasm to the opportunity this fair presents to show Germany, Europe
4nd the world what the Australian inidustry has achieved.
One of the problems faced by Australian manufacturers and service
lidustries In marketing themselves abroad Is the absence of intemationally
recognised Australian brand names.
Our companies are doing remarkable things in information technology and
communications, but their achievemeant. often go unrmarked and
anonymous. Often they are masked by fth names of the overseas
companies with which they are connected.
Theo fact Is Australia does not live In the internallonal mnind as a famously
technological society. We do not have companieS which fly the flag In, the
way that aI Siemens file&amp; It for G~ erm~ any, or Phillips for The Netherlands or
Microsoft for th~ e United States,
I have no doubt that Australian companies of thiS kind wvill soon emerge.
Teistra, to ofler one example, Is becoming a well known Australian brand In
Asia. Intellect, a CaBIT veteran which sells advanced point of s8la wW
smaert card technology, Is nlow a multinational firml opststing in Scanldinavia
and elsewhere in Europe. 
TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 02/ 05
2
It will take time, but the l1'" Pott'rt thing is to ruC40gnis that the Process has
begun. and that the emergence of Such companies will signify not only their
Individtial succss but another Step in~ the transuformation of AsIjstai.
The presence of 170 Australian companies at CeB3IT was unimaginable lust a
few years ago. It demonstrate* how much the enivironment has changed In
Australia, how much it has adapted to the changed International
environment. CoSIT' 96 will change it that much more. For your companies and for
Austraiae It has, I believe, an historic dimonsion.
It Is not too much to say that you carry the future in your hands. Not alone,
of course: those traditional sectors of the Australian economy which have
served us so well down the years will continue to underpin our economic
success, at least So long as they continue to moderrilsa end adapt to
tachnologloui and globl change. So too will other now and sophisticated
elemnents of our manufacturing Indus" r.
But no other inidustry carries such reel and symbolic importance as the one
In which your companies are working. And no Industry serves all other
Industries, or isuso fundamntal to their fitur success, as your Industry Is.
It Is * iso true to say that more trian any other sector of the economy,
Information technology and communications will define the sort of society
we become In the 21 at century.
On your success, and on how we Austrlan governments apply the now
technology, subsiantally depends th achievement of our national
ambitions, Your work fits our strategy.
We need an Innovative, competitive modam manufacturing Industry. You
are providing us with one.
We need an export-oriented economy initegrated with our region and Mhe
world, You are helping us to build It.
We need to re-vitalise our regions. Your industry can help us do It.
We need to overcome the distances wnicm separate people and * Ommunities
from each other and Australia from the world. T1hat Is what you are about
TEL 8. Mar. 95 15: 39 No. 021 P. 02/ 05 
TEL: 8. Mar.~ 5 15: 32 No. 021 P. 03/ OS
3
Yo make Australia competitive and to expand the realm of opportunity for
Australian$ now and In the future, we need comorehenalve and elfecove
vocational education and training. Your industry will play a crucial role.
Information technology arnd communicationsl isa baslc and defining element
In our economic and social ambitions -a world competve economy
underpinning an egalltarian. inclusive society.
It 13 an Industry with vast potential for good. It can make us a more
productive nation, make all sectofu of our economy mnote efficient, inettase
our exports. It Can deliver better health and other social services.
To quota just three examples of this potential: among the companies
represented hare are some like Mincom. which has developed sophisticated
systems for managing capital Intsnsive industris Including mining,
mnanufactuing and defence: and Rosemt Laboratories who have developed
Bralle computers, optical character reading machines that road to the blind;
anid Earth Resources Mapping. whose spectacular graphics packages for
visualisirig and analysin~ g Satellite piCTUres of the earth for applications like
mineral exploration, mapping end city planning, have set Il world standard.
Yet we shouldn't forget the moat fundamental foct about these new
technologies I mean the fact that properly applied, they can make all our
lives easier.
They 9o directly to the most commonplace and essential of our activities.
This is emiphatically not " bay* with toys" teochnalogy. it is technology to
make shopping easier, banking simpler, Teaching more effective, transport
" for, our public service more efficient. It can give Us better h* Spitals and
health services. It can enlarge our experience of the arts, open new
channels of creativity, deliver now and better realms of entertainment.
It has profoundly democratic possibilities.
Yet none of these benefits are inevtabtle. They will not happen by
themselves. They won't happen In Australia and they won't happen In the
world unless we decide ftat tey should happen and re-iolve to find the best
ways to rmake them happen.
Recenty I heard &amp; bow% a startling fact which I think we igowla uaefully beer
In mind when we talk about communilcation's end informaTion technology: It
Is that half the worlds population has never made a telephone call.
We will fall ourselves and future generations If we allow the new technology
to compound the difference which nlow exists between developed and
developing counules if we allow Information technology and
communications to be as unfairly distributed as the world's other resources.
TEL 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 NO. 021 P. 03/ 05 
TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 04/ 05
4
And what is true of t-16 glaol application of th flaw tochnQlolO$ Is true In
different degrees lor Australia. We need a strategy which wIIl ensure that
the great potential of IT and T Is realised In the Interests of out democratic
end social goals.
I think I can may with some certainty that Australia has considered more fully
then most countries 4ll the Implications regulatory, technical and social of
the information society.
Last weak I launched 8 major report Commissionled by the Goverme~ nt Into
the provision of broadband services. The repo't lay* the groundwork for the
Government to be a leadingeodge user of the new technology. Our objective
Is not just to Improve the way we perform the existing functions of
Government but, much more broadly, to re-engineer Its work to deliver in
completely new and more effective ways services ranging from health inl
remote areas to the kinds of entertainment we &amp; so every night In our
suburban homes.
Many of you will also be aware that lost year we dlivered two major
statements: the first on employment, the second on AuMalln cultural
development. Both expressly took account of the new technologies. Both
wer* designed to stimulate and give democratic and socIall direction to the
IT Indus" r.
Australia may not yet be well known tar Its technological Innovation and
excellence, we may not yet have that Siemens. or Sony or Microsoft, but
the companies represented here at CeSIT may reasonably think of
themselves as being leaders sm~ ng those who are establishing such a
reputation for us.
These 170 companies collectively carry one message to the 700,000 people
who are expected to visit this exhibition: It is that Ausuala knows the way
the world is going end will not be left behind.
Let me then congratulate thorn far their enterpriso and wisti them good luck
In their ventures.
Lot me also congratulate all those who worked so hasrd to put this together,
of AWTRADEao Dieter La Crn. e end his teem.
As I hove said so many times in the 082t, Ausualla's future is very much
tied to our close engagement with the economies of the Asia-Pacifc, not
least with our export to themn of Information technology and
tolecommuncstiofls. For that reason I want to welcome In paricular the
rmembers of business delegations who have Come here from Ousngzhau and
Japan especially to meet with Australian exhibitors. 
TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 05/ 0O
I also want to say how pleased I am that Australian State GOovemments re
giving this exhibition their full support; and thet the Premier of Queensland.
Wayne Goes, Deputy Premier Cowan from Westemrn Australla and Minister
Gude from Victoria have all made the effort to be here today.
And finally let me thank our German hets, whose generosity and hospitality
have made this visAt so rewarding and enjoyable partcularly the people of
Hanover. Since European settlement In 1788 Australiana have always known Hanover
as the place from which the British and, therefore, the Australian
monarchy came. When that connection passes., as I am sure It soon must,
this new link may well remain the link formed between Australea and
Hanover by this most 21st century event,
It is now my pleasure to officially open tills Australian exhlbtt at 



TEL:
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINSTER, THE MION F
THE UNITEID NATIONS SOCIAL SUMMIT
COPENHAGEN 12 MARCH 1995 jl. ar 5 10 : 44 No .009 P .01104
J4 KEATING, MP
In a worid which is changing at extaordinary speed, the central fact of our age is
Interdependence,-from the giobalisation of the world economy to the Informaton
revolution, our prosperity and se= urty are now linked Inextricably,
We Australians know that our future depends on equitable and sustainable
development In the rest of the world,
And we know that such development depends In part an flows of development
assistance from t rich to the poof 4untriles, partly on opening up the world's
markets to trade and Investment and partly on the efforts of each individual
country to support its own social and economic development,
No nation's experience Is likely to be directly transferable to another's needs, but! I
think Australia's experience has some relevance to our concerns at this
conference. I certainly do not pretend that Australia has solved its problems, but
we have made progress in developing a social democratic society where equity
and egalitarianism are integral elements of economic and social policy-making.
We believe that our experience of the lost decade furnishes unmistakeable proof
that the pursuit of equity within and between nations is not an option but a
necessity; that greater equity and productivity are not opposed but
complementary; and that the best means of delivering both Is to empower people
and communities with the means to swlve their own problems, Somnetmes the
social task is more to steer than to row.
The first principle of Australian government policy Is inclusion, We believe that
our country's success Is best measured and best achieved by policies which
enable -oll to share in the bounty of the nation.
And we believe that the starting point Is economic growth which is the means to
creating a bounty big enough to share, Economic growth not ortly enlarges the
bounty, it creates employment which Is by far the most effective means of
distributIng wealth and opportunity. 
S" EL: 13 . Mar. 95 10: 44 No. 009 P .02/ 04
Employment is the principal means by which developed and developing countries
can share the bounty and alleviate poverty.
Employment requires economic growth and education. In the moder world, In
both developed and developing countries, education is more than ever the great
liberating force. Equal access to education is therefore an essential foundation of
opportunity. These have been the primary goals of the Australian government for a decade:
an inclusive philosophy made concrete by economic growth and strength,
employment growth, and greater access and equity in education.
Just as we know that social development and social justice are crucial to national
progress and well-being, we also know there is a two-way relationship between
economic efficiency and social justice. In the words of Arthur Okun: " Isocial
justice and markets) need each other, to put some rationality into equality and
some humanity Into efficiency."
In other words, we need cool heads and warm hearts.
The international trend towards the globalisation of economic activity is both
dazzling and demanding. Through both competition and cooperation between
nations It will promote efficiency and create wealth.
Yet we will fail every test of our maturity if, as we make economic progress,
because of their gender, race, cultural background or any other reason beyond
their Influence, large numbers of people are left behind.
Governments used to think it possible to pretend that economic growth alone
would eventually sort out our social problems. But it was never a genuine option.
For example, we know that economic growth alone will not get jobs for the longterm
unemployed new jobs tend to go to new entrants to the labour force and
the longer people are unemployed the less " employable" they become.
There is more than a human dimension to this, and more than a social dimension:
it is an economic folly. Unemployment is a waste of talent and energy. What is
more, the greater productivity and more flexible labour market which flows from
getting people back into work leads to lower Inflation and increases the speed at
which the economy can safely grow.
We cannot disown responsibility for the unemployed; but any honest assessment
will tell us just as emphatically that the days when setting up another government
bureaucracy could be offered as the answer to every social need have also
passed. We are all familiar with inefficient government services and their lack of
responsiveness to individual needs. 
TEL: 15. r .95 10 : 44 No. 009 P. 03/ 04
3
passed. We are all familiar with inefficient government services and their lack of
responsiveness to Individual needs.
Last year, in a comprehensive Government White Paper on Employment, we
introduced a Job Compact a scheme by which the longer term unemployed are
offered appropriate training or assisted to find employment through short term
wage subsidies. Two basic notions underly the Compact: the obligation of society
to help the most disadvantaged, and the obligation of the disadvantaged to take
up this assistance or lose their entitlement to income support,
Our aim is not punish or coerce but to encourage and empower.
It Is a valuable lesson of the past decade that governments alone are not
responsible for delivering desirable social outcomes. We work in partnership with
many people: community groups, business, unions and individuals. This
approach engages more people in finding solutions to social problems, It delivers
services which are tailored to individual needs, and it is an antidote to the
unproductive relationship between bureaucracy and " victim".
Many Aboriginal Australians live in communities whose unconscionable standards
of health have long defied the efforts of governments to improve them. It is a
situation we must change. We have begun by giving indigenous Australians that
which will most empower them legalrecognition of their prior title to the land,
and a Land Fund as the means by which they may get land back.
Following the same principle, that we must give people the means and incentives
which will help them solve their own problems, we are determined that the next
step the delivery of adequate health and education will this time be effective.
Just as transfer payments are necessary within nations, they are necessary
between them. As far as possible, Australia provides aid according to the same
principles which inform the provision of our social services: I mean we design
them for effect, especially the effect of breaking the cycle of poverty.
unemployment and marginalisation.
To give just one example, our $ 130 million population policy will expand the range
of choices available to women by giving families the ability to decide the number
and spacing of their children.
Improving the education, health, living and working conditions of women is not
only a humanitarian ambition, it is essential for economic and social progress.
We know the benefits of development will not flow to women automatically, so
our assistance programs address their needs directly.
One area where Australia's efforts are particularly concentrated is the South
Pacific. 
Tn, i . Mar. 9b 10: 44 No. 00
4
The 22 island countries of the South Pacific comprise only 0.1 per cent of the
world's population. They are among the world's smallest and most vulnerable
societies vulnerable to limited resources and fragile eco-systems, to population
pressures and global warming
But these countries have proud cultures and robust social systems.
They are working together in the South Pacific Forum to strengthen their capacity
to manage their limited resources effectively and sustainably.
Some of them are represented here in Copenhagen where they will tell their
stories for themselves.
But they cannot succeed alone and in this meeting I want to add Australia's voice
to theirs. As Chair of the South Pacific Forum this year, I want to ensure that
their interests and the interests of the world's other small island states are not
forgotten. Let me conclude on the theme with which I began. Social progress depends on
economic growth. It depends in part on access to markets. Nowhere in the world
has this been more obviously the case than with our neighbours in the Asia
Pacific. That is one good reason why we have worked so hard to secure a good
outcome in the Uruguay Round of the GATT, and why we have been promoting
APEC. The GATT outcome is by far the most tangible and effective step to be taken in
recent times toward international equality of opportunity. APEC represents a step
of comparable dimensions for our region: by moving towards a community of the
most developed and developing countries it is turning the so called North-South
dialogue into a functional reality.
Ift. here is one general comment we would make at this Summit, it is that
governments must strive for economic growth. Not to do so is to deny their own
citizens jobs and security and to deny the citizens of other, poorer countries the
opportunities they deserve. Most certainly it is to deny the ambitions of this
Summit. This will be called an historic meeting because of the number of heads of state
and heads of government who have met to endorse the declaration: but history
won't judge it an important meeting if, afterwards, governments squander their
resources and do not treat their people well.
End P. O4/ OZ
I I 



7 PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTERl THE HON P J KEATING MP
BUSINESS SPEECH AT KASTEEL DE WITTENBURO
THE HAGUE -MONDAY, 13 MARCH 1995
It is a groat pleasure to speak to you today here In The
Hague. Au3tralia has very old links with the Netherlands. They
go back more than 350 years but it has to be said that
your countrymen in those days refused to see the
potential of the place.
In two years' time it will be the 300th an~ niv~. ersary of
the landing on the West Australian coast by the Dutch
explorer Willem de Vlamingh. Next month Her Majesty
Queen Beatrix will be launching a replica of Lhe Batavia,
the Dutch ship which was wrecked off the coast of Western
Australia in 1629.
In between those two events the most famous of Dutch
explorers in Australia, Abel Tasman, visited our southern
shores and discovered what is now known as Tasmania.
Tas-rian's impression unfortunately was not a favourable
one: he is reported to have said as he sailed away,
" There Is no good to be done here." And he went on to
trade with Japan,
One of the reasons for my coming to the Netherlands today
is to tellI you that Tasman was wrong there is much
good to bo done in Australia.
Tasman of course was exploring out of Indonesia. So a
nice circle has been turned. Australia's relationship
with Indonesia these days Is deep and full of commercial
promi se.
We recognise that the Netherlands itself has very old
connections with Asia; but these days Australia's active
engagement with the burgeoning economies of the region
can provide a perfect environment for European businesses
wanting a base in the fastest growing markets of the
world. Of course, our links with your country are already well
established. They are more than simply commercial. In
the year3 after World War II Australia welcomed thousands 
of Dutch migrants, and they have made a great
contribution to modern Australian society. We feel at
home among the Dutch and I hope you won't mind me
saying, very much at home in the Netherlands.
We share a set of social and political values. In
politics we incline towards the liberal, egalitarian,
social democratic model. There is plenty of room for
differences within that broad philosophical canvas, of
course; but I think it is true to say that we share the
same notion of what constitutes a good society. And I
think that, in our own ways, we have both gone closer
than most to creating one.
So we have a lot in common including business.
We have been doing business in fact for years, and very
successful business.
The Netherlands is the sixth largest investor in
Austral ia and, amrong the countries * of the EU, the second
1largest. The great Dutch companies like Shell, Unilever and
Philips have been established for a very long time in
Australia. These days companies like Rodamco, Flexovit,
ABN AMRO, and the ING Group are among the 70 other Dutch~
companies who are active.
And increasingly Australian companies are setting up
their European operations in the Netherlands. The
transport firm, TNT, has its headquarters he~ re. Another
Australian company, Mayne Nickless, I understand is about
to become a logistics supplier in the Netherlands for
Unilever.
Goodman Fielder Wattie is another Australian company
operating here in fact it has become the largest flour
miller In Europe and the largast bread maker in the
Netherlands. The Australian company Boral, which has
recently made a $ 100 million investment in Germany, is
also a substantial investor in the Netherlands.
The point I want to make today is that these examples of
the substantial two-way investment which already exists
between us can be multiplied many times over. If we
seize the opportunities which now exist, in time in a
very short time I am sure we will be able to say that
this was just the beginning.
For on the eve of the 21st century Australia is uniquely
placed as a country in which and with which to do
busi ness.
We have made great changes in the past decade. I am
talking about a new Australia: with an economy which
grew at more than 6 per cent last year and is expected to
grow at 5 per cent this year; with employment growing at 
3. S per cent; investment forecast to grow at 24 per cent;
and with an underlying inflation rate at just over 2 per
cent. We are a pro-growth Government, and my visit to Europe
has more than ever convinced me that we are right to be
so. We are right to aim for high growth, in a low
inflation environment. We were also right, I believe, to
pull down the tariff walls which for so long constrained
our industries.
Australia is now open to the world and competing in it
successfully. in the past decade our exports of goods
and services have grown from about 14 per cent to nearly
22 per cent of GDP. Our international competitiveness
has increased by around 38 per cent since the early
1980S.
These figures also speak of a cultural change. We are
talkirig about a country which has been prepared to make
the changes necessary to engage successfully in the
global economy.
We know about change in Australia. We have developed
something like a culture of change. As never before In
our history we are conscious that our future is in our
own hands, and we are extremely confident of our ability
to succeed.
I can tell you this Australia in the first decades of
the next century will be very strong.
We will still be a competitive and reliable producer of
minerals and energy, and of the products from our great
pastoral and zgricultural industries,
But we will be much more than this. We are much more
than this already. Let me give you a couple of examples
which in a sense tell the story.
Australian exports of elaborately transformed
mariufbctures have nearly tripled in the past decade and
tourism exports have doubled as a share of GDP. In
1993/ 94 Australian exports of computers and office
equipment increased by around 30 per cent. Our exports
of telecommunications equipment increased by 34 per cent,
We find that it sometimes comes as a surprise to European
audiences that Australia is in the forefront of
information technology and communications.
I was at the CeBIT Trade Fair in Hanover last week.
Australia is the partner country this year. There are
170 Australian companies represented none of them,
perhaps, quite so famous as Philips, or Eriecson, or
Siemens, but every one of them a measure of Australia's
expertise in information technology and communications.
Collectively, they are helping the European perception of
I 
Australia to catch up with the contemporary reality of
Australia. It is true to say that Australia is not seen in the world
as an outstandingly high technology country. But in fact
it is. Australians enjoy one of the most advanced
telecommunications networks in tho world. What is more,
they export their expertise.
Telephone networks in Germany and other European
countries rely on switching systems developed in
Australia. Australians have developed high-tech
solutions in fields like geographic information systems
and satellite navigation. They have developed the
world's most advanced traffic monitoring and control
systems; and built pcwerful, flexible world class
software applications for banking, transport and retail
industries,
AUStralian software runs air and ground traffic control
at Schiphol Airport. The " smart cards" and PIN pads used
in banks and sup -markets throughout the Netherlands were
produced by an AL, tralian company called Intellect.
I could list many more examples which w. ould illustrate
this essential point about contemporary Australia: that
we have taken on the information revolution with a
passion. And with great success.
Perhaps It has something to do with our being for so long
remote from the world and, living ort a vast and sparsely
populated continent, remote from each other. In such
circumstances people learn the value of communi cations.
Our embrace of the information revolution is certairly
related to the boost we have given in recent years to
research and development through such measures as tax
concessions; the establishment of Co-operative research
centres to link various strands of business arid industry
with our scientific institutions; and to the Governmnent's
encouragement of information technology and
communications and the new media In a wide range of
policy initiatives including last year a major
statement on employment and industry, and another on
cultural development.
There are myriad reasons why Australia has developed its
interest and expertise in information technology and
telecommunications. We have a healthy independent film
and television industry which increases our potential to
provide content for the new media. We have a highly
sophisticated system of closely targeted social services
which the new media can serve; and we have people in
remote communities who are entitled to the sorvices in
health and education and the arts which mainstream
Australia enjoys, and which the new technology can
provide. 
I said In Hanover, and I know the Dutch would understand,
the new information technology switz cur tncial ambitions
as wellI as our economic ones. Notwithstanding its traps
and limitations, it has enormous democratic potential.
And it is where the jobs of the 21st century are going to
be. The outstanding reason for our enthusiastic embrace of
information technology and communications is the future.
The information highway is the highway to the world
Australia has always needed. It eliminates the
disadvantage which distance has always imposed upon us.
With instant international communications our handicap is
gone. Along with the new markets of the Asia-Pacific, the new
information technologies are the keys to Australia's
success in the 21st century.
it is only natural that we should have pursued both. As
I said, we are at the doorstep of the fastest growing
region on earth. Indeed, we are rapidly becoming part of
it; and for this reason we are uniquely placed to help
Dutch business people like yourselves to pursue the
extraordinary opportunities which lie there.
The explosive development of the Asia-Pacific may well be
the most important phenomenon of the second half of the
century. Asia's development will shape the 21st
Century. It will shape the world's economy, its culture,
environment and security.
You will be aware of the development of APEC Asia
Pacific Economic Co-cperation. The member countries of
APEC account for half the world's production. By the
year 2000 they will account for 60 per cent of world GDP,
per cent of world trade.
I am sure you will all know about the historic decision
which APEC leaders made in Bogor, Indonesia, last year:
they agreed to achieve free and open trade and investment
in the region by 2010 for industrialised countries and
2020 for the developing countries. This is an
extraordinary development, It will mean a dynamic and
integrated market of two billion people.
I don't think APEC's objectives and rationale are
sufficiently understood in Europe. It has developed very
rapidly and in quite a different way to the EU. It Is
not a community in the EU sense. It has little
infrastructure and few bureaucrats.
But it is no less serious. One of its great strengths is
that it brings together both developed and developing
economies in one framework. It sets a new standard for
co-operation in what is known as the North-South
dialogue: it turns that dialogue into a concrete
creative reality. 
understand the sc ,' 1snism about APEC which exists in
Europe. But then twelve months ago there were sceptics
saying that what was achieved at Bogor wculd never be
achieved; and, twelve months before that$ there were even
more sceptics saying that we would never get the leaders
of Japan, the United States, China and the other 12
together for a meeting in Soattle.
Scepticism is a healthy sentiment of course, but APEC has
defied it and I expect the pattern to continue when the
Heads of Government meet again in Osak~ a in November this
year I expect that we will agree on a comprehensive
agenda for reaching our free trade and investment goals.
The comnmitment we have made is not like any other trade
negotiation. We have set the end point for
liberalisation -comprehensive free and open trade in
goods, services and capital. So, unlike the Uruguay
Round, we will not be haggling about the Sxqn to which
we remove trade barriers.
We are not about to form an inward-looking or
protectionist trade bloc. All APEC leaders agree that
the trade and investment liberalisation we are
undertaking should feed into and fuel further global
trade liberalisation. What we want is a more open and
liberal multilateral trading system.
I think it goes without saying that Australia would like
to see non-APEC countries come to the same view and match
our efforts.
Australia's fut~ ure is in the Asia-Pacific. That is
unde~ rstood these days by all Australians, 6S per cent of
our exports now go to east Asia, and about half of our
mi grants now come from the region. In the process of our
integration we have learned a good deal, and that is one
of the reasons why Australia is a good place for European
companies to establish their headquarters in Australia.
They will find that Australians are comfortable doing
business in Asia.
They will also find a great many other advantages,
including a standard of living and quality of life
comparable to their own. Becaulse We share a long
tradition and a common cultural heritage, they will find
that they are working within a very fami liar frame~ work.
They will find commercial advantages, such as a highly
competitive corporate tax rate, generous research and
development concessions and, perhaps most valuable of
all, that sophisticated telecommunications system and
highly developed information technology which I have
already described to you.
It seems to us that a circle really has been completed.
Australia has spent the best part of 200 years on the 
7
outer reaches of Europe's influence. We are no longer in
that rbit. We look to Asia and the Pacific. And it is
precisely that shift In our priorities which now makes
the potential for a productive and mutually beneficial
relationship with European countries so much the greater.
In other words, nothing In our European past comes close
to matching the potential which now exists to do business
with Europe in our Asia-Pacific future.
And In that future, it goes without saying, we see the
Netherlands as a most important partner. 



-0D
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RECEIPT OF SUBMISSION FROM THE COUNCIL FOR ABORIGINAL
RECONCILIATION, MURAL HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
FRIDAY, 17 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am very pleased to be able to receive this today. I thought it was important
when we were negotiating, and I use the word negotiating, with the Aboriginal
community over the Native Title legislation that in terms of the social justice
response to the High Court decision, that there was a process of adequate
consultation with Aboriginal communities around this country and that no one
group or one self-appointed group was sought to or seen to represent their
views or their interests and the extensive process of consultation which has
followed in the Report going forward by the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation I think does justice to that wish that there was to be a
widespread consultation and that this document truly represented the views
of, the representative views of, a majority of Aboriginal people. I'm sure this it
adequately does.
And it is true, as Ian Viner said in his introduction, this Report is passed on
today by Patrick Dodson to me representing the Government on the day after
this historic decision again by the High Court confirming a constitutional basis
of the Commonwealth Parliament's Native Title legislation. This is, I think, an
important milestone in the struggle for legitimate rights for Aboriginal
Australians. I think that in the time since I first spoke to the Reconciliation Council three
years ago, just after I became Prime Minister, I said that I thought we ought to
get on and get some results. And that the best way of providing or meeting
some genuine aspiration for a reconciliation was on the basis of the fairmindedness
of the Australian community, that if they see some practical
things happening, some results happening, and they think they're rational,
they will support it. I have always believed this is a most conscientious
community in a most conscientious electorate. And that you can as a
Government or as any group go to them, talk to them, appeal to them, reason
with them and they will listen to you. But they're looking for tangible results.
In that sense there is something solid about them which goes past any 
2
perceived notions of difficulty, whether it be in the economic or the social field
or whether it be in terms of relations with our indigenous community.
Now, as a consequence of that I made clear then at that meeting that this
would be the intention of the Government I was privileged to lead. And at the
so-called Redfern Speech in Redfern Park at the end of 1992, 1 made clear
again that the Government would be seeking to make, first of ali to
acknowledge, and I think it is very important that as Head of Government I
acknowledged in a very public way, the wrongs done during the period of
European settlement to our indigenes and said that reparations need to be
made including of course giving expression to the notion that there was title
and prior ownership of the land to that of European settlement.
Now, I believe that that Redfern Speech and the results which have flowed
from them Mabo, the Native Title legislation and now the Land Fund are
results for which I think Australians have felt good about and I think it has
reduced rancour and it has reduced racism. Because rather than it just being
a skittish debate that never seems to go anywhere, all of a sudden there are
tangible milestones where people understand that something good has been
done and something just has been done and that the community has been
able to reflect upon it and believe in it and feel good about.
So, I think by these results, we have actually reduced any propensity not to
recognise the rights of indigenous peoples and it has reduced what most of
us in this room would call racism in Australia. Now this is a good thing and it
has come as the Reconciliation Council was given a nigh on impossible task
to simply, through the fact that it was a representative body sought to by its
work and by its deeds and by its expressions, preach the gospel of
reconciliation with practical results. It was too big a task without some help
and I think the help needed to come by the Government and the Parliament
taking its responsibilities onwards to do these things.
So I think results are the key words, not pap and nonsense. And if there is
one thing about this debate that I reflect upon, it is that there is no place for
bleeding hearts in it. You know if the Aboriginal community, every time they
see somebody with a bleeding heart, they ought to say thank you but just
please move to the side. It's because of that sort of attitude that it has taken
so long to get this far and it is why now, I think, we have got to continue in the
way we are going.
Now Pat ( Dodson) talked about a policy based on rights not welfare and I
concur in that and we have got to establish what those rights are but of
course we have made some very important headway in that principal right
which, of course, is the right to land and the moral strength of the inherent
right. Whether the Native Title Act applies in only a limited way to those who can
still establish a limited connection with the land is so or otherwise, its force is
that it is an inherent right. That it has quality about it far above a statute
right. But with the Land Fund, where people have been dispossessed of the 
land, the Land Fund gives them the capacity and we know in this country
essentially Australia, particularly in areas where Aboriginal people are still
living a traditional lifestyle, or are still able to live a traditional lifestyle, or live
particularly remote from the urban areas, Australia's a patchwork quilt of
pastoral leases and where it's not pastoral leases of freehold title.
The Land Fund allows the purchase of those titles and it means that with the
inherent right coming from the Native Title legislation and the right to
purchase coming under the Land Fund, the satisfaction of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people being able to get access, get themselves
access to land, becomes, I think, the significant issue of empowerment that
Pat Dodson spoke about a few moments ago. Because we understand that
there can never be justice for Aboriginal people while they live on the margins
of the cities, or they live congregated in former mission stations around the
country or areas we call Aboriginal communities. They have to, I believe,
have that access to land.
Now, I'm very pleased about the fact that we've got a lot of bipartisanship in
this from people who have always had their heart in the right place with
Aboriginal people; Ian Viner is one and I'm glad to see him in this capacity
today, and he refers to our period in public life in the past on opposite sides
of the house, and Fred Chaney who has taken a role with the Native Title
Tribunal. These are good people and they are after good things. But, we
have to be vigilant about this matter because Richard Court has made clear
yesterday that even after the knock out decision seven to nothing of the
High Court, he is going to fight the matter politically.
I was disappointed that John Howard said today the decision confirms a
significant shift of power to the Federal Government on matters previously
within the direct authority of the states This is not a States/ Commonwealth
matter. It is a matter about our indigenous community and it is very clear that
the community of Australia wanted the Federal parliament to have this
authority in indigenous affairs with the carriage of the referendum in 1967.
There is always this discussion about the rights of the States. It is because
this Government believes the States have prerogatives in land management
and have the capacity to manage land, given they have the records and the
data base and the systems that we have under the Native Title legislation
giving them the right to establish their own tribunals. They just have to be
consistent with the Native Title Act and then it is theirs. There is no dispute
about this. There is no reasonable dispute about this.
But, I will tell you this. Beware of the whispered word ' workable', because
this is now the pass word of the die-hards. Not procedural because I get
asked about Justice French saying ' look, there is this procedure and that
procedure' and, of course, the Judge sitting atop of this tribunal is able to
recommend to the Government that this procedure or that procedure be dealt
with, but procedure is one thing, ' workable' is a word that goes to the
structure of the Bill. So, when Richard Court talks about workable, he means
a change to the structure. He doesn't mean a Western Australian tribunal set 
up under a Western Australian act of Parliament consistent with a
Commonwealth law, he means something else.
Now, when John Howard said today, I notice The Age said ' Howard softens
line on Mabo' by referring to he won't repeal the Act he says, but he
wants to make it ' workable'. Workable. Just like the Land Fund. He said he
would pass it but when he got to government he would amend it to make it, of
course, workable.
I just say this, that there has been great milestones made here and this has to
be a bipartisan matter between those who believe in justice for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, that is historic justice and future justice
historic justice and future justice and let's be clear about what we have in
front of us and the results we have and let's go on and not brook any
opposition to the structure of these historic pieces of legislation on some
prejudicial basis that black people shouldn't have title to land. That they
should have only minimum statutory rights and that the whole notion and the
continent where they were possessed of it or had associations with it, they
had the title to it before European settlement is to be put to one side and they
get just minimum rights under statute as proposed in the Western Australian
Act. Now that, we are not having a bar of and I think we have got to press on and
make sure the country understands the difference between procedural
change and procedural improvement and as I say the whispered word
' workable' because workable means burrowing in to overturn progress and to
put these things down.
Let me say something about Aboriginal health and other issues of welfare
which, amongst other things, are included in this Report. I think that as with
all intractable problems it will be dealt with by taking it piece at a time. There
is no big ticket, magical solution, we are not going to get a large Australian
consulting organisation or a major international firm and let them a contract to
repair the lifestyles and living conditions of Aboriginal people, it can't be
done. I was in Hopevale as you may know a couple of weeks ago in
Queensland, Cape York, what struck me about that was that the Cape York
Health Council came into being in recognition of the fact that there won't be
improvements in the health of Aboriginal people unless the Aboriginal people
themselves are committed to the improvements and are part of the solution.
It is another form of empowerment and I think that is right and I think we have
now got to do practical things to make that work. For instance, Aboriginal
people in these parts of the country don't have Medicare cards, completely
unsustainable. They have a right to go to a GP and be treated, but you know
in these places there are no GPs. There are partly no GPs because there
are no cards, there is no booty and there are no pharmacies so there are no
pharmaceuticals. But then we all know there is no point in pharmaceuticals
and drugs if, in fact, we have still got 15 people living in a house with a
transmission of diseases or inadequate sewerage or if there is an acute
problem that there is no air strip to land on for a doctor to give help. 
So, these are things that we have got to do, but we must bring the States into
this and local government because this is a tripartite thing. The
Commonwealth whatever it wants to do doesn't build arterial roads in remote
places. It doesn't build municipal roads. And we have to work with the States
to make sure that roads go to Aboriginal communities, that we actually
encourage out stations and we find that when people move on out stations
their morale improves, their state of mind improves, their health improves
which only proves a point the more we move back, the more closer we get
to the natural order of things the better.
These are all things that I think we can do and the same with things like
sewerage, but you know this to be true, if there is a sub division on the
outskirts of Canberra the first thing that will go out there is a road and the
second thing will be the sewerage line and the water supply. This is not true
of Aboriginal people because the States have not done it and when ATSIC
has got the funding they have said it is all over to you, you got the lot and, of
course, it can't do it. So it has to be a tripartite arrangement and something
we go at and perhaps we start trying to prioritise the areas that need help
rapidly and start doing it, again, with results. So people say ' well, there is
something happening here and it is good.'
So, the land matters as we know because the titles matter and then, I think,
we move on these other problems but let's not be starry eyed or dewy eyed
about it, let's get out there and do it. That is what it means and I think that is
what this Report is about, but there is hope in this Report. There wouldn't
have been three years ago, this could not have been produced three years
ago because I don't think the back drop existed within the Australian
community. To receive such a report, it could be produced but would it have
meant anything? One wonders, but I think it means something now.
So, I am quite bullish about the prospects of us being able to deliver justice,
that we can think about social justice in response to the High Court decision
in harmony with the decisions that have been taken in respect of land and
that we can produce results that, I think, all Australians can feel proud of.
The extensive consultation has meant something, that it has come together
under the stewardship and leadership of the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation, that it has substance and it has meaning, I am delighted to
receive it on behalf of the Government and we now think about how we
respond to it, it won't all be done obviously quickly, it won't be done as a
package all of it but like this intractable problem of 200 years in the making
we will hop into it with substantial fervour to try to see that justice is done, as I
say future justice and not just historic justice.
Thank you very much for the Report. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE DANDENONG RAILWAY STATION,
FRIDAY, 24 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Distinguished colleagues and we have many of them here today Michael
Duffy, of course, well known to everybody here as the Member for Holt and
my colleague Gareth Evans, who before too much longer will be the Member
for Holt. I mean it's a good thing for Senators getting out and meeting
people, but he does it so well. And Rob Maclellan, Minister for Planning, Ian
Cathie and Mrs Cathie, and distinguished guests, and Members of Parliament
from both sides, and ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much for a very nice welcome and most particularly to
Worawa Aboriginal College. I met a group of Aboriginal people in Adelaide
yesterday and the one thing I think, you can say about Mabo or the Land
Fund, the Native Title and the rest of it, it has no doubt got us to the point
where if not in the past most Australian people think when they see an
Aboriginal dance group or Aboriginal people they say they are our people
our people. And it has made us one country and one nation, more than we've
ever been and thank you very much for that welcome.
But you get all sorts of welcomes. I had a pretty mixed welcome yesterday in
Adelaide. I was clutched and grabbed by admiring and devoted supporters in
one place and attacked in others. And then I had Tim Fischer, of course, Tim
was running around picking up the lines from some toffy little stringer for the
BBC, bagging our Parliament and I said, I thought about saying, fair crack of
the whip Tim, when it comes to the House of Commons, I mean, Tim still
thinks a fishnet is for catching yabbies, of course. But for the rest of us, we
now know and, of course, in our Parliament, we used to often wonder what a
three line whip was in the House of Commons well, we all know about that
these days. 
At any rate, thank you very much for the welcome today and for coming to
this, I think, very important event. Transport and intermodal transport is a key
to modern living, particularly as the motor vehicles and with the capacity for
the rail system to do new things and I was very interested in a couple of
things that Alan said, most particularly, his point I think about Dandenong
being, where once it was on the periphery of Melbourne, now being much
more part of the centre of what will be this development out at Pakenham and
Cranbourne and Berwick. And so we need here in Dandenong, and we see
just behind us the Australian Taxation Office which has seen the
decentralisation of the tax administration to the central place just as he made
the point about Parramatta being in a similar position in Sydney which has
these decentralised facilities, the Tax Office, the transport and what have
you. This is going to be the case here. Under the Better Cities Program of
the Commonwealth, it is a way of bringing and changing some of the gloom
about urban decay and how we make urban areas better. Now Alan Brown
said to me, this place, this railway was an armpit of a place. Now, that is very
descriptive, I'll use that one in the House, Alan. Can I have that one? And it
probably was because mostly I take my media etiquette from Jeff Kennett
these days, but I'll take some of the lines from you.
But, the station and the capacity to do this, I think, shows that we in the
Commonwealth believe that urban planning and urban problems or urban
decay can be overcome by dealing with the three tiers of government State
and local and to get something done which is good. To have a building like
this which will not only be functional and efficient, but which is light and bright
and airy and there are no dark corners where people could be molested and
we have got something like 25 television monitors around the building so that
it can be watched, there are people coming in and out of it all of the time.
I think urban renewal is critical to the happiness of most people. We talk
about it a lot in the Federal government because 85 per cent of Australians
live in cities and so to make life better for them is about making life more
comfortable, more pleasant and to live in areas which are more beautiful. So,
that is why the issues like the quality of life and peace of mind matter and it is
why my colleague, Brian Howe, has been steward of this program Better
Cities and why we have around the country and urban areas, such as
Dandenong, been able to move towards improvements in areas which are
getting beyond the capacity of State governments or local governments. So,
this interchange is, I think, going to be an important one for the regeneration
of transport in this area and it means that we can make public transport more
competitive, more efficient and more likely to be chosen as the mode of daily
movement than motor cars. Of course, with motor cars we are continuing to
destroy a lot of urban areas with arterial roads and we all know the better the
road the more cars that move on them. So, this is an important thing to be
doing. I must make a few remarks now about the design of this station and just thank
the community for being part of the extensive public consultations about it
and to the architects Hassall Pty Ltd/ Forbes Fitzharding and the structural 
engineers Ove Arup and Partners. They have done a great job marrying
together function and technology into producing a new and important place
for Dandenong.
This is a model of co-operation in what can be done with the State and
Commonwealth governments together with local government as well and
what we see as a consequence is in a very key part of the city of Melbourne,
in this area of great growth, in this hub of Dandenong, we see this capacity to
do something good. And, now with the recovery in full swing, with the job
growth coming through strongly, with again where Dandenong has suffered
quite substantially in terms of unemployment, we are starting to see that
improve and see new businesses starting again and we can make some of
these key centres core centres in our capital cities as is happening here with
the Taxation Office, other state and commonwealth facilities in Dandenong
and with this intermodal change to make it easier to go from rail to road to
bus et cetera.
So, can I thank lan Cathie and Alan Brown and Michael Duffy who has been
involved with this project from the beginning and to those other members of
the community who have been involved with it, this is quite a great and a
good thing to be doing together in the city of Melbourne, in the city of
Dandenong where I am very pleased to be on this very happy occasion. It is
my pleasure now to join with Alan in unveiling this plaque.
ends 



K' 2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT PRESENTATION OF A REPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT ON
NATIVE TITLE SOCIAL JUSTICE MEASURES ' RECOGNITION, RIGHTS
AND REFORM", MURAL HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 27 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
One of the things that very greatly pleases me about receiving this is not so
much for every detail that is written here, but for the fact that we are seeing
the public manifestation of the esteem that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people hold for themselves, have always held for themselves, but
which in other times when that sense of justice and sense of decency in the
country has not focussed on their concerns such a report like this would
never have appeared.
It is a great pleasure to me that Lois O'Donoghue is presenting it to me as
head of the government because in this modern world today and as in any
complex society, leadership is always everything and in the complex
discussion over the High Court decision, it was Lois O'Donoghue who
showed that leadership in pulling together that group of people who
negotiated with the Government. I remember saying to her in one of these
early meetings that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community must
learn to negotiate. In saying that I was saying they must regard themselves
as a force of such power that they are capable of negotiating and
understanding what negotiation means. It means understanding what your
core interests are and what is not in your core interest and that which you can
see in the other persons point of view and trade away to come to a
negotiated settlement or arrangement which reflects the broad interests and
doesn't compromise the specific interest.
That leadership has, I think, been reflected in the peak Aboriginal and
Islander bodies and as a consequence we, together, wrote a very effective
Bill with Native Title. It was a great victory for the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and for social democracy in this country when the High Court
held its validity seven judges to nothing a couple of weeks ago. And then
on its heels, of course, we bailed up the Opposition with their manipulative
approach in the Senate to try to destroy the integrity of the Land Fund Bill
and despite the Leader of the Opposition's cockiness when faced with the 
prospect of an early poll he caved in and passed it. So, we got the double of
the century in a week. Seven to zero on native title and the Land Fund Bill.
These are things which, I think, have made a great difference to the ambient
climate out there in the community. I said here a week ago when Pat Dodson
was presenting the Report of the Aboriginal Reconciliation Council that I think
Mabo and the land fund, that the passage of Mabo has made Australians feel
good about themselves. They know a right thing has been done. A just thing
has been done and it has reduced racism. It has reduced racism. I think now
that the wind behind the sails of the reconciliation council is part of that wind
and it is the old thing: one good act begets, one good influence begets
another. And, we are seeing with now a lot of horse power and much pride
the presentation of that Report and similarly here today with this Report
' Recognition, Rights and Reforms A Report to the Government on Native
Title Social Justice Measures'.
These were proposed when it was agreed amongst us, the Government and
those Aboriginal people who we were negotiating with over Mabo, to say ' well
look, these things shouldn't come down from on high, they shouldn't simply
come from a group of representatives, but rather come from a broad basis of
consultation.' I think ATSIC and the Aboriginal Reconciliation Council have
gone out and done those things and ATSIC has certainly done it here by
consulting with Aboriginal people around the country. The result is this and I
promise you this Lois that the Government will consider it, we will look
through it, we will follow the threads of the policy we have been following
which says that Australia will never be one nation while ever the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people are one apart from the rest of us.
That is our policy and the things that fall within that, that we can get support
for and that we can do we will do. If there is more in this than we can digest
we will certainly be digesting that which we can and every bit will make
progress along the way.
Now, Lois said something important which shouldn't go above peoples heads
and, I think, in a sense I tried to repeat that a week ago, the same thought.
That is, what we are talking about here, about support for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, is rights not welfare and this is about rights.
Social justice is about rights as well as it is about specific things. We are
now talking about these intractable problems of health and housing and what
we need is specific effective action. A week or so ago with Pat Dodson here I
talked about some of the things we could do to be effective and when we get
progress we get the snow ball affect. Just as we did with Mabo, we will get it
with the other things and we do, as you say Lois, need to bring the States in
and we need to bring local government in because the Commonwealth,
through ATSIC, can't solve all the problems of the environmental situation
with Aboriginal communities or environmental health, we can do things about
direct health. I think the main thing is to get the generation of Aboriginal
people out of the mind set. That some how it's welfare: it is a right, but we
need to do it effectively and we need to do it together. 
One of the lessons that came to me from the Cape York Health Council and
my visit to Hopevale was that there, the community on the Cape, have
regarded a commitment repairing the problem of health as needing a
commitment by them to participate in the policies. Not just something that
comes from outside, but something they are part of and without them being
part of it, just the same with the non-Aboriginal community in this country,
there is no way that their health can be attended to unless they are part of the
solution and I think they need to be there as well.
So, I want to guarantee that the next generations of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people are not victims and are not treated as victims, that
rather they are there to see this change, this shift in moral and to see that
many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people assert their culture and
their rights and their standings and determine not to be victims and to get out
there and play a role in this community. I think that is happening and this is
what this is about.
I noticed in today's press, of course, with the by-election result in the ACT
and elsewhere we have got all the pundits giving us the value of their views.
One of the views I notice from one of them today is that Mabo and Aboriginal
rights is a distraction. The republic is a distraction. Our identity is a
distraction. It is really down to the grind stone in the mortgage and nothing
else. Well, the person who wrote this, just as an example, I said to this
person after the 1993 election ' how did you get it so wrong, how couldn't you
pick the trends?' And the result was ' oh, that is what Hoggie told us. That's
what Hoggie said to us.' Not that we are paid to think and to absorb the
culture and to write, but no, like Mr Midnight, that is what Hoggie dropped in
their ears. That Labor had no chance of winning and that the pundits should
be clever and write us off.
Now, one of them is today saying ' look, the Prime Minster's obsessions with
the interests of Aboriginal and Islander people is a distraction'. They couldn't
be more wrong, couldn't be further from the truth. That couldn't be further
from the truth than that view because unless Australia understands that it
succeeds as a society that is its economy and its community go together as
a society unless all that happens together then there is little prospect of us
reaping the economic rewards that bind all this together and getting those
social commitments we need, whether it be from the broad workforce or from
the Aboriginal community or where ever.
So, let's say this. Three years ago, I think I am probably right in saying this
Lois, we wouldn't have seen this Report. While the esteem was there always
with the indigenous community about themselves and their indignation was
there we wouldn't have seen this Report. It has come because the
community has basically decided that these wrongs are going to be set right
and these historic wrongs are going to be set right, to the extend that we can
ever set them right, but at least acknowledge that the wrongs have taken
place and seek to set them right. And, to follow the land change through
which is, as you say, central to the future of indigenous people, with this
Report which goes beyond that to look at a broader articulation of rights. I 
4
think that is what this means. That is what the Report which Pat Dodson
presented to the Government means. It is what I think the Australian
community means and it does feel better about itself and it does meet the
notion of multi-culturalism in its broader sense have more meaning when the
nation, as a society, decides that our indigenes will be taken to its heart
forever. That is what the Report means and that is why I am so delighted to
receive it.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF PRESIDENT VACLAV HAVEL OF THE
CZECH REPUBLIC, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 28 MARCH 1995
It is a great pleasure to welcome you here to Australia as the President of the
Czech Republic.
And it is a double pleasure to welcome you here in your own right.
In other words, for who you are as well as who you represent.
You are, of course, a very well known figure in Australia, as the public
interest in your visit here shows.
Because, despite our very different history and geography, Australians have
long watched with sympathy and concern the struggle of the Czech people
against the terrible varieties of repression which have afflicted Europe this
century. And in recent years we have watched with admiration as you and your
colleagues fought a tyrannical system, with great personal courage, without
moral compromise.
And we rejoiced when finally, remarkably, in one of the happiest events of the
century, you brought that system tumbling down in the ' velvet revolution'.
The critical act for any Government or people is the act of imagining.
That has been one of your great contributions to your people, even at times
when what you were imagining must have seemed unattainable.
Yesterday, I received from the distinguished Australian novelist and poet
Rodney Hall these remarks.
' Vaclav Havel has contributed greatly to world literature. 
Through his plays he speaks out courageously, with warmth, tolerance and
good humour. They take us straight to the heart of the matter and involve us
in the middle of situations we feel we already know to be the truth yet this is
the truth shown in a totally new light.
He gives us chunks of life, cut from their context with a scalpel, and set up in
the limelight as a medical sample might be put under the microscope. It is
art at the threshold of being the very life it reflects.
Vaclav Havel can be funny and tragic in the same breath ( this is a rare and
enviable talent) revealing a comic side to the tyranny of closed minds. As his
audience, we come out of the theatre energized, convinced that we can do
something about society and the way we are, which is a mark of exceptional
quality." Mr President,
Your essays, lectures, letters, and other writings are among the most vivid,
sustained and searching explorations of moral and political responsibility
produced anywhere in the world.
At the heart of what you have written is your belief, as you have said, that
' Society can be enriched and cultivated only through self-knowledge, and the
main instrument of society's self-knowledge is its culture.'
This truth is just as relevant to Australia in our different hemisphere, and
with our different history as to Europe, as we address the task here of
creating a tolerant, diverse, inclusive society open to the world, but true to
our sense of ourselves.
Central to this has been the issue of righting the dispossession of Australia's
indigenous inhabitants.
You are, I am told, the first state visitor from Europe ever to ask for an official
program which includes the culture of Aboriginal Australians. That is a matter
of pride and pleasure for us.
Throughout your life, moral and intellectual accomplishments have been
fused with a deep understanding of and concern for the lives and welfare of
ordinary people.
If I may say so, these are just the sort of qualities a President should have.
Professor Robert Manne told the readers of the Melbourne Age last week that
Czechs ' will eventually count as a singular blessing that their first President
after the stale nightmare of communism, was a man of tolerance, taste,
humour, curiosity, courage and honour'. 
I am sure this view is shared by all Australians who have met you.
Mr President,
The timing of this visit to Australia could not be better.
It was inevitable that the uncertainty which followed the 1989 revolution in
Czechoslovakia would lead initially to a decline in our trade and commercial
relations as old patterns changed.
But that same event has created the strong base from which we can build a
much closer relationship.
Already our trade and investment links are growing.
Australian businesses such as Brambles, Coca Cola Amatil, ADI,
Pioneer Concrete, Bowral, Mincon and Blackhill Minerals are trying to build
their operations in the Czech Republic.
There is no doubt we can be doing more together.
I made the point to European and Australian business people during a recent
visit to Germany and the Netherlands that Australia's closer engagement with
Asia, which has been at the core of this Governments approach to foreign
policy, is not something we pursue at the expense of good relations with
Europe.
On the contrary, we are convinced that the more directly and fully involved
Australia is with the countries of our own region, the more relevant, the more
productive, our links with Europe will be.
And beyond the commercial and economic relationship, I know there are
opportunities for Australia and the Czech Republic to develop closer ties in
cultural and social areas
Australia has benefited enormously from our association with the Czech
people. Directly, of course, from the thousands of Czechs who have made Australia
their home and who have made such a valuable contribution to our national
life to our manufacturing and mining industries in particular, to the
professions.
And to the arts. A Czech, Eduard Boravansky, was the father of the
Australian ballet; Rudy Koman was almost as seminal a figure as a patron of
Australian contemporary art; Czech musicians have been made a
disproportionately large contribution to Australian music. 
4
But we have also benefited indirectly from what the Czech people have given
the world from your musicians like Dvorak, Janacek, Smetana; and writers
like Hasek, Kundera and Havel.
Mr President,
You have paid us a great tribute by coming to Australia, and by your interest
in our country and our culture.
I hope that over these few days you, Mrs Havlova and your party can take
from Australia experiences which will live with you, as your words and
experiences and those of the Czech people live with us.
ENDS 



/ b
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED 6.3OPM 29 MARCH 1995
* AS DELI VERED*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
SIR JOHN MONASH MEMORIAL LECTURE, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE
29 MARCH 1995
Thank you very much, Race, for inviting me to give this lecture.
Sir John Monash stands among the highest order of Australians and I count it as
an honour of the highest order to deliver the lecture which bears his name.
Let me also add my voice to Kim Beazley's when he gave the inaugural address
last year, and say how pleased I am to see the Monash Graduate School of
Government up and flourishing.
It is mandatory these days to judge the worth of things by the degree to which
they increase a nation's " competitiveness". I will not take issue with this. You
will hear me use that word more than once tonight. We do have to be
competitive world competitive and we cannot be that without an efficient
government sector.
But let me also say that an efficient government sector a knowledgeable,
professional, imaginative government sector is equally essential to the creation
of a good society; and, because it is an investment in our human resources and
is bound to make us stronger and more cohesive, it will in itself make us more
competitive.
And let me just say this I hope the direction of your thinking is pragmatic. I
hope it is about imagining what might be done and how to do it. I hope it is
about what can be done, not what can't. 
The world and especially bureaucracies. public and private is full of people
who learn first to cover themselves off against all misadventure, and only
afterwards address the task. And, of course, the worst misadventure is to have a
mistake pinned on them.
This is a very conservative and debilitating phenomenon.
It is a short step from avoiding risk, to avoiding responsibility, and a very short
one then to avoiding doing anything at all.
The disease of carefully disguised inactivity or professional nay-saying can
afflict any organisation, including political parties. It is no better or less irritating
than professional idealism that is the habit of talking loftily without the faintest
intention of acting practically. That is why I say I hope that the Monash
Graduate School of Government will inject into the culture of government an
ethic of doing. Not finding the obstacles to achievement, but the paths to it.
Dare I say that I have a strong feeling that John Monash would have approved of
nothing less.
Monash was nothing if not a doer. He was a man of true greatness. He made a
mighty contribution to our military history, of course, and in doing that he was
one of those who forged the great tradition of the first AIF
He remains Australia's most famous soldier.
When we ask why did he succeed in so much? we can find all kinds of
reasons. Clearly he had a powerful, logical mind and superb gifts as an
administrator. Lloyd George called him " the most resourceful General in the
whole of the British Army", the " greatest strategist" and said that he would have
and should have become Commander-In-Chief.
Yet for all his success as a soldier, few gave the country more than Monash
gave us as a civilian.
In fact, it is difficult to think of another Australian who left behind such a unique
combination of memorials to his work. I doubt if anyone ever left so many in
such a small area.
There is the Anderson Street Bridge which he built across the Yarra and, within
a mile of it, a statue commemorating his service as a military commander. Then,
within the same small precinct, there is the Shrine which he helped to build. All
of this just down the hill from the Richmond school he attended. And all of it
connected to the power supply he founded in the 1920s at Yallourn. 
Now, of course. I wouldn't venture a guess at what he would make of the plans to
privatise his creation, but I have a feeling that he would not let sentiment or
ideology stand in the way of the most practical means of delivering electricity to
Victorians. He seems to me to have been an eminently practical man, and I imagine quite
immune to ideological fashion. I can no more imagine him in the New Right than
in the Old Left. I suspect he was of the camp which says so long as It is a
useful idea which will help us meet our goals, it does not matter what we call it.
Of all the things John Monash bequeathed us, I'm inclined to think that at this
stage of our history none is more important than his pragmatic philosophy.
In fact, we can safety infer from his remarkable achievements the qualities which
must have most distinguished him: self discipline, the courage of his convictions,
an enormous capacity for work, vision, decisiveness.
Seen from our vantage point what strikes us most about the man is something
like an absence of doubt.
I dlaresay there have been many Australians whose intellectual powers matched
Monash's and whose ambitions were the equal of his.
But very few achieved what he achieved.
I hope you get my drift. In Government one is always trying to narrow the gap
between vision and realisation, between policies and implementation, between
ideas and their concrete manifestation in effective and useful reform.
So when we look at a career like that of John Monash, we ask what lessons can
be drawn for government, for public policy in the modern era.
Now I might say, inter a/ ia, that I was struck by something he said in a letter he
wrote as a young man to his first love. He said that many people had tried to trip
him up, tried to stop him in his youthful ambitions, and that he had been forced
to leave those so-called ' friends' behind and had become unpopular. There will
be others in the room who have had this experience.
Of course the problems of governments is that they can't afford to be unpopular
at least not for too long. But nor can good governments afford to merely pursue
that which is popular.
Good policy is not always popular not at first, at least.
Yet I suspect more general and more productive conclusions can be drawn than
this one. 
Ever since the war in which Monash played so illustrious a part, the same
question has been asked: how different would the world be if all that youthful
ambition, energy and intellect had not been wasted on those battlefields? How
many scientists and engineers; how many artists and philosophers; how many
leaders were lost?
How many Monashs?
Of course, it is not so much a question as a melancholy reflection. It is really a
statement of despair.
A more useful question for our times might be what gave Monash that certainty
what gave him the confidence which enabled him to achieve so much? What
gave him the ability to inspire the same confidence in others?
All sorts of largely imponderable psychological possibilities aside, we might
reasonably conclude that this characteristic flowed from a clear set of values to
live by: from an unshakable respect for the democratic institutions of this country
and for the cultural traditions Australian, British, Prussian and Jewish he
inherited; from a profound sense of civic duty; and an equally profound belief in
his country's future.
Marry these beliefs to talent and ambition, and you have at least the beginnings
of a great nation-builder.
The question begs to be asked can we, in the altogether different country we
now live in, marry them to the talents and ambitions of contemporary
Australians? Can we put the same certainty, the same absence of doubt, into the lives of
young Australians?
I don't know the answer to that, but I believe we must try.
For example, if you ask me what is my best reason for replacing our present
Head of State with an Australian, it is that the affections of young Australians for
the British Monarchy are not what they were in Monash's day or my father's
day. And they will diminish further we can be sure that within the space of half
a generation the affection will not be as great as it is today, our day.
But Australians will continue to need a Head of State who inspires their respect
and affection. They will need someone who embodies the nation's ideals and
aspirations. 
Someone who is to their generation what Monash became to his. He would, of
course, have made a splendid Governor-General. His equivalent today would
make a splendid President and you will forgive me for making the observation
that it is hard to imagine him contesting a general election for the office.
The move to an Australian Head of State will of course help to define us to
ourselves and to the world.
And it is important to define ourselves just now.
Some of the reasons for this seem to me self-evident. We are living in an era of
extraordinary change both within Australia and in the world and in our
relationship with the world. Knowing who we are and letting others know will
surely be a useful aid to our success.
We are not talking in terms of the ideology of 19th century nation states or
century nation states for that matter.
We are talking about drawing a line around the loose, pluralistic, federal
democracy which is contemporary Australia and having that line define our
loyalty, our values, our identity.
We are talking about a definition of ourselves which embraces not just the
multicultural facts of our contemporary existence, but our increasing integration
with the cultures of the region and the world, and with their economies.
We are talking about definitions of a people who are in many ways more worldly
than their predecessors, whose tastes and values are less vigorously defined,
and whose greatest need in the 21st century may well be the capacity to cope
with change.
Most of you will know that last year we commissioned an expert group to provide
us with a report on civics education in Australia on the community's
understanding of our democratic values, institutions and history and on the best
means of increasing it.
We received an outstanding report which left us in no doubt that we should
proceed to adopting civics education on a nationwide scale.
It is reasonable to think that by this means we can invest Australians not only
with more knowledge of their country but with more faith in it who knows, with
some of the certainty that Monash and his generation seem to have felt. 
But again we would stress that the values will be different to those of earlier
generations. We can and should teach our best traditions the democratic,
egalitarian traditions. We should make sure that our great institutions are
understood, respected and appreciated.
We should teach our history and give all Australians the means by which they
may understand themselves as part of the Australian story.
But some elements of the old tradition will be left behind, or at least the
emphases must change. Some of our old traditions, for instance, cast women in
a roles which are entirely unacceptable and inappropriate today. Some do not
speak of the tolerance which underpins modern multicultural Australia.
The creation of this extraordinarily diverse contemporary Australian culture is
perhaps our greatest post-war achievement, and I believe we should enshrine
the values which sustain it for the generations of today and tomorrow.
Monash and his generation felt an attachment to the British Empire and British
civilisation which we can neither share nor emulate.
Yet I'm inclined to think that, properly understood, our contact with the world at
large and our increasing ability to understand and communicate with different
cultures offers a future which is just as fulfilling.
We will never feel about our region what earlier generations felt about the
Empire; but there is a growing sense of excitement about Australia's Asia-Pacific
future which matches the promise it holds. If it is true that earlier generations of
Australians felt it was a blessing to have inherited the Empire and its institutions,
the next generation might yet see their own region as conferring something
similar on them.
I think I hardly need to say again that this is why we have pursued the goals of
APEC with such determination.
I said after the Bogor Declaration last year that this was something which future
generations might thank us for. It was not something which had to happen: it
was something we decided to make happen.
It will mean greater prosperity and more jobs in the future. It is a big step
towards setting Australia up in the 21st century. It is a big step towards setting
the countries of the region up. Yet it should be recognised that the benefits are
by no means all in the future. 
They have already begun to flow. most importantly in the fillip that the process of
developing APEC has given to a regional consciousness. In Australia I think this
has been a quite profound development. Just three years ago to talk about our
future in Asia still produced scepticism and even hostility. It doesn't any more.
Two years ago to talk about getting all the heads of government together, from
Washington to Tokyo to Beijing to Jakarta, was commonly met with cynicism. To
suggest, even just 12 months ago, that at Bogor those heads of government
would agree to free trade between the developed countries by 2010 and
between all by 2020 was to invite derision.
But these things happened and Australia played a leading role in making them
happen. That in itself should give us confidence. But nothing comes close to
the confidence we can draw from the burgeoning business we are already doing
in the region and, especially as APEC develops, the limitless potential for doing
more. If John Monash set one example it was that each generation has a responsibility
to the next.
Yet that heroic generation of Monash's did not see Aboriginal Australians as part
of the country's future. We do. And it seems to me that the next generation
could reasonably ask of ours that we do all we can to finally set things right with
the original inhabitants of this continent. So we are doing it with Mabo; with the
Land Fund, with the process of reconciliation; and, by every practical means at
our disposal, with solutions to the problems of Aboriginal health.
On the other hand, Monash's generation did not have a moment's doubt about
projects which were deemed to be plainly in the national interest. Irrigation
projects, land clearances for farms, forest industries all proceeded without
hesitation or impediment. It is not so now and we should be thankful that it's
not: even if it means we must accommodate the rather unsettling thought that
our generation might have thwarted Monash's efforts to develop the brown coal
resources in the La Trobe Valley it certainly would not have happened without
an Environmental Impact Study.
But the truth is we can no longer pretend that the pursuit of ecologically
sustainable development is an option for Australia rather it is an imperative, a
challenge we have to meet, an obligation we have to the Australians of the 21st
century. Now there are a lot of commentators out there some incessant, some periodic
who say that all these government concerns are only marginally legitimate. 
In waves they descend upon the political debate saying we must only address
the economy. Everything else, they say, is a diversion or an indication that the
Government has jumbled its priorities.
It is humbug of course. We cannot successfully attend to the needs of our
economy without attending to the social fabric, to cultural and human needs, to
national cohesion.
We delivered an arts statement last year because in the next century nations will
increasingly succeed or fail according to the capacity of their people to think
creatively and creatively adapt new technology.
We delivered it for any number of other reasons, but none were so important as
this and probably none so plainly illustrates that governments cannot separate
the economic from the cultural or social.
These efforts are of the same character as building bridges or power stations or
even shrines of remembrance they are all parts of contemporary nation
building. And all successful nations make these efforts.
But the commentators are right in so far as it is true that we can do none of these
things unless we create a competitive, adaptable, successful Australian
economy and therefore it is no less true that this is our greatest responsibility
to future generations.
If we are talking about putting certainty and faith and belief into the lives of
Australians, we are talking about an economy which in an uncertain world
delivers opportunity and security to Australian families.
Above all we are talking about jobs.
Nothing erodes belief in a society as efficiently as unemployment: nothing
sustains it as efficiently as jobs.
This is something which has not changed. Employment remains by far the most
effective way to distribute the nation's wealth and the most concrete proof that
we continue to take our egalitarian ideals and traditions seriously.
Today it is being put around that the economic recovery is over. It is, we're told,
just a fleeting moment and now the sky is falling in. For those who have fallen
prey to this notion, and have begun to walk around with heads bowed and
thinking tomorrow will never come, let me provide the antidote. I mean the facts.
Let me start with the growth in employment and the decline in unemployment. 
The recovery has created 560,000 jobs since March 1993 on average 720 new
jobs every day.
Over 1994, unemployment has decreased by 1.7 per cent, the greatest one year
reduction since the Bureau of Statistics began the Labour Force Survey 30 years
ago, and the second highest reduction last year in the OECD.
Last month the figures were as strong as they have been at any time in the last
two years, with 90,000 new jobs created. So long as we are vigilant with the
macroeconomic settings, the indications are that this is sustainable. And vigilant
and active we are being.
This extraordinary job growth is occurring against a backdrop of restrained
wages growth. Wage inflation is very much under control the last quarter's
data show an overall annual increase of about 4.1 per cent. This is entirely in
keeping with the Accord commitments of the Government and the unions.
It has happened in part because the new industrial relations system gives a high
priority to enterprise-based bargaining an essential response to internationally
changed circumstances which require the Australian labour market to be taken
into the modern competitive environment. Enterprise-based bargaining is one of
the reasons for employment growth.
There are now 1.44 million people covered by certified agreements 56 per cent
of those covered by Federal awards.
These agreements recognise the mutual interests of companies and workers.
They have delivered responsible and mature wage outcomes on average,
increases of 4.2 per cent in agreements signed in 1994.
And those increases have usually been offset by considerable increases in
productivity. These recent changes need to be put in the context of the sustained progress
which has been made in real unit labour costs over recent years.
The story is this: the costs of production in Australia have fallen from what was
close to a record high in 1982 to less than the average of 1966-73.
Real unit labour costs today are 13 per cent lower than they were in 1982. So
long as we maintain the momentum towards enterprise based bargaining and
other structural economic reform, the sustained low level of labour costs since
1986 will continue into the future. 
In other words, we have seen long term gains. And we are not about to let them
slip. While some people are talking about a change in the weather, what we are
experiencing is in fact a change in the climate.
The move to enterprise bargaining is occurring in a climate of industrial peace.
In the period between 1975 and 1983 the average annual number of working
days lost per 1000 employees due to strike activity was 590. Since 1983 the
figure is 208 a reduction of 65 per cent.
From 1988-94 the era when formal enterprise bargaining began the average
was 185 days.
These figures are well under the OECD average and the rate of reduction is very
much faster.
In short, we used to be seen as a notoriously strike-bound country. That is
emphatically no longer the case.
As I said, the whole climate has changed. We have seen and we will continue to
see structural change which will deliver to the next century an Australia with a
modern, flexible, competitive industrial relations system an essential
underpinning of a modern, flexible, competitive economy.
I won't recite in detail the other major structural reforms to the Australian
economy of the past decade which are fundamental to our present
competitiveness and which set us up to be competitive well into the future.
It is enough to say that the deregulation of our financial markets, the lowering of
tariff barriers, the relaxation of exchange controls, and the floating of the dollar,
were essential steps. The effects on our competitiveness have been both
profound and irreversible. So long as we follow through what has been both
profound and microeconomic reform, we will have sustainable growth into the
future. No microeconomic reform we have undertaken has been more important than
our investment in vocational education and training.
You will hear it said these days, usually by the same people who insist that the
sky is falling in, who are generally the same people who insisted that we were
about to have a double dip recession or a depression, that the Government has
lost its enthusiasm for microeconomic reform.
Of course to say that we haven't even to point to proof of our endeavours is to
invite the charge of complacency. It is a serious charge. But it cannot be
sustained. 
Not if you look at the introduction and operation of the Industrial Relations
Reform Act. And not if you look at our investment in vocational education and
training. I won't go into training in detail. But the future is the focus of this address, and
the future depends on education and training our economic success vitally
depends on it.
The information highway is already here. A revolution in work is occurring before
our eyes. By early in the next century as many as a third of all jobs will be in the
so-called knowledge-based industries.
Today, without question, knowledge is the most valuable resource a nation can
have. And the knowledge keeps changing: in the German metals industry it
turns over every five years; in their information technology industry it is every
two years.
For all these reasons, the $ 1.5 billion the Commonwealth will spend on
vocational education and training between 1993-97 is an essential investment.
We have to move as quickly as our competitors and develop a world class
training system in which employer associations, training institutions and industry
are directly linked.
That is what we are doing. We are working as fast as we can to build the bridge
by which Australians can get from the old to the new into new opportunities,
new jobs, new technology. From school to work, unskilled to skilled, from the
social margins to the mainstream, from manufacturing to knowledge-based, from
unemployment to employment.
We established the Australian National Training Authority in 1992. In Working
Nation last year we established the National Employment and Training
Taskforce; introduced a Youth Training Initiative to enable fifteen to seventeen
years to get into training or jobs through individual case management, and
created the revolutionary Job Compact.
The initiatives are working. There is a major cultural change under way a
change in the climate. By 2001, 95 per cent of 19 year olds will have completed
Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification or be participating in some form of
education or training.
And the shift is towards vocational training. Unmet demand for TAFE places is
now 36 per cent greater than it is for higher education. The proportion of
students choosing TAFE over university has increased from 15 to 25 per cent. 
This is an investment a massive investment In our human resources. in what
Peter Drucker calls "' the only meaningful resource today" knowledge.
Training is a wealth transfer. It is a profoundly democratic and just investment
and in the times which are coming it is essential to the maintenance of the social
fabric. It is probably the most important initiative we can take to redress lifetime
income inequalities.
It is also essential to a healthy economy. A better trained workforce is a more
productive and more innovative workforce. Skill formation begets technical
change, and technical change begets productivity and on productivity depends
the competitiveness of companies and nations.
Microeconomic reform continues with the recovery. And let's consider the shape
and size of that recovery.
Last year the Australian economy grew faster than that of any other developed
country. And it grew with low inflation. Job growth, as I have said, was
exceptional beyond the most optimistic forecasts. And only Canada recorded a
fall in unemployment at a rate faster than Australia's.
When I was in Europe recently I was able to point out that, under the
convergence criteria set down under Maastricht, we would meet the targets for
economic and monetary union where every other European country, with the
exception of Germany and Luxembourg, would fail.
The criteria concern inflation rates, interest rates, deficit ratios and government
debt. At present Australia meets every one of those. And it is worth looking at the
comparisons of government debt. Only one European government has debt
lower than 50 per cent of GDP that is France with 49.5 per cent.
Australia's government debt is 34 per cent of GDP. It is very low.
There is a lot of scaremongering around at present. This is utterly predictable
and totally familiar behaviour, but it does create anxieties in the community
which are very often baseless. And it does deny to Australians the confidence
they are entitled to enjoy after the work they have put in. And I believe it also
makes it significantly harder to efficiently deal with the real problems which
remain.
And there can be no doubt that the real problem remaining for Australia is the
current account deficit. 
Yet the fundamentals of the economy are strong, and that the medium term
settings and underpinnings for a sustained recovery are well in place.
The uncertainty, the apprehension about the basics, the notion that the good
news may not last for long derives almost entirely from the recent increases in
the current account deficit.
I want to devote most of the time that remains to addressing this subject.
As a percentage of GDP the current account deficit is now at a high level, but not
the highest historically. In fact Australia has always run a current account deficit
for the simple reason that the investment opportunities here have generally
outweighed our savings capacity.
Our increasing integration with international financial markets in the 1980s has
increasingly encouraged us to call on foreign savings rather than our own, and
as a result we have seen the current account become not just a fact of our
economic life but frequently a problem in it.
The actual size of the current account deficit should not be the sole focus of
debate about our external position. What matters are the much more
complicated issues of the composition of the current account, the circumstances
that have led to its change, the confidence of overseas investors in Australia's
economic fundamentals, and the outlook over the medium term for both exports
and imports.
We cannot deal with the problem without an understanding of these issues.
As far as the recent large increase in the current account deficit is concerned, it
has to be understood that now, as at such times in the past, the growth is
stemming in large part from a surge in imports of capital equipment. It is, of
course, part of the general surge in productive investment.
The data are instructive. In the first 7 months of this financial year the current
account deficit grew by $ 6.1 billion compared to the same period a year earlier,
with capital equipment imports increasing by 23 per cent. By comparison
intermediate goods imports grew by about 10 per cent, and consumption imports
by around 12 per cent.
Increased capital equipment imports reflects a general view that the prospects
for growth are excellent and that the fundamentals for future prosperity are in
place. So the increase in part reflects our economic success and the confidence
it has created. At the same time, to some extent it contributes to further
economic success. 
The productive investment we are experiencing is crucial to the continuation of
Australian structural reform, to the modern isation and expansion of our
underlying private economic base.
It also should be noted that when strong investment surges have dissipated in
the past, so too has the level of the current account deficit decreased.
Nor can we ignore the fact that foreign business has been willing to finance the
relatively high deficits, and they are doing this because they believe it to be
good business. At this juncture, with our strong credit ratings intact, the
financing of the deficit can be understood to have a sound financial basis in
which overseas lenders fully expect to receive healthy returns.
In other words, financing the deficit reflects continuing financial market
confidence in Australia.
But it is not confidence the Government takes for granted. It is not something we
are complacent about, It is a continuous, hands-on process. Maintaining
confidence in our external financial situation depends on having policies which
deliver sustained and balanced economic performance.
At the same time it needs to be recognised that there are structural reasons for
the increase in the current account deficit. Some of these the Government can't
influence, but there are important ones we can.
To begin with, over the last several decades Australia's terms of trade have
been falling with world commodity prices. This means that without structural
progress on the export side it becomes increasingly hard to balance our trade.
And there have been significant developments on the export side. The
proportion of GDP coming from exports has increased from 13 per cent in 1982
to 22 per cent today.
Again, it is important to understand the composition of economic data, since in
large part this increase is due to a highly desirable change in the make up of
exports. Our traditional export base, of rural and resource commodities, has declined as
a percentage of all exports from 62 per cent in 1983 to 46 per cent last year. By
contrast, our exports of Elaborately Transformed Manufactures have increased
from 10 to 17 per cent in the same period. This last area is one which will
become of even greater significance as world economic development proceeds.
As an exporting nation we are now much more solidly placed than we were in the
past. This has come about in part from an extraordinary improvement in our
international competitiveness. 
The index of international competitiveness has risen by 40 per cent since 1983.
You will forgive me for making the point that in the eight years before 1983 there
was no change in the index in other words, we were no more competitive in
1983 than we had been in 1975.
You see what I mean when I say that these are not fleeting changes. they are
long-term structural gains sea-changes.
As with the fundamental developments in the labour market, the reorientation of
our export base enhances our capacity to grow and deal more confidently with
adverse international economic circumstances.
As I suggested earlier, another factor contributing to current account pressures
has been significant international moves towards financial deregulation. World
capital flows are much greater these days, and it stands to reason that more
financing in Australia will be drawn from overseas funds.
We should not forget that this is a two-way flow. We opened up the Australian
financial system to the world in 1983/ 84, and now about $ 76 billion of Australian
private capital is invested abroad. This phenomenon is rarely mentioned, but it
is a significant consideration in any useful interpretation of our overall
international financial situation. Seventy-six billion is not an insignificant amount
when the net debt is around $ 160 billion.
Another fundamental but complicated issue when it comes to understanding the
current account challenge is the distinction between the short and medium term
prospects for both exports and imports.
As a percentage of GOP our current account deficit is high and it is not likely to
decrease for some time. But decrease it will and for several reasons.
One is that recovery from the drought is bound to increase our export revenues.
It will also decrease some of our recent imports caused by grain shortages.
Another is that some of the countries which are significant importers of
Australian goods are recovering from recession and we can expect our exports
particularly non-rural exports to grow as they do.
Finally, partly in response to current account pressures, the Government moved
to dampen domestic demand at the end of 1994. When these effects flow
through we can expect significant decreases in the growth of import demand. 
Yet nothing in the circumstances I have outlined diminishes the Government's
responsibility to manage our external position. The current account deficit has to
be addressed.
Perhaps the major issue is that the larger our foreign borrowings the greater our
exposure to fluctuations in economic sentiment in financial markets abroad.
The advantages that come from overseas borrowings need always to be
weighed against the adverse possibilities arising from changes in market
perceptions and activities.
The obvious way to diminish these risks is to increase national savings. We
have been concentrating on this for some time. You will recall the introduction of
the Superannuation Guarantee Levy in 1992.
Our policy commits us to increasing the overall level of Australian
superannuation contributions to 9 per cent from employers and 3 per cent from
employees by the year 2002/ 3.
Obviously these savings increases will promote the potential for financial capital
needs to be met from domestic sources, and the risks associated with borrowing
from overseas will be proportionately decreased.
National savings increases through superannuation also mean that it will
become easier to meet the financial needs of Australian retirees, whose
numbers will swell in coming years.
We take the issue of the current account deficit extremely seriously. We are
consistently assessing policy and in the forthcoming Budget we will be
addressing elements of structural change which have the potential to reduce
both internally and externally derived pressures.
There should be no mistake about our intention to use the Budget to resolve the
outstanding issues in economic management. It is an excellent opportunity to
fine-tune the recovery and put in place longer term reforms which are consistent
with our needs for sustainable and balanced economic and social development.
As I said earlier in this address, we are living in a period of unprecedented
change. It is much more likely to accelerate than go away. Change breeds
change, but it also breeds success in turn it develops the capacity to cope with
and even lead the changes.
But that does not alter the fact that in times of change there is uncertainty. And
let me say that every effort of the Government is directed towards removing that
uncertainty creating in every way we can the elements of a national life in
which all Australians can find a place. 
17
A job, training, health and education services, security, a sense of belonging and
a sense of loyalty to the country, dare I say it a sense of excitement about
Australia these are the goals.
Inevitably the whole picture of our intent fades from time to time. But I can tell
you it does not vary.
And I can also tell you that we know we won't get there if we allow our the
political culture to be clogged with timidity and prevarication.
As a Government we know that we won't do anything for the cause of certainty
by allowing opinion polls or media opinion to drive policy. Governments which
do not listen are not good governments. Governments which only listen are not
good governments either.
I think the same sort of spirit Should pervade the public sector. The task of
government is to make good policy and deliver it. It is to anticipate necessity,
not wait for it to dictate the terms of our existence.
I have a very distinct feeling that John Monash would have offered similar
advice. 



3
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
START OF THE WESTFIELD FRED HOLLOWS 500 INTERNATIONAL
RELAY RACE, BOURKE, WEDNESDAY, 5 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am delighted to be in Bourke, it is one of the few places in the far west of
New South Wales I always wanted to see, but somehow never got around to
it. I have today and what a lovely day it is too.
Could I say what a double pleasure it is being here associated with the spirit
of Fred Hollows. We look at the town of Bourke which has been riven by the
drought, where it has had to try to fight its way back. With all of its troubles it
has still got a big enough heart to do something like this, sponsor this race,
and to remember again Fred Hollows.
It is a great pleasure to be here with Gabi because, I think, the Hollows
Foundation typifies the thing that Fred was really great at and that is getting
on with it. He was unconventional and practical, but he got the job done and,
of course, we have another great challenge in Australia and that is, of course,
with Aboriginal health and a lot of the spirit of what Fred was about we want
to employ in dealing with that problem. That is direct attention to the problem
at hand. So, I think, that is a celebration of what Fred was able to do and
what now Gabi and Mike Lynskey and the Foundation have been able to
follow up. That is why we are here to support the run and to also remember
that international fraternalism that Fred sponsored in Nepal, in Vietnam and
in Eritrea and, of course, we have some runners here from Nepal and Eritrea
and Vietnam on this occasion today all three countries represented.
So, it is a great chance to renew that international fraternity, I think, that Fred
sponsored and to come to the place where Fred wanted his ashes scattered.
I know Bourke takes that responsibility, as the Mayor said, very seriously and
it is a great pleasure for me to be here, to be part of that fraternal spirit, part
of the spirit of Bourke and part of the spirit of Fred Hollows. I would like to
thank the Mayor, Wally Mitchell, and Frank Lowy from Westfield for
sponsoring this and it is a great pleasure for me to be associated, again, with
Fred Hollows and Gabi Hollows who has followed Fred's vision and work with
great fidelity.
Thank you very much indeed. 



PRIME MINISTER
"* EMBARGOED UNTIL 8: 30PM**
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
WALTZING MATILDA CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS
WINTON 6 APRIL 1995
This is a great honour. It is one to tell our grandchildren about: we were in the
North Gregory Hotel when Australia celebrated the first performance of Waltzing
Matilda 100 years ago.
And we were all in evening dress. Which is something the swagman would have
found amusing but maybe the squatter, the troopers and Banjo Paterson would
have appreciated it.
I'm sure they all would have liked the irony in it.
It is a great pleasure to be here and to see for the second time in two days the
spirit of rural Australia.
I was in Bourke yesterday another place in the romance of the swag. And
another place suffering the drought.
Yesterday in Bourke the town was gathered for an extraordinary event an
international marathon race from Bourke to Parramatta to raise money for the
Fred Hollows Foundation.
Fred Hollows is buried in Bourke and they celebrate his memory as a man who
loved the bush and the values of the people who live there.
His work was, in many ways, an extension of the old idea of mateship, and
through it he lifted all our spirits and raised our goals.
Here in Winton, in an altogether different way, these ceebrations are reminding
us of the same things. 
They are reminding us of the spirit of the bush and commemorating a song which
has lifted our spirits for 100 years.
There are no limits to the power of a good song.
I read on the way up here that 10,000 people would be in Witon this weekend:
so this has to be a very considerable boost to Winton as it struggles through the
drought. You see, music has more than charms it has profound economic effects.
In times like this it is not as good as rain, but it may well be the next best thing.
Waltzing Matilda was born in a drought era of course, and it is not hard to imagine
that this might have had some effect on the melancholy theme of the song. And
there is equally no doubt that in all the varieties of hard times Waltzing Matilda
has galvanised the spirit of counless Australians.
If culture is that which defines a people, if it is the expression of their collective
sentment, Waltzing Matilda sits at the centre of gI~ culture it's a well-spring of
the national sentiment, a pool, a billabong.
I suspect there is no one here who has not at some time, somewhere in the
world, heard or remembered the tune and felt deeply affected by it
I'm sure it has brought Australians home before they intended to, and given
others the strength to stay away a bit longer. For a century it has caused
Australian hearts to beat faster.
I venture to say it has caused more smiles and tears, and more hairs to stand up
on the backs of Australian necks than any other thing of three minutes duration in
Australia's history.
It has long been our unofficial national song. Not our anthem as I've said
before, one can't sing too solemnly about a jumbuck. But Waltzing Matilda is
Australia's song and it always will be.
Think what it has withstood down the years. Wave after wave of American and
British popular music. The cultural cringe and all that post-colonial posturing.
The urbanisation of Australia which might have been expected to dilute the old
bush sentiments. Mass immigration and multicultural Australia which changed
the face and the fabric of our society.
Watzing Matilda has endured them all. It has endured through wars and
depressions, good years and bad. It has endured some terrible renditions by
both local and overseas performers. 
I don't think we should make it official and issue some kind of decree; but I think
% w all know that Waltzing Matilda is at least as beloved as the anthem. It is to we
Australians what Land of Hope and Glory is to the British, or AmerIca the
Beautiful and God Bless America are to the people of the United States.
Anid, entirely without prejudice to the status of Advance Australia Fair, we might
sing Waltzing Matilda at a lot more public occasions than we presently do.
I hope these celebrations serve as a bit of a trigger for this.
I have no doubt that all through these celebrations people will be talking about
why Waltzing Matilda endures. Why ft means so much to us.
I know some will also be asking who the swagman was and what, therefore, the
song was meant to signify. I won't be buying into the historical debate, but I
suppose every Australian is entitled to say even obliged to say what the song
means to him or her.
I don't think I was the only Australian kid who wondered when he learned the
words at school what sort of swagman is this? Jolly one minute, drowning
himself the next?
These questions about the psychology of the swagman have never had the
weight of the social and political interpretations the ideological interpretations.
Paterson's words describe a class struggle, and if ever there was a class struggle
in Australia it was in the 1890s.
Its not hard to see the song as an affirmation of the idea of the fair go, which still
strikes a powerful chord in Australians. And may it always do so.
It is also about freedom. The swagman is a free spirit.
We can interpret Waltzing Matilda as a celebration of our rebellious nature, as
part of the tradition which began with the convict rebellion at Castle Hill and runs
all the way through Frank the Poet, the Eureka Stockade and Ned Kelly. We can
think of the swagman's jump into the billabong as an Australian statement of
liberty or death.
But, the truth is, none of these things come into my mind when I hear it sung.
They didn't come into my mind when the entire crowd gathered in Croke Park in
Dublin sang it before the Gaelic football final when I was there two years ago. 
I don't know what came into my mind then I think the experience emptied it of all
rational thought. But afterwards I was aware of the extraordinary power of this
song on an Australian's senses.
All sorts of music can move us, but to hear Waltzing Matilda sung so fervently
and beautifully by the people of another country 12,000 miles from home is to
know that nothing can move us like our own song.
It is to know that a national song is not something to be interpreted intellectually.
When you hear it, you don't think about a political position, or social and
psychological issues. You don't think about the historical context.
What Waltzing Matilda tells us in an entirely uncomplicated way is that we are
Australian. And it tells us in a way that I think is equally Australian in character it
tells us without beating drums or waving flags, or pounding our chests. It tells us
with a simple melody and a story, and a whimsical and ironic story at that.
There is no national song I know of quite like it in the world.
I'm sure what happened with Banjo Paterson and Waltzing Matilda happened in
the realm of the spirit.
I think he wrote a story to a tune which quite mysteriously in ways we'll never
know picked up the spirit of the place as Awt as then; and, like the ghost of the
swagman, it never died.
And it touches us as a ghost might. As the spirit of the bush might.
When we were kids the other line I think we used to wonder about was the one
which says that " his ghost may be heard as you pass by the billabong". I confess
to wondering what you would hear. What sort of noise would the old swagman
make what does it sound like when you stuff a jumbuck in a tucker bag?
It took me ages to realise that this was Banjo Paterson's whole trick the son is
the ghost of the swagman, and a hundred years later we are hearing it as loud as
ever. 



( I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE. PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FROM THE DINNER, GLOBAL CULTURAL DIVERSITY
CONFERENCE, SYDNEY, 26 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
We have already had, today, a very good beginning to this conference this
important conference on global diversity, and I think there was a unanimity
of view that the conference began well it certainly did with the diversity of
that percussion performance we saw this morning, and I'm not sure that the
Secretary-General and I were percussing people, but I know that the
musicians were. At any rate, one is told that as the day closed, that it was a
successful day, and we are very pleased about that. Because this is a very
significant and important theme for the United Nations, and the world, to
embrace, because as we have remarked to ourselves over the course of
this day many of the world's problems are not now super-power problems,
they are not nation state problems they are problems which arise from
little differences and differences of view that have been concentrated into
virulent, in some cases, strains of objection and Intolerance and prejudice,
which threaten the peace of countries, the peace of regions and the peace of
the world. And we find ourselves joining in the United Nations in the
endeavour of seeking to remedy some of these problems, to quell these
conflicts, and we are coming to the conclusion very obviously that we are
better trying to deal with the problems at the source, rather tn the
manifestations of them, when they already arise. And so, by the United
Nations and the Secretary-General giving this conference its endorsement
and its imprimatur, we are bringing to the world agenda an appreciation of
the importance of diversity as something to celebrate, rather than something
to fear.
Now, this evening, We are continuing the thefrie, and the performers tonight
the musical entertainment tonight Is again, another cause for the celebration
of diversity, and the fact that it has enriched u. s all so very much. And let me
say, that in this country, nothing has enrich~ ed Australian cultural life more
than the new diversity of this country, and the openness to other cultures.
And they are the cultures of our Aboriginal people, Asian cultures around us,
European culture all of these things have been the cause of enriching this
country. I know there is now a threat or a iperceived threat, rather to the 
internationalisation of culture, and we have seen this particularly in
entertainment, and we are very conscious of this because In this country, we
lost a film industry to Hollywood in the 1930s. I'm sure many of our
distinguished guests might not appreciate that there but for the grace of
Charlie Chaplin went the rest of us Charlie Chaplin, and Louis B Mayer and
the Warner Brothers were a hell of a team to beat, but we did have an
important Australian film Industry. We have lost one, and we are determined
not to lose another. You might know that, of course, we have the French
elections on at the moment, and we over the course of the Uruguay Round
we found ourselves implacably on the other side to the French in the Uruguay
Round, seeking to give the producers of the South a place in these big
agricultural markets, which unusually as a developed country, Australia
participated in. But, of course, the one thing we joined the French on at the
end of the Round was in protecting Intellectual property in protecting
cultural property. And, I think one can do these two thing that is, be proud
of one's own culture, and do the things to enrich it and protect it, but through
its strengths allow it to be open to others so we gain and secure a benefit
from them, So I think we shouldn't fear the international isation of culture -I
don't think it is a crude choice between selling ourselves or impoverishing
ourselves in the cause of cultural fidelity I don't think we need to do those
things. I think we take the general view that we can profit by being open to
the world, and if the proof of the pudding is In the eating, I'm sure that
Australia is an example. But we have seen it so often we have seen the
impact of Greek and Roman art and architecture on the world, we have seen
the power of Chinese culture, and the profound influence of Chinese art In
Europe in the 18th and 19th century, we have seen the Indian sitar infiltrate
its way into the music of Liverpool in the 1960s, we have every ' time we have
seen an openness to diversity, we have seen something better. And, of
course, let me say on our part, that here how we cherish in this country the
culture of Aboriginal Australians I think one of the great cultural phenomena
of recent Australian history has been the rejuvenation of Aboriginal culture,
and its integration with the non-indigenous cultures of Australia. And not only
that, but we are seeing it acclaimed around the world as well.
We welcome diversity it has been a cause of power to our arts and to our
culture, and it makes the point again that here we are having a conference
seeking to promote the idea that diversity is a cause of celebration, and can
be a cause of celebration, and something richer, and better, rather than
simply something that leads to division and fear and calamity.
Tonight, we are very appreciative of the fact that the Australia Council which
is Australia's premier arts funding body, the body most possessed of the
charter of promoting Australian art and culture has sponsored tonight's
performance, which we are about to enjoy, and has arranged with the
performers and the artists to come tonight to entertain us. I would like to
thank the Australia Council, and the performers, for doing this in the cause of
this great undertaking of increasing the awaren ess that we are seeking to
understand better at this conference about the value of global diversity,
worldwide. I would like to, most especially, thank the Secretary-General for
endorsing this conference, for coming here, for bringing his wife to Australia 
it is a great honour he does us. He has, without a doubt, the hardest job in
the world. I don't think there Is . some say " well, the Presidency of the
United States Is the world's hardest job", and it may be true. But, seeking to
resource this body the United Nations in its diversity, and in another form
of diversity in seeking to secure the consensus that is always required to
move it forward, to renew it, to consider its future and how it might be
reformed these are the things, the tasks, which have fallen in this age of
ours to Doctor Boutros-Ghaii. It is with those heavy responsibilities, that we
know he has, that makes us appreciate ever so much more his attendance
here. Could I finally thank you all for being so enthusiastic about the conference
for coming to Australia, for doing us that honour, for joining us, and for
coming tonight to celebrate this dinner with us, and to hear some of the
performers, and some of the music, that I know you will be pleased to see.
ends. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP OPENING
OF THE GLOBAL CULTURAL DIVERSITY CONFERENCE, SYDNEY
CONVENTION AND EXHIBITION CENTRE, WEDNESDAY, 26 APRIL 1995
Your excellency, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, distinguished speakers, ladies
and gentlemen.
It is my pleasure to welcome you to Australia, to Sydney and the 1995
Global Cultural Diversity Conference.
On behalf of Bob Carr, the Premier of New South Wales, and Sir James
Gobbo, Chairman of the Australian Multicultural Foundation, who are cohosting
this conference with the Australian Government we welcome your
participation in discussions of great importance and we hope, in time, of
great consequence.
We are very privileged to have with us so many eminent speakers from all
over the world. I thank you most sincerely for coming.
Mr Secretary General, it is a particular pleasure and an honour to welcome
you on your first visit to Australia, especially in this year in which we are
commemorating the 50th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
1995 has also been designated as the International Year for Tolerance and
the first Decade for the World's Indigenous People.
We are also pleased to welcome Dr Federico Mayor, Director-General of
UNESCO, which celebrates its 50th anniversary in 1995 as well, and the
Deputy President of South Africa, Mr Thabo Mbeki.
The conference has brought together knowledgeable and concerned
individuals to consider the ways by which we might make cultural diversity
less of an impediment to human progress and more of a means to it. Less
of a source of conflict, and more of a means by which the benefits of
tolerance can be learned or re-learned. Less of a violent and destructive
force, less of a vehicle for xenophobia and prejudice, and more of a means
to creating a more peaceful, creative and secure post-Cold War World.
In short we sen it as a contribution to the effort to make the 21st century a
better one than this. 
This conference was conceived as a means of marking all these milestones.
And, I might say, Australia is an appropriate place to mark them.
We are a country looking forward to the next century. We believe we have
a constructive role to play in those issues which concern the United
Nations. We have always believed that we were present and active at its
inception in San Francisco but we have never believed it more than now.
And we are nothing if not culturally diverse: more than 220 nationalities are
represented in our population. Forty two per cent of our people were born
overseas or have one parent born overseas.
Australian society is rich in linguistic, racial, religious and cultural diversity.
We have consciously devised policies to encourage and preserve this
diversity and gain in return benefits to the nation and community.
We count the creation of this rich, pluralistic and peaceful society we think
one of the most successful multicultural societies in the world as one of
our great national achievements.
That is why I say that Sydney is an appropriate environment for this Global
Cultural Diversity Conference.
Not because we presume to think that Australia can be a model for the rest
of the world the world is itself too diverse for that. But we have learned
some useful things about living together, we have a deep interest in these
questions and we think we can make a contribution in a world which
desperately needs answers to them.
Fifty years ago in San Francisco, a group of delegates, including Dr H V
Evatt from Australia, met to design the United Nations. They hoped that the
institution they were creating would ensure that the wars which had already
ravaged the world twice in just thirty years would never be repeated.
They wanted to construct a framework for a world in which international
stability was based on common values of justice, development and peace.
But in 1946 the lessons of the failed League of Nations were still fresh in
everyone's minds and the consequences of that failure appallingly real. So
there was a strong streak of realism as well as idealism in the blueprint the
delegates drew up in San Francisco.
They knew the United Nations needed to take into account the realities of
global power. And they understood the importance of the nation-state. 
The role of the nation-state was already cemented at the centre of
international affairs, and its importance was to grow even larger as the great
process of decofonisation got under way.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the framework the architects of the United
Nations developed had at its core the need to settle, or at least contain,
conflicts between nation-states.
In the event, as we know, the post-war reality fell short of the high hopes
of San Francisco. The emergence of the Cold War and a bipolar
international system imposed a very different dynamic on United Nations
operations. Still, despite the complications and set-backs of the following half century,
the United Nations managed to notch up substantial achievements. Not
enough of them, no doubt, but many more than some of its critics allow.
But fifty years on, the Cold War is over and there has never been a better
time to ask ourselves if the United Nations we now bia-u is what we now
need. And what we will need in the 21st century.
Given the scale of change in the world since the organisation was formed, it
would be astonishing if the answer was yes.
Many distinguished figures, not least yourself, Secretary-General, have been
engaged in juJst this task of renewal.
Australia, through Gareth Evans especially, has been playing a role in this
debate, as we did in Sani Francisco half a century ago.
I do not want to explore these important structural questions this morning.
There are many other forums at which that will be done.
But I do want to draw the link between what we are talking about at this
conference and these wider United Nations issues.
Because cultural diversity, which we in Australia value as a source of
strength and pride, has an external dimension, too.
And the manifestations of cultural diversity we see on the television news
more often seem to take the form of tragic and intractable conflicts.
We have been reminded horribly of this by the suffering we have seen just
this week in Rwanda.
I want to pay tribute hero to the role of the Australian peacekeepers in
UNAMIR, who were instrumental in providing medical assistance to the
victims of the terrible massacre at Kibeho. 
4
They have shown the finest traditions of the Australian Defence Force, and
richly deserve the Anzac Peace Prize they have been awarded,
Ironically, the end of the Cold War which was otherwise so welcome
made possible many of these new outbreaks of conflict around the world by
releasing the political iron bonds which had contained them.
So, in the former Yugoslavia, in the former Soviet Union, in Burundi, in
Somalia, we see tragedies unfold large-scale horror and appalling
inhumanity, stemming from ingrained, small-scale hatreds.
Anid these conflicts are shaping the international system, and challenging
the United Nations, just as profoundly as traditional disputes between states
have done.
They are the reflection of a world in which very often the ation and the
state are rio longer the same thing.
The nation-state, as it existed when the United Nations was founded, is
going through a period of profound transition, and the international
community has to respond.
We see this most obviously in the economic area, where the global market
place is already a reality.
The engagement of the developing world in the international economy is one
of the most far-reaching arid beneficial developments of our age but, as
Auistralians know, it is part of a process which challenges our former ideas
of economic sovereignty.
Similarly, responses to the degradation of the environment cannot possibly
come from one country alone, because both the causes and the effects are
transnational.
Arid the information revolution poses huge problems for laws of national
copyright, and makes the national regulation of what our citizens see and
hear almost impossible.
In short, one of the mantras of modern international relations noninterference
in the internal affairs of other-countries these days has a
greatly modified and much reduced meaning.
In this very different world, how should the international community
respond to the ethnic and communal conflicts which so mar international
peace, and properly disturb ouir consciences?
I dto not mean by this how should we go about the important tasks of
peacekeeping and peacemaking, or the immediate human responses of 
providing food, shelter and medicine to those who are suffering? Those,
again, are issues which require separate consideration.
Instead, at a different level, I think that responses lie in some cases in
redefining our idea of the state. In other cases, we need to rethink our view
of the nation.
Sometimes, the best response to intractable tensions may be the old
fashioned remedy of redefining the borders of the state.
That is what happened, peacefully, when the Czech Republic and Slovakia
split, and it is the answer that many of the component parts of the former
Soviet Union found.
Part of the answer may lie in a radical redefinition of what constitutes a
state. In Europe, the very homeland of the nation-state, and the source of much of
the national conflict which has so scarred our century, the European Union
is dramatically changing our ideas about what a state is, and how
sovereignty is distributed.
And after 1997, when Hong Kong reverts to China's control, China will
comprise one state but with two distinct economic systems.
A third response, and one I think that is important, is to build up the role of
regional institutions and identities.
Because the gap between individual states and multilateral organisations like
the United Nations can sometimes be too great for quick and effective
responses to humanitarian or security problems.
And the cultural and historical background necessary to resolve problems
will often lie more readily in the local region.
In addition, an important factor in democracies like Australia is that our
people will often more readily support commitments in our own region
Cambodia, for example than outside it, because they can understand more
easily how events there can affect them.
When the government of Papua New Guinea was searching for a solution to
the problems it faced on the island of Bougainville, for example, it found the
idea of a regional peacekeeping force useful.
Similarly, the United Nations operation in Haiti had a large regional element.
And I think the problem of conflicting claims in the South China Sea a key
security question in Asia is probably more amenable to a regional than an
international settlement. 
The greatest contribution of regional organisations, however, has so far
been seen in economic frameworks like the European Union, NAFTA and in
this part of the world APEC.
APEC brings together eighteen very different economies and cultures united
in the common purpose of sustaining prosperity and growth in the Asia
Pacific. It is a practical example of what used to be called North-South
cooperation.
And I have no doubt that here, as in Europe, the act of working together on
practical economic issues will have beneficial political and security
consequences as well.
So regionalism is central to the broader United Nations efforts to promote
peace and prosperity not an alternative, but an addition.
Finally, however, the answer to what we can do about troubling
humanitarian and security problems may lie not so much in rethinking the
state, as in redefining the nation.
The challenge in many cases is how we can create societies rich in cultural,
racial and religious diversity but do so in ways which encourage rather than
compromise a sense of national identity.
It is too glib to say that the answer lies simply in better understanding. The
problems in the Balkans or in central Africa do not stem from a lack of
familiarity with the culture of the antagonists.
This means that the redefinition of the nation is a complex task. It involves
economic and social development, justice, human rights, good governance,
inclusive institution building, tolerance, respect for difference, the
strengthening of civil society.
So it is not an easy job or a quick one. And I do not pretend that the
Australian experience is readily transferable to other parts of the world.
But, as I said, I am certain that some of what we have done here can lead
not only to the development of a culturally rich, diverse, and peaceful
Australian society, but may suggest to others ways of improving harmony
within and between states.
This would be a fitting contribution to the current debate about the future of
the United Nations and its operations, and to the International Year of
Tolerance., It is true that we count what we have done here as a great success.
Nowhere is that truer than in our changing relationship with Asia. 
Just a generation ago, the White Australia Policy was still a reality in all but
the technical detail.
Australia came perilously close to marginalising itself in our region and in the
world. Now, half of all our immigrants come from Asia.
They are adding immeasurably to the richness of our society, to our arts, to
our commerce, to the way we live our daily lives,
And their values, like the values of all those who have come here before,
will help shape our culture.
This is a much more tolerant society than that which existed just a
generation ago. Today, no Australian political party can hope to succeed
with an immigration policy which excludes people on racial or ethnic
grounds. Tolerance itself has become one of those words to which we
attach a primary democratic value.
Yet it is important, at this stage of our history, to put our multicultural
successes in perspective.
For instance, I think it would be a mistake for this generation of Australians
to persuade themselves either that the transformation is complete and
completely satisfactory, or, indeed, that all the achievements have occurred
since we first took on the idea the word and the policies of
multicultiralism. Under a different banner that of assimilation migrants from Europe and
the Middle East were welcomed in the decades immediately after World War
II and made a profound contribution to our national life and development.
There are regions of Australia where in the 19th century people from
Germany and Italy were more numerous and their cultures more pervasive
than any from the British Isles.
Today when we talk of the enrichment of our culture by people from all the
countries of the world we sometimes forget that people have been coming
from all over the world to this place for 200 years; that our landscape was
interpreted by painters, scientists and explorers from Germany, Switzerland,
Poland and France as well as Britain and that this artistic and intellectual
tradition was consolidated in the 20th century.
It seems to me we should remember that tolerance of cultural difference is
ultimately a necessary condition for a successful new world country; and
that those traditions of egalitarian democracy which emerged in the last half
of the 19th century had the seeds of multiculturalism in them. If it is true
that earlier generations of Australians traditionally took the view that where
and to what rank people were born should be no measure of their character, 
and that in Australia everyone should begin without these handicaps, then
we can see ourselves as building on a tradition.
And we can learn the lesson that the best traditions of a country, and the
best instincts of a people, can be the basis of radical change. I think that is
what we have learnt in Australia in the past couple of decades that
societies can be changed, that an inward looking culture can be made
outward looking, that what seems alien can be revealed as friendly, that
where threats always seemed to lie there are now rewards and
opportunities. And I think we must also always bear in mind that the dominant cultures of
our history those of the British Isles and Ireland far from being hostile to
the growth of a culturally diverse society, provided in democratic institutions
and ideas its essential precondition.
I make these points because it does not hurt to be reminded that our efforts
are part of a much longer story: a story in which progress has been
uneven. We do not know all the answers, and the story is far from over
and we should not assume that the rapid strides we have made in the past
two decades are a guarantee of success in the future.
There is no more profound example of the distance we still have to travel in
Australia than the position of Aboriginal people in our society and their
relationship with non-Aboriginal Australians.
Nor, of course, is there any better example of the fact that since 1788 this
continent has played host to a multicultural society.
This conference is not the place to offer a short history of the
dispossession, brutality and neglect, which accompanied European
settlement and which has continued in this century. Until we succeed in
our ambition to affect a permanent reconciliation with indigenous
Australians, our claims to have achieved a successful multicultural society
will always be compromised.
But we are at last determined on reconciliation a new partnership built on
mutual respect, justice and equity and we have in the last two years put in
place some long overdue foundations.
We have given legislative expression to a decision of the High Court of
Australia that the idea of terra nullius the farcical notion that no one
owned Australia prior to British settlement was indeed a lie. The High
Court established that there was a Native Title to land, rooted in traditional
law and custom itself, within the common law of Australia,
The legislation giving effect to this decision has survived criticism and a
legal challenge. It was confirmed in the High Court just last month. And I
might say what has also been confirmed is that Australians are prepared to 
support such a dramatic change in the law that they want to see the
relationship between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians put right.
The establishment of a Native Title will not of itself redress the
consequences of dispossession. In truth, of course, nothing will. But over
the next ten years the Government will allocate some $ 1.5 billion to a
permanent fund so that dispossessed indigenous communities will have the
means to buy land and in so doing regain the potential for spiritual and
cultural regeneration, as well as an economic base to improve their material
well-being.
The final step will be the implementation of social justice measures. We
now have before us two major reports which draw on extensive
consultations with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and in due
course we will announce the measures calculated to be most likely to
redress the wrongs and raise the living standards and life opportunities of
indigenous Australians.
There is no doubt that we will succeed best in this wherever we are able to
give Aboriginal people the means of solving their own problems. It is
equally true that we will make improvements in the quality of their lives,
including their health, and raise morale and self esteem wherever we can
deliver the means of their retaining contact with traditional culture and
customs. That, after all, is the most fundamental principle of
rulticulturalism. For us, the process of reconciliation is a basic test of our modern
nationhood on it depends our relationship with both our past and our
future. On it also depends a favourable measure of our achievements in the
realm of cultural diversity.
But to put Australia's progress towards a successful multicultural society in
perspective, to make reference to ambitions not yet fulfilled, is certainly not
to discount the scale of our achievements or the pride we take in them.
The Australia I knew as a child and the Australia of today are radically
different places. When we were growing up we did not and could not
imagine the Sydney of 1995. And even if we had been able to visualise the
city as it now is, we could not have conceived of the means by which it has
been brought about. We could not have conceived of the necessary policy
changes. Perhaps most importantly, we could not have conceived of the
necessary changes in ourselves.
That is at the heart of multiculturalism. It describes a response to the
diversity that exists in Australian society. It is a policy for managing the
consequences of that diversity in the interests of all.
This means a policy which guarantees rights and imposes responsibilities. 
The rights include those of cultural identity tho right to express and share
individual cultural heritage, including language and religion. The right to
social justice the right of every Australian to equality of treatment and
opportuinity, regardless of race, ethnicity, religion, language, gender or place
of birth.
The responsibilities might be summarised as follows: that the first loyalty of
all Australians must be to Australia, to its interests and its future; that all
Australians must accept the basic principles of Australian society, including
the Constitution and the rule of law, parliamentary democracy, freedom of
speech and religion, English as the national language, equality of the sexes
and the right of every Australian to express his or her views and values.
That is the essential balance iin the multicultural equation: the promotion of
individual and collective cultural rights and expression, on the one hand;
and on the other, the promotion of common national interests and values.
Arid Success depends on demonstrating that each side of the equation
serves the othpr.
In practical terms one side can be seen in Government programs to provide
people who have just arrived in AuIstralia with assistance to locate and use
the various welfare services, including health, housing and income support.
Or in, for instance, the Translating and Interpreting Service which, by phone
or in person, assists migrants to break down the language barrier they face
until they become fluent in English.
Or in the Special Broadcasting Service, whose daily television and radio
broadcasts in 67 languages help to maintain the threads which link so many
Australians to their n'ative culture,
These are eminently practical measures calculated to minimise the trauma
which migration has always entailed and make the transition to a new life in
a new Culture that much easier. They do not demand or enforce an
attachment to this country, they encourage it.
We take the same view on citizenship. We do not oblige new settlers to
take out citizenship but we actively encourage them to, and when they do
we ask them to swear an oath which expressly acknowledges the principle
of tolerance on which rMUlticulturalisni depends.
The dividend of cultural diversity is largely paid in the form of a society
which is both more rich and interesting and more harmonious and peaceful,
In more recent times we have discovered a new dividend a productivity
dividend. We have learned that cultural difference means different ways of looking at
the world. In an economic environment which demands of enterprises that 
I1
they use every possible advantage to be innovative and flexible this is likely
to be a tangible asset.
We have learned that being among the very few countries whose people
understand all but a few of the world's languages and cultures is a very
considerable competitive advantage.
In addition, we are discovering that our policies have provided us with the
most valuable links to countries where we can do business: personal links
and personal understanding between Australian enterprises and the markets
they wish to enter.
We are taking steps to capitalise on these connections and the great cultural
diversity of the Australian workforce through a Productive Diversity Agenda.
This is perhaps the most concrete example we could adduce to show that
the encouragement of cultural diversity is much more than an act of
benevolence it is an act of national self interest.
I am sure it is the hope of everyone here that over the next three days
persuasive arguments will be put to show that the global interest can be
served by the affirmation of cultural diversity.
We certainly do not say that what has occurred in Australia should be a
blueprint for the world., Cultural diversity, let alone human diversity, makes
the idea of a single template absurd. Nor do we expect this conference to
be a celebration of our achievements.
However, we do feel able to say that this very democratic, very open and
very forward looking country has learned a good deal about the benefits and
the management of cultural diversity. We are a country emerging, I think,
into a great 21st century future. We will not be a nation state in the old
sense of that term: we will be a more purposefully independent country
than before, yet we will be more integrated with the world and with the
Asia-Pacific region in particular than the Australians of 60 years ago, when
the United Nations was created, could ever have imagined.
We like to think that we might have in our modern nationhood at least some
of the elements of a 21st century model diversity, tolerance, openness and
worldliness within the boundaries of national purpose and cohesion. And
perhaps as we pursue those goals we can help the world pursue them.
I have very great pleasure in opening this conference and inviting the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to deliver
the keynote address.
Sydney 26 April 1996 



TEL T4E LM: a y .95
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF EMPLOYMENT SERVICES REGULATORY AUTHORITY,
WILLIAM ANGLISS COLLEGE, MELBOURNE, 4 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I'm very pleased to be here and I thank the William Angliss College for being
our very kind hosts on this morning to launch the Employment Services
Regulatory Authority. It is, I think, another one of those milestones in the
history of our country, of our society, and I made the point, I think, back in the
election in 1993, that the election was very much an ideological contest
between those that had one view of Australia and those with another. And
the view that we on this side of politics and society had was that Australia
was strong enough and rich enough, and we hoped wise enough, to accept
the notion of inclusion and to say that we move ahead as a society together,
that we should never, ever accept the fact that some people are allowed to
miss right out and fall off the back of the system, become an underclass and
try and meet their way, or battle along, basically in some sort of a rut of
assistance, or community assistance, or welfare, for the rest of their days.
Now, it turned out that that message was pretty well understood and received
in the last election and it is true as Joan Kirner said, that on election night I
said we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind, that the election was very
much about activity and employment, about the whole notion that the way to
fairness and equity in this country is through the right to a job and one's
capacity to share in the national bounty and have a piece of the cake which
comes generally through employment in this country.
So, we had a number of objectives: one to restart the economy and get it
cracking, to get employment going strongly, and at the same time to look after
those who have been particularly disadvantaged in the labour market the
long term unemployed. And we can say now, a couple of years down the
track, we are well along the way of meeting some of those objectives. We've
had 4.2 per cent employment growth over the last year, which in OECD terms
is spectacular. We have had the biggest fall in unemployment in the last
year, or year and a half, that we've had since we've be-en kieping the records
2: 01 No. 007 P. 01
lc1 
2
and we're now starting to see substantial inroads to the category of long term
unemployment, That is, those who are long term unemployed are getting a
bigger share of the employment action in this cycle than they did in any other.
That's because, I think, that we've had a lot of aggregate employment
because you can have Working Nation, but Working-Nakion without growth
and employment one feeds off the other, the fI~ xiThas got to come from the
employment. But not only have we had the raw employment, we've had, I
think, the success of the labour market programs and actually trying to bring
people who are long term unemployed back into the mainstream of the labour
market. Now, this is a matter of great pleasure to me, and to Simon Cxean who
manages these programs under his portfolio and also to the social security
system with our colleague Peter Baldwin it's a matter of great pleasure to
the Government as a whole tii-tNwe'v-e been able to see this transformation.
But the good thing is I think we're getting acceptance for the notion of the
equity of it all. Now, I mean, the thing about our Tory friends is when you say
equity it's like holding up the wooden stake to Dracula they're always
moving away from the word equity. But when we talked about Working
Nation, talking about equity and efficiency, well, the efficiency word, well, they
couldn't, you know, ideology meant they couldn't really leave that one behind
and we said, well, where are we going to get the skills complementation in
this recovery? I mean, as the recovery continues and we start seeing real
strength in employment and potential bottlenecks in the labour market, where
are going to get the skills formation from? And we are essentially going to
get them from the long term unemployed, you know, then a group of 350-
400,000 people. So we are saying not only is it an inequitable thing to do to
leave them behind, it's an inefficient thing to do. That is, that the labour
market will be stronger and better and that the point that Sue and others have
made this morning, people have skills. The fact that they have struck a poor
patch in the labour market, or they haven't been there at the right moment, or
they haven't been managed properly, or they have not been understood
doesn't mean that they can't be particularly useful back in the labour market
doing the things that they have done in the past or are able to do in the
future, or if they are trained to do in the future. And so as a consequence,
we've seen now an acceptance of, I think, the concept behind Working
Nation, which is a very revolutionary change because the whole concept of
cp e ranrigement and the Job Compact, that is, when someone is long term
unemployed, unemployed over twelve months or more, they have this right to
be case managed for an individual to get to know them, to understand their
aptitudes, their educational standards, their employment history, their
personality, and try and match them and help them, and at the same time,
then after eighteen months, qualify for the Compact where the nation makes a
commitment to give them a labour market place, a subsidised place in the
labour market, for a period of time provided they take it.
This is, I think, quite a revolutionary change and it did come from, as Joan
said, the Green Paper consultations and the White Paper, and were able to
put it into place. Now I notice today, you know-, we have people still 
TEL' 4. May .95 2 : 01 No .007 P .03
3
cavilling about. I notice, Vince Fitzgerald today talking about savings in
The Australian saying, '~ Well, you know, the Government should have
basically used the Working Nation money last year and put it off the Budget
deficit" you know, it's a view, but it's a pretty dull view, it's a pretty dumb
view. And you say, why? I mean, here we are, we're about to bring down a
Budget which is going to address the major problem the country faces in
the medium term and that is the sav ins icnbajance and the current
account deficit. That's what the Budget is going to be aimed squar'ly-at.
It's principal task is not demand management, so why did we, last year,
have to forget Working Nation and simply put the proceeds off the Budget
deficit? And there's only one reason ideology. Ideology, that is, out of
sight, out of mind. You know, the hard-hearted view, the rest of us can
move on into higher incomes and better standards of living and bad luck,
the sort of buffer at the end of the station, the cushion, the shock-absorber,
is that 300,000 or so people can be the long term unemployed and who
cares about them because politically they don't matter. I mean, that's the
view. You know, it's a view those of us who appreciate the sort of country
Australia is and has become should fight, that we should resist, that we
don't want the Newt Gingrich view of the world here and we are not going
to cop it being sort of basically parroted by people like John Howard, you
know, running around parroting little right-wing ideologies dfedupo
that they are more palatable. But basically down to the same thing, that is,
Mr Downer as Leader of the Opposition, said Working Nation was an
extravagance, they would hack into all the labour market programs upon
which it sits and basically say that it's dispensable. Well, we don't think it is
and I don't think the employers think it is because I think they see the clear
value of it. But more than that, it does make us a better, stronger society to
have these values. I mean, politics and national life is about values, it's not
just about the Budget balance, it's not just about the tax system, it's about
values. And you've got to make a determined effort when you've got
we've now international ised this country, you've got international price
earnings ratios being attached to our stocks, you've had, you know, great
increments in wealth. I mean, twelve years ago, when I first became
Treasurer, the all ordinaries index, I think from memory, was 451 that's
over 2,000 today. That's over a four-fold increase in real wealth for the
people holding stocks in this country, and you will see that. The
international isation of the place means that there is going to be more
wealth here, and its distribution will often be uneven. That's not to say that
we should comply in any induced unevenness. Rather, we should resist it
and try and bring up the people at the bottom of the queue. And whether
they come up via Working Nation or the transfer system, or support for low
income families, or the singular commitment to employment, I mean,
whatever it is of those we choose or choose together, these are all things
that a good society does in the name of equity, decency and justice. And
that's where Working Nation came from it came from those concepts.
But, like a lot of things the Government has done, we are now seeking to
sort of push the boundaries out further and what we are seeing here today
is really a quite revolutionary change to the way the labour market works 
TEL: 4. May. 3b 2: u UrINQ -U
4
and you've already seen, you know, the Job Compact come into place, the
Youth Training Initiatives are up and running, the Nation-alTraining Wage
has been implemented, the Australian Student Traineeship Foundation,
NETTFORCE, and now we are looking at the launch of the Employment
Services Regulatory Authority, with its contracted Case Management
launch. And here, we are seeing another important innovation in the way
the Australian rabour market works, because we are now seeking with the
basis of case management that close in, personalised attention and care
which we are able to give people. We are able, in that context, to start to
say " well, maybe we ought to be giving people a choice about who
manages them", and try and encourage some competition into the system
that manages them, so that there isn't just one monolith servicing them,
though the monolith that has done its very best under strained conditions
that's the CES but to open it out. Essentially, ESRA was an idea that
Simon ( Crean) and I dreamed up, and it came from the Austel model in
telecommunications. And that is, that we had Austel running a market
between Optus, Telecom and the resellers of telecommunications services.
And so what we sought to do with Austel was to create a private market,
but with the market tipped in favour of the duopolists in this country which
was Optus and the resellers, away from the former monopolists, Telecom.
In the same way, the same concept is here with ESRA that is, we will have
a body sitting over this labour market seeking to create a proper market in
training management, in case management and opportunity, and in the
labour market, and the delivery of labour market programs in such a way
that we will not simply see some monolith, and at the same time, involving
private sector companies. And we heard Sue's contribution earlier from
Drake amongst others that will be here, like, of course, the Brotherhood of
St Laurence and similar bodies we will see them proliferate right across
the country, and we will see these skills come up. We will see the skills
base of case managers come up, we will be able then to see people
moving between organisations, and we will develop truly an industry in
this particular field. Another good thing about it is that there is one good
thing about the Tories -they can always rip away at a labour market
program, but it is very hard to start tearing away at these things, once they
start being built up. One of the things you have always got to do when you
think about social reform in Australia is to make it Tory-proof you have
always got to Tory-proof them. It's not just do them, but you have got to
hermetically seal them so they can't get their nasty little right-wing
fingernails under them and tear them away. And this is another thing that I
think matters in this that is, that we can actually not simply develop it, but
we can, in the doing of it, get a lot of acceptance for it.
I think one of the things that Simon ( Crean) and I would like to see happen
here is that as we see this system continuing to sophisticate itself that
the case managers themselves can start to create their own labour market
programs. And that we might be able to relate to organisations and case
managers in a way where we fund those, built in a way which is wholly
different to the way we do it today. And that is one of the things that one 
TEL' y.
would hope to see come a much more flexible, efficient and effective
labour market program. Now, I was delighted when Joan told me that we
hava nlready got 271 private bvie accredited I think contracted is
probably the right term private and community organisations. Two
hundred and seventy one, who between them will help 100,000 job
seekers. A significant number of these accredited contracted case
managers specialise in services to clients with particular needs such as
youth, people with disabilities, mature-aged unemployed people, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, people of non-English speaking
backgrounds, and ex-offenders etc. And I think that we are talking now
already about 600 outlets around the country. So, already we are starting
to see the thing blossom and as you know, the fact that Joan is also on
NETTFORCE means we can make that linkage to the companies and to the
industrial sectors. Because I think one of the great possibilities in case
management in Australia is that we actually get sectors like the metals
industry and the metal industry employers with the metal industry unions
talking about taking up case management themselves, so that when some
firm in that industry requires somebody, there is a much easier matching
process, and that there is, if you like, people tending to gravitate towards it
for jobs in that particular industry. We start to get some segmentation in
the industry. I think the notion is of a training company, and I think we are
seeing this in a sort of NETTFORCE concept arising there. So, I think that
is going to be an important change too, So, the whole case management
notion providing private sector as well as government involvement needs
to be applauded and further promoted.
Can I just say a few words here about the CES much maligned, but it has
done a terrific job over the years, under difficult circumstances, often with a
system a weight of unemployment which it was never really designed to
manage. But, at the same time, managed it well, and now referring people
to private case managers. It's a cultural change there, and I know that we
in the Government are very proud of the changes which have been taking
place in the CES in its capacities, and let me just take this opportunity to
record our appreciation of that organisation.
I would like to also take the chance while I am here of just complimenting
Simon on the job he has done with Working Nation it has been a mighty
job a mighty job. It is really the hard tack of public policy itfs one thing
announcing it, designing it and announcing it and getting it out, it's another
thing making it work. Putting all the bits together, seeing that they fit
logically, trying to get their efficiencies up, get them moving together it's a
tremendous task, and I have got many reasons to feel proud of this
Cabinet, and proud of the Government, but none more so than Working
Nation, and the job that Simon has been able to do with all of you who are
involved with these programs. I mean, it's a great tribute to the sort of
system of government and the society we have that we can take something
like this on, and get it up quickly and get it running effectively you can just
imagine the sort of debate you would have in the United States with a
program like this, well, you wouldn't have a program like this in the United
A tit~ S: 01 No. 00OU~ U 
TEL: 4 . IMd~* Z'-
6
States, or in other parts of the world. And I do hope that what we have
done here in Working Nation is going to be a bit of a trail-blazer in the
OECD countries as something better in terms of how the long-term
unemployed can be brought into the labour market, and to have their share
of the nations bounty, their share of the opportunities, their share of the joy,
their share of the happiness, because they are entitled to it as much as any
of the rest of us are.
So, could I perhaps conclude by thanking Joan sincerely for taking the
job. She is a believer in community organisations you have got to say
that for her. And this is right up her alley, this one, because this is
community action at work in the very best sense of that phrase. That is,
going out there, and getting these linkages to community organisations in
the welfare sector, and other community and private organisations, and
getting that mix I think Joan's experience in government, and her own
experience in community activity, almost uniquely places her with ESRA to
see it really come good. And so I thank her most sincerely for that. I would
like to finalise by expressing my appreciation to everybody who has
enthusiastically taken Working Nation up who have seen it as an
opportunity, who have been of good spirit and good heart, and who have
got in to see what they can do, and many of those organisations are
represented here today, and many people who have done that are here
today they are too numerous to thank, but I sincerely thank you all,
because Governments can do some things, but without you, they don't
happen. Particularly in this area, and I think the fact that you have
embraced these programs holds out such great promise to people who are
disadvantaged and unemployed people we have heard from a couple of
them today, and you can just see this whole question about one's place in
society, one's esteem for oneself, how important it is to advance to a job.
and to make one's way in life. That can only come when one loses that
esteem through being rejected by society or seemingly by being
unemployed for a long period of time, or unemployed at all, indeed, and
then to be supported I think these are things which mean that people can
rise and their esteem can rise, and their whole sense of themselves can
change and they can soon become much more effective take a much
more effective place in our country and our society. The main thing is, with
all these things, as I said earlier good societies can do more than one
thing at a time, and good governments can do more than one thing at a
time we can attend to the Budget deficit, and the Current Account Deficit,
while at the same time we look after the unemployed. And not only is it
something we can do, it is something we should do. And we should
always reject the doom-sayers who, in the end, have basically a caraway
seed for a heart there is a very small thing ticking in the chest, which,
really, is all about being essentially when you get down to it all, when
you rub all the phrasing and all the polish of it, it's just a bit of meanspiritedness.
We are all, I hope, much bigger than that. Thank you indeed.
ends. 



Th
( I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
VE DAY AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS COMMEMORATIVE CEREMONY,
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, CANBERRA, 8 MAY 1995
It was my privilege to launch the Australia Remembers celebrations last year
and I took the opportunity to say that I hoped all Australians would be
touched in some way by the commemoration. The program today has
certainly touched all of us, and no doubt similar events being staged across
the country this year are having similar effects on millions of Australians
including, I hope, millions of Australian children.
Here, and wherever we commemorate the service and sacrifice of Australians
in war, we at once pay tribute to generations past and remind ourselves that
our duty is as they saw theirs to the next generation, to the future of
Australia. Major General James and my colleague, Mr Sciacca, paid eloquent tribute to
the contribution Australia's servicemen and women made in the European
theatre during World War 11. More than nine and a half thousand Australians
died there: young Australians, men and women with the best part of their
lives still ahead of them.
They went to Europe as their parents' generation had gone before them and,
perhaps, under fewer illusions about the realities of war.
We know why they went. We know because Australians decided long ago
that they would not forget those who made the supreme sacrifice, and that
they would pass on to future generations of Australians the message that
sacrifice contains.
We know because our parents and our teachers told us, because we
attended ceremonies every 25 April.
We learned that these men and women had a notion of duty they believed
that so long as they wanted freedom and democracy, and loved Australia and
believed in its future, they were obliged to defend them and even lay down
their lives. 
It is an example we must keep alive for our children.
Our young men and women should know that Australians like themselves
believed so deeply in their country they were prepared to die for it. That
Australians like themselves crossed the world and joined forces with men and
women from many other countries to defend freedom against tyranny.
They should also know what we mean when we talk about courage and
perseverance and the immeasurable value of sticking together in hardship
and they will know it when they learn about these Australians.
It is important that they know these events occurred, that they engulfed the
whole world. They should know and we should remember today that vast
numbers of Allied servicemen perished in the war; that millions from what was
then the Soviet Union, millions of innocent civilians, millions in the
concentration camps, perished. They should know about and we must
remember the Holocaust.
They should know that, as people thronged in city squares to rejoice in the
victory, the horrors of Auschwitz were just being revealed. That as liberation
was being celebrated in one half of Europe, totalitarian rule was being
imposed in the other. And that on the battlefields and in the prison camps of
Asia there were three more months to be endured.
In knowing these things we hope that they will never forget that freedom and
democracy are hard-won and must be defended. That peace is the greatest
gift any generation can receive, and should never be taken for granted. They
should know that these things are to be cherished.
Yet it is no less important to see the message in the jubilation of fifty years
ago. What we see in those images is humanity triumphant. We see men and
women celebrating the victory of good over evil in the battle they have
fought. It is their victory.
Perhaps nothing makes the reasons for fighting the war so clear as their
happiness. For many thousands of Australians VE Day meant beginning their lives again.
It meant being reunited with their families. It meant going back to their farms
and factories and offices and restarting their lives.
Someone once said of the Americans of that time that they were an heroic
generation they refused to be broken by the Great Depression, they fought
the war and then they built a great country. Without a doubt, the same can
be said about that generation of Australians. They went about re-building
their lives with confidence and purpose and their efforts gave rise to a period
of sustained national development. 
Among the builders were many thousands who had endured the war in their
own countries and left their shattered lives and devastated homes to start
new lives in Australia.
I do not think we should let this day pass without reminding ourselves of how
much they have given Australia; how much we have gained by being open to
the world, generous towards those who have come here to escape
oppression and hardship, and tolerant of cultural differences.
In building new lives here they enriched us all. That is one of the great
lessons of the fifty years which have passed since the war ended, and one
that we should not forget.
Today we pay tribute to a generation whose faith was profound: not just
among those who served in the armed forces, but those who kept up the fight
at home and all those who carried the vigour with which they defended
Australia in war into building Australia in peace. Through this ceremony and
through all the commemorative events this year we hope to sustain their faith
in our own lives.
And I believe it does sustain us. This generation of Australians have
engineered great changes in their country and its relationship with the region
and the rest of the world.
They have coped with change imposed upon them global change of
unprecedented dimensions at unprecedented speed. They have adapted
perhaps as no previous generation of Australians has had to. And they are
building a country which is stronger, more confident of its place in the world,
and more able to play a creative role for peace and democracy than ever
before.
To continue to do this is to continue to honour those whose lives we
remember today.
It is to say in ways which our children will understand why the war was fought.
If we do that, in future we will be able to say that on the 50th anniversary of
the end of World War II Australia truly remembered. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
POST-BUDGET ADDRESS TO THE COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB,
MELBOURNE, 12 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It's great to be back with Collingwood again good ci' Collingwood forever.
They know how to play the game, and they do, and there's a thing about
Collingwood two things: commitment and loyalty. That's what I always
think when I think of Collingwood, I always think of commitment and
loyalty, and it is the great underdog club. And I always say, in the political
context, what's the best position in the race to be well, this is racing
parlance, not football parlance but one out and one back. One out and
one back not quite in front, but one out and one back, and make a rails
run at the death. And that's what you are doing at the moment Alan, I know
that. He's a cunning fellow, that Alan he's got a strategy here, and that's
the pendulum it's the same in politics when that pendulum swings up,
you get all that tear back, and then of course, we will see a great round of
Collingwood victories in the latter part of the season. Anyway, I hope I'm
there to see a couple of them And let's, at least, mark today as perhaps
one of those days. I think it's been a good week for the country, and if it's a
good week for the country, then it's a good week for Collingwood. And, so
let's mark this day as a day where maybe the pendulum has reached the
top of the swing.
Well, I'm here to talk about the Budget, and I know people think Budgets
are pretty dry things I suppose they are, but they do get your blood racing
on occasions. And this one has got John Howard's blood racing. Poor little
Johnny was in there last night doing his best, gesticulating and carrying on,
but they were a very glum little side behind him when they left. It was very
interesting, the House of Representatives: it has this it's a bit like a
football match the mood moves up and down the field. And always in the
high professionalism of politics the same as football you know when you
doing well, you know when you have been hurt I mean, you might walk
straight, but you know it's hurting like hell and you know when you have IN 
hurt the other guy. And they were a little hurt, little bunch this week, I can
tell you. And ours were a little happy little bunch. So, there's a bit of
something going on there in Australian politics.
But let me tell you some things about the Budget, because it is important to
all of us, as it is important to where we are in our economic history, and the
cycle, because Australia is really in a great position we are well-placed
today. We're now an open, externally oriented competitive country. We
are living near the fastest rowing markets in the world for the first time in
our history I mean, the markets for us, traditionally, were in Europe and
North America. They are now right on our doorstep here in Asia. We are
so competitive today we are 40% more competitive than in 1983. And
when you hear a number like that, you think " that's 4% or 14%" but it is
That's 40% more competitive that's the exchange rate, wages and
inflation. 40% more competitive since 1983, and that is what is driving the
exports they have grown by 50% in the last 6 or 7 years and it's what is
producing that competitiveness is producing the natural productivity
coming out of the pores of the economy, because we now have a
contestable market. In the days of high tariffs, when we had business
which didn't need to operate competitively to make a quid, but rather just
live behind the tariff wall as that went down, the natural productivity of a
business of a management of a business the tone improved. And we
have now got enterprise bargaining. And as a consequence, we are now
getting productivity related wage bargains in 60-odd% of the Federal Award
area. And so we have produced in Australia through import competition,
and by competition among import competers and non-import competers
we have now produced a contestable economy, or a contested economy.
And that is what is now naturally producing the low inflation.
In other words, if you get the structure right tariffs, competition policy
which we are doing with Hilmer, a completely open financial market, a much
more flexible labour market all of these things produce a natural
contestability which gives you natural increments to productivity and low
inflation. So that's the sort of economy we have got today. We could have
only dreamt about that sort of economy 10 years ago. So, here we are we
are in this great island continent, we are at the foot of the greatest markets
in the world, and we are so competitive, you could almost sell anything from
Australia these days. So, the aim was in this Budget to keep that going.
To keep the growth going. Now, you know in this country it has been the
Government's policy to run a pro-growth strategy. And you might say ' Well,
all Governments run a pro-growth strategy, don't they?". But, the answer
is, they don't. If you go through Western Europe, or most of North America,
the growth number drops out of the system it's not an objective, it's a
residual. In other words, all the bits and pieces go into the machine, and
get thrown around, and maybe 2% GDP drops out the back, or 1 if we
were living in Europe, it would be 1 if you were living in Japan, it would
be but if you lived in Australia last year, it was And the year
before that, and the year before that 4.25%. And the year to
September, that growth became 6.5% but 6.5% was just a bit too strong 
for us. So the Government moved interest rates up on 3 occasions late last
year to try and shave it off and slow if back to a sustainable rate. And in
the Budget forecast, we have got that sustainable rate of 3.75% for this
year. So what we needed to do then, was to look at the medium-term,
because we have now, basically, broken the back of inflation we have got
high rates of growth, we have had phenomenal rates of employment
growth, we have had 640,000 new jobs since the election. It's the fastest
decline in unemployment since we have been keeping records about the
labour market. So we have got employment we had 90,000 job growth for
the month announced yesterday. Our problem remains the current
account deficit. The one constraint on us really growing the place faster is
the current account deficit, and our reliance on overseas savings and
overseas debt.
Let me say a few things about this, because this is what the Budget is
principally aimed at it's not really aimed at slowing demands this year,
because the interest rate adjustments of last year have effectively done
that. So, the Budget is aimed at that medium-term, late 90s 2000 period
of pulling the current account deficit back so we can go on with faster rates
of growth, but the demand not spilling into imports. More of it being
satisfied by a bigger investment program here.
Now, let me just give you a little picture about the current account. In the
1 960s and 1970s, we always ran a current account deficit of about 2.5% of
GOP, so we had no debt. And the reason for that is we always had capital
inflow, private financial investment from abroad, equal to about 2.5% of
GOP per year. So, we are running a current account deficit of 2 and a half
percent and we picked up 2.5% capital inflow, so we end up with no debt.
What happened in the 1970' s and the 1980' s our savings went down quite
sharply, that's household savings and they went down sharply because of
over a decade of high inflation. See, once you put 10% inflation on the
people for over a decade, you can't kid them that there's any value in
sticking money away for savings because if there's 10% inflation and 4%
real rate of interest they're picking up 14% there being taxed on the 14 so
in reality they are being taxed on inflation and their real interest rate was
completely gone. So, we inculcated in a whole generation of Australians:
buy a flat, buy an apartment, buy a house, buy a beachhouse, buy anything
but don't basically save and then of course we had access to debt, to
housing very high level of home ownership, cars, software, whitegoods
etc and as a consequence our household savings declined. It's a very hard
thing to change the savings propensity that is the willingness or wish of a
nation to save. You can change it but low inflation we have got now will
change it, but how long we have had low inflation for three years, how
many more years before people get the message that savings are basically
worthwhile again and many years probably and the thing is we can't wait
that long so one of the ways we get that adjustment is through the budget
and the other ways government sought to get the adjustment is through
superannuation, let me just explain what's happened with the current
account. As I said to you in the 60' s and 70' s it ran at about 2% of GOP, it 
now runs on average around 4 and a half percent of GOP so we have
picked up 2 and a half percent of GDP on the current account that we
basically can't afford and we have been doing that that's been adding to
our national debt. We have got to then tailor it back to under three percent
to allow us to be sustainable and consistently on a very long term and
consistent basis.
So, we have to find essentially our problems is 2 percentage points of
GOP. Now this year GOP is about 500 billion, that's the total economy, five
hundred billion gross domestic product. Two percent of it is about ten
billion, ten thousand million, so our problem is ten thousand million paucity
of savings. What we did in the budget was take the budget on Tuesday
night to take last years deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP to a surplus of .7 so
you can say we are three-point six, in round figures call it four percent we
have made a four percentage point of GOP change to the budget balance.
The other thing we did in the budget on Tuesday night is we extended the
Government's award superannuation scheme from the six percentage
points that it is now under the superannuation guarantee charge which will
then rise to nine by the Year 2002 and what we have introduced on
Tuesday night were two elements: we have asked employees to put away
three percent of their wages and if they put three percent away we will
match it with three percent from the One Nation tax cuts and tip them both
into their personal superannuation account. On Tuesday night we added
another six percentage points of wages and savings to the system so
that's six on top of nine so as a consequence when the system gets to
maturity which will be now 2002 which is not far away seven years away
every Australian person will have superannuation contributions of
which is enormous change, it is the largest most comprehensive private
savings plan the country has every had. This is what it'll do to saving.
At the moment we have got 186 billion in super funds, by the year 2020 we
will have 2000 billion in super fund or two trillion. And you might have
noticed on the front page of The Financial Review this week " A 2tr
Bonanza" that's the first time I've seen this expression ' TR' enter the
Australian lexicon. Two trillion, two thousand billion, and our national debt
is one hundred and sixty billion at the moment so were we to get there we
would have thirty times the size of our national debt sitting in
superannuation funds assets. But let me put it in terms of GOP because
that's how I put the rest in so we are comparing apples with apples the
superannuation change is worth 4 percentage points of GOP, it will add
four percentage points of GOP as a proportion of GDP. That's by 2020 but
2020 if still twenty five years away, if we look at it by 2000, we're adding 2
percent so on the budget we've done four and we have done two on super.
So on Tuesday night we put in a six percentage point of GOP savings fix to
meet a two percentage point problem on the current account. Now you say
" that's going to do the trick isn't Well, it will but what we want is more
investment so to keep that growth up and to keep the jobs up and to keep
the strength up we need even more capital stock and more investment then
we have now. So, that two percentage point will get added to maybe by 
one, might even be one and a half, so we won't just have a two percentage
point problem we will have a sort of three percentage point problem but we
have still got a six percentage point fix, and even if our economists say oh
well in the budget change some of its cyclical in better times the budget
rolls back into surplus and bad times it drops out, all right, we will give them
the benefit of the doubt, we'll knock two of the four out, and say two of it's
long term and two of its cyclical so we have a solid two on the budget and a
solid two on superannuation in other words we've got an undeniable four
percentage points change on savings on Tuesday night to meet,
essentially, a two to three percentage point problem. So that's how central
and important last Tuesday night's budget was.
And what it will do is give us growth through the balance of the 90' s with
low inflation to get to the Government's target of five percent unemployment
by the year 2000. Now normally we could'nt get to five percent because as
much as we tried in the 80' s we couldn't get below six because we couldn't
get the people trained the long term unemployed trained to get back into
work so even if we had all the job growth in the world we couldn't get
below six because we couldn't find the people to take the jobs. We put that
fix in last year with Working Nation. With Working Nation, we're now casemanaging
the long term unemployed and the happy news is that this year
in the last twelve months 102 thousand of the long term unemployed went
back into jobs, unemployed longer than twelve months or more, so as the
economy grows and we take up all the school leavers, the natural entrants
to the workforce, migrants and we get down to that core pool of long term
unemployment where we have, even with our best endeavours, six to seven
percent unemployment couldn't do any better, this time we are going to
reach right into that number through Working Nation and we will a five
percent unemployment target is well within our range, now in OECD terms
there will be no country in the world get within cooee of us. Not within
cooee of us.
I was in Germany recently and I went to the Province of the state of Lower
Saxony for the CeBIT Fair where we had the largest international
electronics fair in the world and we were the guest country the partner
country and we had two hundred Australian companies exhibiting there
and one had to be very proud of seeing it there but I had the pleasure
while I was there of meeting the Premier of Lower Saxony. Lower Saxony
is the home of Volkswagen that's where the Wolfsburg is the capital of the
Volkswagon empire, and the whole of the state of Lower Saxony runs
around Volkswagons and the Premier said to me, " Mr Keating you know,
there is a great community spirit here in Lower Saxony" and I said " well,
that's wonderful to have that, you know, to get that sort of sense of
commitment". He said " Yes we've all agreed, we're working a four day
week. Very serious, they are working a four day week", he said " because
we've got to put people off at Wolfsburg to get the productivity up to keep
the cars competitive with the Japanese and everybody else". 
Yet in this country, in the last year, we've had 4 per cent of employment
growth. We basically got about one for one, for every 1 percentage point of
GDP, we get about 1 percentage point of employment growth so if we are
growing at about 4 per cent in GDP, we generally pick up about 4 per cent of
employment growth. He said, look, if we were growing at 4 per cent here,
we'd be lucky to pick up 1.5 per cent of employment growth. But if the labour
market program is not there, the training isn't there, and they also carry
enormous, enormous levies on employment which we don't have here. So,
when you look at us compared to Germany, say, and look at our experience,
we're growing around 4 per cent a year and we've got employment growth
running between 3 and 4 per cent, and it means that this country can get
within cooee of a target of 5 per cent unemployment. But the one
constraining element is the current account deficit and our debt. And that's
what the Government had to address the other night. Now, let me say apart
from the quality of the savings change, just let me tell you how it's going to
affect things beneficially. Last year, we had a bond selling program that's
covering the Budget deficit and maturing debt that's old bonds being
replaced and the Budget deficit being added on. Last year's bond selling
program was $ 21 billion. This year's bond selling program is $ 6 billion. So,
Tuesday night we took a $ 15 billion load off interest rates, and if there's going
to be fewer bonds, what happens? The price of bonds goes up. And if the
price goes up, the yield comes down. That's why the long term bond rate fell
by 1 per cent over the last ten days because of that great change in the bond
selling program. So, the Budget was a really important change that came
right when the country needed it. But let me tell you a couple of other things
about superannuation and we've done this through the Accord with the trade
unions Bill Kelty and I started on this long road back in 1985-86 when we
put the first 3 per cent scheme in. Then, the ACTU and the Government
moved it up to 5 per cent in the latter part of 1980s. In 1991 we put in the
Superannuation Guarantee Charge we put it up then to 9 per cent by the
year 2002, employer contributions 9 per cent paid in lieu of cash. We're now
at 6 per cent on 1 July, that's 7 per cent in two years' time, then 5, then 9 per
cent. But 9 per cent was not a mature contribution, you couldn't really get the
kind of living standard at the time that we really wanted people to have.
Remembering that when my generation, the baby-boomers, are 65 there'll be
half as many again retired aged people then as there are today and when our
children retire, twice as many retired aged people as there are today, and it
would put enormous pressure on the Budget and those that work. In other
words, we'd be asking those in work to carry this massive population of
people who have retired. So, we saw this coming ten years ago and started
the plan for it. As a consequence, on Tuesday night, under the Accord, we've
agreed that employees will put in 3 per cent and the Government will match it
with the tax cuts, paid as superannuation to take it to 6 per cent, and then
added on to the 9 per cent. It chops out at twice average weekly earnings, it
chops out at about $ 60,000 odd and then falls away.
But, anybody who is already making a 3 per cent contribution will get the
three per cent tax cut whether they are above these figures or they are not.
That is, between one and two times average weekly earnings anybody who is 
now contributing will get the value of the tax cut. They won't get it over twice
average weekly earnings.
But, let me tell you now, I'll give you the punch line, what it all means. It
means this, that a person on average weekly earnings that is $ 33,000 will
end up at the end of their working lives with a lump sum of $ 470,000 in
today's dollars. And they will have an annual annuity of $ 30,000. If we take
somebody on twice average weekly earnings, they will end up with a lump
sum of $ 670,000 and they will have a pension of $ 42,000. In other words, if
you take the person on average weekly earnings, they will have a pension, an
annuity of twice the value of the current pension. You might say well, look,
that is good, that is at the end of their working life and that is 30 years from
now, but let's take perhaps an even more relevant example, someone who is
in their 30s now, a couple in their 30s. By the time they retire, they will be
getting three quarters more than they were getting under the pension and
when their children retire they will be getting 100 per cent than under the
pension. So, this is a great change and as I said it puts away by 2020 $ 2000 billion in
national savings. Now, you see, you can understand why I get black about
John Howard. I mean, as if that team would have the imagination or the wit or
the common sense or the foresight or the courage to do anything like this.
They won't even talk to unions much less get you can imagine them
wandering up to the union movement saying we want you to put 15 per cent
of your income away as savings. They say ' oh yeah, sure, sure. Don't take it
as cash, take it as savings, oh sure'. Because you don't get respect and
regard and you can't build a relationship from people that you don't want to
speak to. They don't want to speak to the work force. It is a slight defect in
their economic policy they don't want to talk to the workforce and they said
' oh yes, you got inflation down to 2 per cent because you had a recession'.
John Howard had a deeper recession, do you know what inflation was the
year after the recession? 10.5 per cent. We had a recession and we came
out of it with inflation actually at 1 per cent, on average over the last three
years it has been 2 per cent and that was because of the tax cuts of the
1980s. As people went through that wage restraint in the boom of the late
1980s we said take 6.5 per cent for wages and not 15 or 16 per cent, like you
did when Howard was around, and we will give you tax cuts. And, those tax
cuts of 1988/ 89 saved Australia's inflation rate and we were able to go into
the recession at about 4 per cent inflation and come out at 2 per cent.
In other words that wage trade off, bringing down fiscal policy in the I1980s
has made all that possible. Now, John Howard let the cat out of the bag last
night in a speech which was free of policy. He had a great opportunity to say
within a year of an election and a Budget reply where he stood, and what he
was about, but John is going to run on Liberal party advertising gumph on
basically poll driven stuff and he thinks that the rest of you are silly enough to
take that gullible rubbish until polling day and see him take the job he thinks
was also due to him. But, what he did say was this, he said ' a Coalition
government would put a lid on the increases on superannuation contributions 
and rely on tax incentives for savings'. Well, we had him rely on tax
incentives for superannuation all the way through the 1 960s and 1 970s and
by 1983 only 40 per cent of people had superannuation and today it is 90 per
cent. So, here we are, here is the Labor party setting up the scheme these
characters couldn't even dream about, much less establish and he said ' no,
no, I know you are going to put away $ 2000 billion, I know people are going
to retire on $ 30,000 a year or $ 45,000 a year, I know the average person is
going to pick up a lump sum of half a million, but we are not having it. Not
having it'. Not having it because it is not ideologically right. If it is not done
by tax incentives, in other words if it is not done to the top end, you see John
wanted a scheme where in the last three years, the executives, remember the
thing called superannuation before we put on the reasonable benefits limits
were paid as a multiple of your final average salary over three years. So, the
executives would end up with $ 3 million, $ 3 million, $ 3 million and so you
would get seven times three and by the time you got your tax, you walked out
with your $ 15 million.
That is what they thought the superannuation scheme was about and that is
how it worked, it basically worked for people in the top end of business and in
some parts of the public sector. But, the great bulk of the Australian people
were not in it. Now, everybody will be in it and this is most particularly
skewed to the low paid and particularly to women in part time work. Because
part time people get a great benefit here. We pay them the $ 1000 tax cut
even if, let's take someone on $ 10,000 a year working part time. A woman
working in retail or clothing part time or something like that. Three per cent of
$ 10,000 is $ 300. They put away $ 300 and we put away $ 300. But we will
actually give them $ 1000, so if they want to save another $ 700 we will
actually give them $ 1000. So, that person could put not just their 3 per cent
away, but put another $ 700 away a year and make it a $ 1000, we will make it
$ 2000 $ 2000 a year over 30 years, $ 60,000, compounding let's say
$ 150,000 so, that person on $ 10,000 just as a result of Tuesday night's
policies could put a nest egg of $ 150,000 together. And they would have no
chance. These are people at the bottom end of the wage market.
So, these are the sort of policies that you get from a sensible, real
government. A government that actually has a touch with the community and
does the things that need to be done. Now, as a consequence of all of this I
think, I can say to you confidently that we are going to see growth continue
over the next three years, we have taken enormous pressure off interest
rates, we have successfully slowed the economy and we now want to see it
just come back to a nice sustainable level. But, importantly, we have got that
medium term current account fix in there by the budget deficit swinging back
into surplus on the one hand and superannuation on the other. And, that is
why our friends in the Liberal party were flat footed on Tuesday night. That is
why John Howard had a silly giggle at the table and that smile glued on. That
is why last night they were sitting up there trying to urge him on despite the
fact he had no framework to address the government's policies and it is why
the government won the 1993 election and why we will win the next one. 
So, I am glad you came today so I could tell you these things, so you could
get on us early. We were long odds, but we are shortening, a bit like
Collingwood long odds, but shortening get on to us now and get a tip right
from the horse's mouth. But, more particularly, I am pleased you have come
along to understand what, in fact, we are doing. It is not just a jumble of
numbers or an exercise in numerology or accounting, but there is a strategy
lying behind it because if we can lift our savings, we can lift our investment. If
we lift our investment, we lift our employment and if we end up with 5 per cent
unemployment or less, this will be one of the most united, cohesive and much
happier societies than most around the world and that is the Australia we all
know. The egalitarian Australia where the right to a fair go and a fair go
starts with a job and being in the society and not in an underclass. That is
what is going to keep Australia together. That's what is going to mean that
we are not going to have great extremes between the rich and the poor and it
will mean that you can live in this country without a barbed wire fence around
your house or a set of alarms or all the other things that people have got to
do in most other countries. And why this will remain a nicer country than, I
think, a lot of similar countries because government policy for over decade
has been about inclusion. Putting everybody in and looking after it from the
longest term unemployed to the people running the great public companies,
we in a sense, have tried to govern for all in a progrowth economy with low
inflation and now with higher savings.
Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
SUNBURY CAMPUS, VICTORIA, 12 MAY 1995
** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*
I'm very pleased to be invited to open the Sunbury Campus of the Victorian University
of Technology. It's a beautifiil campus, and a fine example of the emerging integration
of post-compulsory education.
The Sunbury Campus is proof of the potential which exists when the two essential
elements of tertiary education, TAFE and universities, are linked.
It is a natural development stemming fr~ om the reforms to post-compulsory education
initiated by John Dawkins in 1988.
New institutions like Sunbury been made possible by the increased revenue flowing
into higher education from the establishment of the fairest and most innovative
financing mechanism in the world, the Higher Education Contribution Scheme.
Since the education reforms in 1988, Australian post-compulsory education has
undergone extraordinary changes and expansion.
The previous separation of TAFE and higher education, which restricted the access of
the less advantaged to many forms of skills development, is now being broken down.
It is becomidng recognised that the distinctions between vocational and academic
education are essentially arbitrary and a reflection of history and inertia.
TAFE is no longer seen as the poor and distant cousin of tbe university system, and
propitious arrangements for credit transfer which no-one foresaw are now emerging.
And it is not only here: two months ago I visited the University of Southern
Queensland which has developed close and imaginative links with NSW TAFE.
Sunbury is going in exactly the right direction. We want a more complementary and
united formal skills development program and that is what Sunbury is doing.
The students who derive the advantages of Sunbury's innovative educational reform
can, in important ways, trace their good fortune to HECS. 
H-ECS was introduced in 1989 to a cacophony of student complaints. We were told
that: free education is a right; HECS will restrict the access of the poor to higher
education; higher education helps all society and thus should be fully paid for by the
Government; and that women will be discouraged from enrolling.
I want to spend a minute or two addressing some of these issues.
There is no such thing, of course, as " free" education somebody has to pay. In
systems with no charges those somebodies are all taxpayers.
This is a pretty important point: a " free" higher education system is one paid for by the
taxes of all, the majority of whom haven't had the privilege of a university education.
Ask yourself if you think that is a fair thing.
The most common complaint was that if we asked students to pay for some part of
their higher education, the poor would be deterred even if they didn't have to pay
until they were earning at least the average income. This most common argument was
in fact the hardest to believe, simply because HECS was designed to insure that
students paid nothing when they couldn't afford to.
Nevertheless, the Government has kept an eye on the disadvantaged. And there have
been several independent studies of this issue.
The evidence that HECS deters the disadvantaged is a bit lie a policy statement from
my opponents: the more you look, the less you see.
The most recent study, published in the Current Affairs Bulletin in January 1995, puts
it this way: introduction of HECS does not seem to have had any discernible
effects on the composition of the student body".
But a major effect of HECS has been to allow the system to grow at an extraordinary
rate since 1989, and this has unquestionably helped the disadvantaged by creating more
places. From 1988 to 1993, for example, the number of higher education students
from the poorest of backgrounds has grown by around 30 per cent.
igher education generally has expanded at a similar pace, with one of the major
reasons being that all of the HECS revenue has been used for this purpose for higher
education, as the Government promised. The increase in total outlays on higher
education of about $ 3 billion since 1990 has been underwritten to the tune of about
billion from HECS repayments.
This means that 50 per cent of the new places are here because of HECS revenue; that
up to 100,000 of today's students more than likely would have been doing something
else probably something far less interesting and beneficial. 
The capital provided for the Sunbury initiative has come from the Commonwealth
through AINTA, the State Goverrnent, and the university. As well, the Victoria
Institute of Technology will receive $ 15. 9m from the Commonwealth as part of the
incorporation of higher education capital funding into institutions' operating grants
over the 1995-97 triennium.
Without HECS, and the support from both ANTA and the Victorian Government,
then, it is much less likely that we would be able to open the Sunbury Campus today.
And is undoubtedly true that, without HECS, there would be far fewer students in
general, and far fewer disadvantaged students in particular.
But is it fair to charge at all when society derives considerable benefits from tertiary
education shouldn't this mean a subsidy? Certainly, education and training beget
technological change, and technological change is the only way in the longer term for
our collective incomes to grow.
Moreover, education and training are a fundamental part of governments' armoury for
breaking the nexus between parental poverty and childrens' access to material and
social gain through skills formation.
For these reasons the HECS charge is only about 23 per cent of the costs of a place,
and not 100 per cent. For these reasons TAPE costs are overwhelmingly met by
governments. Finally, female enrolments have grown relatively quickly since 1988. Women now
outnumber men in our universities HECS hasn't hurt here either.
The case for HECS is overwhelmning. Not charging means allocating scarce resources
provided by all to students who generally come from advantaged backgrounds and
who inevitably get the best and most highly paid jobs. But charging only when former
students are doing well financially ensures there are no barriers.
Now I have to come clean and tell you that HECS does have a problem: the Coalition
is not commnitted to it.
In the last election the Coalition's higher education policy was to allow universities to
charge up-front fees. Sure, they said, they would keep HECS places as they were and
just allow this as a top-up.
But, as sure as night follows day, HECS would have been eroded. Don't forget, the
Opposition is completely committed to drastic cuts in public expenditure. In time,
higher education would have become a very easy target, and up-front fees the norm. 
HECS is spreading throughout the world as the right way to charge for university
attendance ( and variants of it have now been introduced in the US, New Zealand, the
Czech Republic, and it is recommended by the World Bank for developing countries).
HIECS covers the vast majority of post-graduate Australian courses, and an extension
to cover even more has recently been offered as a possibility by the Stanley Committee
Review in the event that fees in this area which only apply to 15 per cent of students
present access problems in the future.
Sadly, the Opposition can't see the beauty of our financing arrangements.
For the next election, then, write this down: the Government guarantees HECS, the
Opposition doesn't. The Governent will not compromise access to post-compulsory
education, the Opposition will. The Government is repulsed by the notion of full upfr~
ont fees for undergraduates, the Opposition embraces them.
It is one of the more bemnusing refrains of contemporary Australian politics, to hear the
Opposition talk about microeconomic reform as a means to greater productivity and a
more internationally competitive economy, while refusing to commit themselves to
equality of opportunity in a sophisticated education and training system.
As if clearing the way for the development of all our human resources and the fullest
expression of all our human potential is not a microeconomic reform of the most
fundamental kind.
Nothing is so basic a prerequisite of our economic future and the future well-being of
Australian society.
It is an integral part of our economic and social policy, our national strategy and
vision, to establish an innovative and integrated formal skills system in Australia.
ANTA and higher education funding, with State government support, together
committed to the expansion of opportunities.
Education and training are the fundamental building blocks for our future prosperity.
Education and training are the answers to sustained and healthy productivity growth.
Education and training are the key to the break-down of entrenched inter-generational
poverty. As I have said before, for both the individual and the nation, education and training
constitute the bridge between the past and the future.
In last Tuesday's Budget the Government set out a revolutionary long-term retirement
plan for the nation. It will guarantee that the incomes of future senior citizens will be
higher and more secure.
The Budget means that there will be considerably greater domestic savings available to
finance our investments. This helps to provide insurance against adverse international
financial fluctuations. 
Australia's revolutionary new means to greater vastly greater national savings is of a
kind with the reform, expansion and equitable financing of post-compulsory education.
Both help to set the country up for the 21st century both are major investments in
our future.
Both represent progressive and imaginative policy: both are motivated by national
need, designed to develop the economic fundamentals, and delivered in ways that
improve the social and material circumstances of those with the least advantages.
Both, I might say, are Labor to the bootstraps.
The Sunbury Campus is an institutional manifestation of Labor's commitment to
educational, social and economic reform. It encapsulates the big idea.
And so it is with great pleasure that I formally open it. It is a great pleasure because I
know that this campus will well serve this community and thousands of tertiary
students from now on into the next century.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT LUNCH HOSTED BY THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF
MANAGEMENT, PERTH, MONDAY, 15 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I very much welcome the opportunity to talk to you as most of you are
members of the Institute and to talk about the economy and the growth
prospects we find ourselves with and the, Budget. Because, this is an
important Budget, they are all important but, I think, this is particularly
important given the fact that we have succeeded in engendering quite a lot of
growth back into the Australian economy and the aim of the game is now to
keep it going at a sustainable rate, with low inflation and so that we can reach
our target which we have set for ourselves of five per cent unemployment by
the year 2000.
That means a lot of investment and a lot of investment means a call on
savings. Part of our problem has been, for many years now, that because in
the 1970s the increase in wages and costs, the broken profits of the period
and the big call by the public sector right through the 1970s dislocated
Australian private investment. We ended up for a decade, with a very low
level of investment and so that hole in the capital stock meant that we have
never ever got beyond the period since where we can grow at more than
about four and a half per cent without the demand spilling into imports. We
can get the economy up and running and it is really quite fast for a western
style economy such as Australia to grow at four and half to five per cent. But
after that, we get a spill into imports, and that is because there is not enough
plant and equipment, not enough strength in the capital stock for us to be
able to grow at five and six per cent and yet satisfy the production here in
Australia. So, the aim of the game from here on is to add to that capital stock. Now, we
have got a big boom in investment in the late 1980s, in the second half of the
1980s, but not all of it went into plant and equipment. Quite a lot of it went
into central business district towers, office towers and other things which
have been sub-economic and it is only now that they are starting to fill up and
(! t 
starting to produce a rate of return. In other words, we carried a big call on
our savings for not a commensurate increase in our productive capacity.
Now, this time it is different. You will notice that plant and equipment
investment in the last year was running at around 26 per cent. In the last
Budget we put the forecast in at 14 per cent. All the pundits said ' oh, too
optimistic, Budget built on all this optimism'. It turned out the rate of growth in
plant and equipment was about twice what we estimated and the economy
grew by even more than the Treasury had estimated. So, we are now seeing
a very large investment phase, but this time it is going to be adding materially
to our productive capacity where as the late 1980s cycle didn't so do.
The aim of the game now is to keep it all going and to keep that additional
capacity coming into our capital stock so as to bring unemployment down to
five per cent. This is a particularly important economic and social objective
because Australia has, I think, one of the opportunities, let me say it has
been one of the few countries in the world, where we have a quite fully
employed society and where we are more cohesive as a society, where our
values are as intact as they can be, that is our egalitarian values, and that we
move along as a society together. That the policies of inclusion matter and
that we regard it as a matter of national importance and national policy that
we have as many people getting a right to a job as possible. These were the
tenets we put together in One Nation in 1992, but indeed they have been the
policies we have followed since 1983. That is, there has always been a
premium on growth and on employment.
This is not true of many countries. In western Europe, employment is the
number that falls out the bottom of the system, it is a residual. And, the
growth is also a number that happens to fall out the bottom of the system.
Government's don't target growth. If you look at the West Australian
economy it is growing even more rapidly than the national economy and that
is because the whole of national economic policy is focussed towards growth
and the states that have had the tariff monkey lifted from their back, that is
Western Australia and Queensland are growing even faster than the national
economy. I was in Lower Saxony, Germany, about a month ago, this was where we had
the CeBIT fair and Australia was the guest country at the largest technology,
electronics fair in the world, and the Premier of Lower Saxony, Premier
Schroeder, met me and he was saying, we were having a talk about his
economy. He said ' look, we have got tremendous community spirit in Lower
Saxony. Everybody puts their shoulder to the wheel, it is a community effort.'
He said ' we are facing big problems because the main industry of the State is
Volkswagon at Wolfsburg and because of the continuing productivity of the
motor industry we are getting more output for fewer people. So, we have all
decided to work a four day week, the whole of the State is working a four day
week.' I said to him ' but, why don't they pick up other jobs, I know you
employment growth isn't what ours is, but isn't there enough?' He said ' well,
we have only got, basically, three quarters of one per cent employment 
growth'. Now, in the last year in Australia we have had 4.2 per cent
employment growth. We have had four to five times as much and that is why
we have actually got a chance now. We have seen unemployment come
down from 10.5 per cent to just over 8 per cent last week and we are
forecasting 8 this year, but we want to get to five per cent by the year 2000.
That will mean that this country is stronger, socially it will be much stronger
and, of course, there will be much greater levels of wealth. But you all know
in this room, that employment comes from investment and investment comes
from a set of variable which include profits, return on capital, the level of the
inflation rate, the competitiveness of the exchange rate, it comes from all
these things and it comes from national savings. The central point of last
Tuesday's night Budget was to improve and augment national savings.
When I first started speaking to you I talked about that 1970s problem of a
dislocation of private investment. What happened in the 1970s is the public
sector spending at the Commonwealth level went out from 23 per cent to
about 27 per cent under the Whitlam government and they went from 27 per
cent to 30 per cent under Malcolm Fraser and John Howard. When I became
Treasurer in 1983 Commonwealth Government spending was 30.5 per cent
of GDP and the year I resigned the Treasury it was at 23.5 per cent. It was
down 7 percentage points of GDP which in today's dollars is about $ 30-35
billion a year.
But, that big call in the 1 970s meant that it, essentially, suffocated the
capacity of Australian business to borrow and to invest. Now, you know, that
one of our principal problems now is that we are running a current account
deficit, on average, of around 4.5 per cent of GDP. At the moment it is
running around 5.5 per cent, but it averages around 4.5 per cent in the 1980s
and early 1990s. In the 1960s and 1970s it averaged around 2.5 per cent,
but then we had no debt. We had no debt because every year we had
private capital investment equal to about 2.5 per cent of GDP. In a country
this big there is always something going on whether it is ports, wharfs,
railways, mines or whatever it might be, manufacturing industry, and there is
always a level of private equity investment. That generally equalled our
current account deficit so, we could go on running a current account of about
per cent of GDP, but not build up any debt. What has built the debt up for
Australia is that extra two percentage points of GDP which is $ 10 billion a
year in today's dollars. GDP is about $ 500 billion, 2 per cent of it, is as I said
earlier, around $ 10 billion.
The problem and the challenge for us is to put in a savings change to meet
that two per cent and this is what we did last Tuesday night and in the doing
of it, making higher rates of investment in the future sustainable, higher rates
of growth sustainable and higher rates of employment sustainable. You
remember Ralph Willis saying that we went from a deficit of 2.8 per cent of
GDP to a Budget surplus of $ 700 million. The shift overall is around, if we
look in the next year or two out, the shift is around about four per cent of
GDP. In other words, we are in surplus this year, next year we are in even 
larger surplus, the year after that we are running a surplus of $ 7 billion. So
basically, we have got a change there of about four percentage points of
GDP and I will just do this little bit of arithmetic with you because there are a
lot of numbers in this, but it is quite easy to follow. The savings problem is
two per cent points in size. So, we have got to get a two percentage points
fix into the system. We have got, essentially from the Budget, a four
percentage point change and then the other great change in the Budget was
to build on the reforms we had introduced in earlier years to award or national
superannuation. This, I think, we can genuinely say is the most
comprehensive savings change or plan the country has ever had.
You know that the Government, in 1985-86 under the Accord Mark V, we
introduced there three percentage points of savings by the workforce, of
income put away as savings in superannuation or as we called it ' award
superannuation'. That was moving up towards five per cent when we
introduced the superannuation guarantee charge or the SGC as it is known.
That takes contributions by employers on behalf of employees under the
wage arrangements, up to nine per cent of wages and salaries by the year
2002. But, I think, most of you in this room would know, to get a mature
contribution to superannuation, something that adds a very substantial long
term benefit to retirement incomes, you need to be around about 15 per cent
of a wage and salary.
In the Budget we did two things. We said that we will be supporting the
inclusion and awards of three per cent of employee contributions and we will
pay the second round of the One Nation tax cuts into the same
superannuation accounts. So, in other words, as a result of last Tuesday
night's budgetary change, there will be a further six percentage points of
wages on top of the nine which exists under the Superannuation Guarantee
Charge. Put the two together and you have got fifteen. So, by the year 2002
everyone in the country will be putting 15 per cent of their wages and salaries
away. This is going to produce an enormous shift in savings. When John
Dawkins and I were sworn in as Ministers in 1983 we had $ 40 billion in
superannuation funds. This year we have got $ 186 billion and by the year
2020 the Treasury estimates we will have $ 2000 billion. We will have $ 2
trillion in superannuation funds by 2020.
Our national debt at the moment is $ 160 billion. Already we have a greater
level of savings in superannuation at $ 186 billion, greater now than our
national debt, but that will grow. This will do a number of things about
retirement incomes. Let's take someone on average weekly earnings now on
$ 33,000, at the end of their working lives, they will build in today's dollars a
lump sum of $ 470,000 and they will have an ongoing annuity in retirement of
$ 30,000 a year. So, they are on $ 33,000 a year now, in 1995-96 dollars, they
will have $ 470,000 as a lump which payed out as an annuity ends up at
$ 30,000 a year. Someone on twice average weekly earnings, around
$ 60,000, will end up with a lump of $ 670,000 and an ongoing annuity
payment of $ 52,000 a year. 
So, this is a great change to retirement incomes and to savings. When my
generation, the baby boom generation, is 65 there will be half as many retired
aged people as there is today and 10 years after that or 15 years after that
there will be twice as many retired age people as there is today. The problem
will then be; how does the cohort at work carry this huge group of people, this
aged group in retirement at that point without an erosion of the basic pension
or a massive change to taxation levels? Well, there is only one way start
now to put a scheme together. We started in 1985-86 and what you are
seeing on Tuesday night, in a sense, is the culmination of those changes with
another six percentage points added. This is not simply a great change in
social policy, but it is also a great change in savings.
Let me go back to the calculation, the two percent again. Remember I said
the current account is two percentage points of GDP, larger than we can
afford it to be. We have put a four percentage point change in on the Budget,
but that savings pool from superannuation is going to be worth four
percentage points of GDP by 2020. So, by 2020 we have got an eight
percentage point change in four in the Budget, four on superannuation but
the problem is more immediate than 2020. So, let's say, look at it in the year
2000, which is what we in this room are immediately interested in. Where is
the current account going to go in the year 2000, five years from now. In five
years from now those superannuation changes will be worth two percentage
points of GDP, the Budget will be worth four. But by then, some of that four is
cyclical, some of it is structural. If the cycle changes at any time and the
cyclical part starts to turn down, let's say ' let's put a discount into that and call
it two to three per cent'. Two to three per cent on the Budget and two on
superannuation. That comes to four to five per cent and that is what we did
last Tuesday night. We put a four to five per cent of GDP savings change in
for a two percentage point current account problem.
That is why the Budget is so central to the maintenance of this recovery
because the recovery can only be built on investment and we can't have the
investment without the savings otherwise it will spill over into overseas
savings, into overseas borrowings, into overseas debt.
So, the Budget in that sense, was a great change and one that is designed
to, you remember in the latter part of last year we had three quick interest
rate adjustments and that slowed the economy off from the growth rate of
then 6.5 per cent which was unsustainable back to something around four per
cent which is what we have now. In other words, we don't need this Budget
to restrain domestic demand. What we need this Budget for is for a medium
term change in savings because we have got the slowing from the monetary
adjustments. As a consequence, last year we sold $ 21,000 million worth of
commonwealth bonds. The bond selling program was $ 21 billion. As a result
of the Budget changes, the bond selling program this year will be $ 6 billion.
So, there is a $ 15 billion reduction this year over last year in the bond selling
program. You know you don't have to be an econometrician or a financial
market person to know that if you take $ 15,000 million of demand off the
Australian savings pool, there is going to be a lot less paper around than 
there was therefore if there is less of it, the price of it rises and if the price
goes up with the bond the yield comes down. The yield, of course, is the
interest rate.
So, as a consequence of the Budget, the bond market fell by one percentage
point. From just over 10 to just over nine for 10 year bonds in the last week
or so and that is the cue, I think, that some of the other people the banks
and others have taken in the financial markets. In other words, by getting
the Budget back into surplus quickly and decisively, we have taken an
inordinate pressure off the financial markets which is reflecting itself in that
shift in bond yields. In other words, what the Government is after is
sustainability. We have had three years of growth since the recession. The
Treasury in Statement Two is forecasting sustainable growth for three years,
for three years out. In other words, if we take three years from now we are
talking about 1998, if we look from 1983 to 1998 we will have had growth
right through the period bar for 18 months which was in 1991-92, in the
recession. It is going to be a very long period of growth, but after the
recession, of course, low inflationary sustainable growth and not pushed
along by a bubble of bank lending and indiscriminate lending of the kind we
saw in the later 1980s, now a far more abstemious financial sector with low
inflation, secure profits, a much more flexible labour market with enterprise
bargaining; in short a much more sustainable level of growth into the future.
That is what the Budget was about, but it was not just about that change in
the balance, but as I said, that huge change in savings coming of
superannuation. Now, I have got John Howard running around the country
talking about chicken little, the sky is falling in, we have had five minutes of
sunshine, la de da de da. But, the truth of the matter is we have already had
three and a half years of growth and the Treasury is saying we will have
sustainable growth around these levels through the forecast period and the
forecast period is 1995 to 1998. So, after the recession, we have had three
and a half years of growth and we are heading for six. We had 90,000 job
growth last month. We have had the largest fall in unemployment in the last
year since we have been keeping the records. The Government's principle
commitment in the election was to reduce unemployment. We said we would
aim for a target of 500,000 in three years. Well, in two and a quarter years,
we are already at 650,000. We got to the half a million mark in two thirds of
the time that we thought and not only that, we are now reaching into the long
term unemployed because 100,000 of them have gone back into the labour
market or where in any such period in the 1980s maybe only 10,000 would
have gone back into the labour market because what happens, when the
labour market picks up the school leavers the new entrants to the workforce
go into jobs, those who are longer term unemployed generally get left behind.
But, Working Nation, that statement I introduced on behalf of the Government
last year, the case management and labour market programs is now getting
into the long term unemployed, getting them trained and giving them a job
subsidy and getting them back permanently into the labour market. 
This is going to mean, where in the 1980s with all that growth we got
unemployment down to about 6.5 per cent, but we couldn't get any lower no
matter how hard we pushed with employment, we couldn't get any lower
because we couldn't train the people. Working Nation is actually going into
that body of long term unemployed people and training them and getting them
back out so that means that the five per cent unemployment target becomes a
real possibility for us.
In western world terms, there are very few countries with that prospect facing
them. That is, to be able to say we would be able to keep up higher rates in
investment and higher rates in employment. Because if we need to fill that
capital stock I first mentioned we would need even greater levels of
investment than we have today. It is not just today's investment levels, but
something greater than today's. That is going to call on savings and that is
why we needed the Budget change and the superannuation change together
because if we are to relieve that pressure on the current account, we are not
just simply relieving it in a static scenario. We are relieving it, but as we
relieve it we will then build up greater demands for investment because the
confidence effects will be greater, the needs for employment will be just as
great and so as we get more successful success breeds success and so
we will have even more investment. We have got to be able to pay for that in
savings too. So, we needed a big change, a really big change in Tuesday's
night Budget and that is what we gave you a large change on the Budget
balance and a large change in superannuation.
All of this, I think, means that as we move down towards the year 2000 we are
going to be able to see a further great change to the nature of Australia. This
is the first time in our history where we have been located at the foot of the
fastest growing markets in the world. Normally, for us, traditionally for us,
those markets have been in Europe or North America. They are now here at
our doorstep in the Asia-Pacific and to have that great opportunity we have
got to be stripped down, competitive and be in a position to go and get after
it. But you can't get after it without investment and you can't get after it
without investment if you are relying on the rest of the world for savings.
Can I just say there is a lot of gloomy stuff around about savings and you can
see how the Government is taking it seriously, but we are taking it
constructively. We are not out there with slogans and with incantations. We
are in there with some serious policy. But, I think, you need to remember we
have got $ 160 billion of off-shore debt, but in the period since the
Government removed exchange controls in 1983; you see before 1983 you
couldn't invest off-shore, the Reserve Bank wouldn't give you the tick under
the managed system to invest off shore. But in the period since 1983 to now,
we have now got $ 135 billion of off shore assets. So, we have got $ 160
billion of net debt, but we have got $ 135 billion of off shore assets. So, you
look at all these big companies like BHP and Boral and Brambles and the
TNTs of this world, they have all invested in North America, in Europe, in the
Asia-Pacific, and as a consequence we have now got a very large stock of
investments off-shore. 
So, all these things have taken in the minds of the financial markets when the
assess Australia. They don't just look at our current account debt, they look
at our assets off shore, but they more importantly, look and see what we are
doing in the longer run about savings. They say ' is this a serious country?
Yes, it has broken the back of inflation, but it got itself into a whole in the
1970s. Has it got itself out of it? Has it done the things to add to savings and
keep its competitiveness up.' Now, I think, after Tuesday night the answer to
that is a resounding yes. But, it wasn't just Tuesday night. It was also the
1993 Budget which John ( Dawkins) presided over as Treasurer and took a lot
of stick for in getting fiscal policy back into shape at that time and it was the
Budget's in the 1980s where we pulled, as I said, outlays down from 30.5 per
cent of GDP to 23.5 per cent.
Tuesday night was a big change in Australian public policy for the
maintenance of a long-run, low inflationary, high investment recovery. So,
when Richard Court tells you it is happening because the buses are running
on time or it is happening because he has got some project starting, all that
helps but it is principally happening because of the national government's
policies. It is principally happening because of the change in
competitiveness coming off the exchange rate, wages and productivity and
we are just signing up another Accord with the ACTU which will maintain
moderate wages growth into the future and protect that inflation rate. It is
worth remembering that Australia, today, is 40 per cent more competitive than
1983. Not 4 per cent or 14 per cent, 40 per cent. That is why Western
Australia is growing so strongly. It is coming off the big wage adjustments of
the 1980s which turn that big nominal depreciation of the exchange rate into
a real depreciation. I like the States we are doing quite a lot with the States
now at COAG, you can see it with the Hilmer changes I like the States to do
well. Victoria is starting to go ok and there has been some sensible things
done in fiscal policy there.
But a Lloyd Webber show and Grand Prix is not going to remake the Victorian
economy any more than making the buses run on time or ticking off real
estate developments is going to change things here. What is going to
change things is the big pulse of national public policy. The only thing that
ever changes anything and when you look at the Government, people say
' well, you have been in office 12 years, don't you think it is time for a
change?' I say ' what other government would be putting a savings change of
this quality and this dimension in, having this conversation with the workforce
to get people to put 15 per cent of their income away as savings, what other
government has done that? What other government has been able to break
the back of inflation and keep it there by the introduction of an enterprise
bargaining system in the labour market?' I have mentioned John a couple of
times, the last thing I did was on Friday was open another university at
Sunbury in Victoria. In 1983 only three children in ten completed secondary
school. This year it is eight in ten and we have added, as that eight in ten,
that massive through put has spilled out then into tertiary education, we have 
added about 65 per cent of places to universities in a big revolutionary
change in the 1980s which John ( Dawkins) presided over.
As a consequence, we have established about 18 universities of the size of
the principal state universities to the system and we are now building, in One
Nation, the TAFE system through the Australian National Training Authority
so that vocational education sits up beside tertiary education to provide the
horse power for the product innovation Australia is going to need to
participate in this world economy and to participate to the full.
I have got John Howard chasing around yak, yak, yak, yak on radio stations
around the country. I have got Costello like a crow on a fence carking at
every, picking the eyes out of every bit of good news that comes along and
Howard saying ' well, you know, test my credibility with the Prime Minster's.' I
say ' but hang on, what are you talking about? What have you ever done?'
Does anyone know of one thing that John Howard did as Treasurer that
mattered, seriously to this economy except other than increasing the levels of
outlays to GDP? I mean, he is now trying to remake himself by denying all
the policies he was associated with in the 1980s when he was Opposition
leader. I said ' well, hang on, I have been around during this period with a
Cabinet that has international ised the Australian economy, which has
changed its competitiveness by 40 per cent, which has revolutionised the
product markets, which as knocked the tariff wall over, which has totally
changed the face of Australian education, which is now changing the culture
of Australian management. We have had 50 per cent, we have nearly
doubled exports. Exports were at 13 per cent of GDP, they are now at 22 per
cent. That is what we have been doing and we have had 26 per cent
employment growth since 1983.' When you talk about credibility, you are
talking about someone who has got another set of things on the other side of
the ledger to compare himself with. But there is this side of the ledger and
then there is that side of the ledger. There is nothing else other than a few
empty incantations. Howard has only had three policies.
One is throwing tax benefits up to top end families. The other is kicking the
life out of low wage earners below about $ 24,000 a year. I mean, what a
great objective to have in public life. Say ' well, I want to get after those
characters on $ 23,000 a year and shake the living hell out of them.' And, the
third thing is to put in a GST. They are his three policies. They have never
been any different. The same three. He had a chance on Budget night to get
up, we are within a year of an election, he had the Budget reply to get up and
say ' hang on, there is the Government, it has put down this big change in
savings, big change in the Budget balance, they have introduced Working
Nation, Creative Nation et cetera, this is what I think should the be shape and
nature of Australia.' Nothing, just a bucket of abuse, a bucket of rhetoric and
in the end nothing else.
So, I don't believe the Australian people looking at this recovery and its
quality, not just the recovery, but the low inflation high productivity nature that
it has, and the linkages this government has made in Asia with APEC or our 
role in the GATT, are going to walk away and say ' well, here we are with what
has been the fastest growing western world economy with low inflation, we
will turn our back on that for John Howard, Tim Fischer, Peter Costello and
Alexander Downer that sparkling front bench of theirs that sparkling little
front bench of theirs. And now, of course, we have got Dr Nelson who has
been in the Labor party for 17 years, that is his claim to fame. The Liberal
party these days is like a business club. You join at the door. They say ' oh,
you want a safe seat in Parliament, ohh come in, come in. You want to be a
member of parliament in one of our best constituencies, just step this way.':
opportunism and brigandry, the stock and trade of a party without any guts
and without any substance.
The message I want to give to you is this that this is a very large savings
change coming from a government which has fundamentally altered the
nature of Australia to an externally orientated competitive trading economy,
but where when we let our guard down in the 1970s and let our capital stock
drop and at the same time with double digit inflation, punctured a whole in the
propensity of Australians to save, we have tried to repair the problem by the
public sector coming back strongly into surplus and making up for those
paucity in private savings by a set of savings arrangements through
superannuation which will guarantee us a lift in savings when we really need
it.
That is why, I think, the Budget was well received and why I hope you think
that it is a good document and one that will sustain the recovery into the
future. Thank you.
ends 
QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION
Q: Prime Minister, in light of the recent Karpin Report ( Enterprising
Nation), can you comment on how you rate Australian managers now?
PM: The old tariff barriers, the tariff walls produced a lot of easy profits and
when we had a less discerning securities market and stock exchange,
boards of directors could get away with over valued assets or under
valued assets and, essentially, modest profit performances. There
was not a lot of pressure for distribution of dividends, but most of the
manufacturing sector was protected by the tariff walls, its profits came
from the tariff walls. This produced a lot of sloth in the structure of
management in Australia and this has changed, of course, in the last
years or so with the tariff barriers coming down, with development
for the first time, really, of a sector of internationally traded services
which we have, and until we removed exchange controls, ever had and
that development has meant that we have developed whole new
sectors in the financial services, in education services, tourism, et
cetera which did not exist and they are internationally traded services,
so you have to be internationally competitive to be in it. The mining
industry had international competitive pressures on it because it had to
sell into an international market place against other countries, but most
of the manufacturing, of course, was protected by tariffs.
Like everything else, competition is a great thing and competition
works and much of what the government has done over 15 years, over
12 years is to introduce competition by way of imports with lower
tariffs, by way of competition generally in Australia, by now getting the
State and Commonwealth sector utilities out there and competing,
introducing competition into things like airlines and
telecommunications and what have you and by and large the
opportunities to success particularly in the turnaround of our
competitiveness and also the pressure which has come from the
recession has produced a lot of productivity changes and a great sea
change, I think, in management.
I think David Karpin was talking about not simply an improvement in
management, the capacity to manage, but also in genuine
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship got a bad name in the 1980s
when we had the world awash with money and people borrowing it,
buying up assets for, largely, non-productive purposes. That is not
what we have always thought that an entrepreneur was about. We
thought an entrepreneur was about building industries and building
businesses and seeing opportunities in market niches and exploiting
them. I think we are developing a class of managers and
entrepreneurs now as we are going about. I think, any commentary I
want to make is we haven't got enough of them and we need more
such people and, I think, the fact that the country is now so open and 
so near particularly South-east Asia that we are seeing South-east
Asian entrepreneurs coming to Australia and our entrepreneurs going
there and this flux that this is setting up is producing a more
entrepreneurial spirit in Australia because I certainly believe we need
it. You will always need the people to make the business decisions to
make the world go round and we have tried to give business an
environment in which to do that. High profits, a competitive exchange
rate, a competitive country in all, a competitive tax system, all of these
things are important as back drops to that sort of essential
entrepreneurial activity.
So, I think, David Karpin's point is yes, it has improved a lot, but of
course, we all know it had to, but we have still got quite a way to go
and I think I endorse that too.
Q: Prime Minister, last week I saw Cheryl Kernot's comment that of the
billion worth of asset sales that were projected for this year only
million had in fact been achieved. Is that in fact correct and how
confident are you that the $ 5.5 billion projected for next year will in fact
also be achieved?
PM: I am fairly confident because we have floated some of these larger
assets off in the past. We sold a quarter of the Commonwealth Bank
in 1991, I think it was, then we sold subsequently another quarter of it
and that is by far and away the biggest of the sales and now, of
course, it is a company listed on the stock exchange and it is priced
every day and part of the arrangements that we are now making with
the Commonwealth Bank Board is that the Board's considering
purchasing some of the shares back so that it makes the digesting of
the sale even easier to the market. So, I think, that is something that is
well within our grasp. Qantas was to be in this year, we have been
improving Qantas's underlying profitability and picking the right
moment to sell it. It is not just a matter of saying ' well, we had it in for
last year'. It is a matter of whether we sell an asset, but we pick the
right moment in the market to actually sell it and, I think, we are better
off selling it this year than last and that was a judgement we made
about the middle of last year and at the same time its underlying
profitability is improving. So, I don't think there is a problem there.
They are the main ones, and of course, next year we will have some of
the airports.
So, we have had, I think, a reasonably successful period with asset
sales. If we don't sell them often it is because we take a decision to
delay them for market reasons not because we can't sell them or in
same way we have misjudged the quantities or amounts. By and
large, they are fairly conservative estimates. But, can I just say that
next year, the Budget is in surplus without the asset sales anyway.
The quality of this change here is such that free of asset sales, the
Budget will be in surplus anyway. But, as a person from Moody's 
made the point on the radio last week, it doesn't matter whether the
asset sales are in or not. He said all we look for is the bottom line.
And, the reason they look to the surplus and not try to disaggregate it
is for the reason I said earlier, $ 21 billion worth of bonds we sold last
year, this year we will be selling $ 6 billion. It doesn't matter what the
source of it is, we are going to be selling $ 6 billion not $ 21 billion and
therefore the pressure off interest rates only is so much more obvious.
I think, that is what the financial markets will be looking for. The main
thing for us is that we have got the Budget comfortably back into
surplus and we reckon next year we will be running a surplus of about
$ 4.1 billion and the following year we will be running a surplus of
around $ 7 billion.
Q: Mr Keating, let's suppose Treasury gets it wrong in respect of forecast
on growth and the numbers aren't quite so big as they are forecasted
and let's say the weapon of superannuation doesn't yield the
difference of two per cent that is needed for the savings, how does
your Government plan to address next year, subject to you being in
power, of course, the balancing of the Budget once the national assets
have been sold off?
PM: I thought I answered that in the previous question. That is, next year
without the assets we will still be in surplus, but we are in surplus on
rates of growth which are far less than the ones we have had at the
moment. You see, in the year to September, when the September
quarter national accounts came out for the year to September, the
economy was growing at 6.5 per cent. We had 8.5 per cent for gross
national expenditure and 6.5 per cent for GDP. Because spending
was greater than product, it was spilling into imports and we know that
we know that we can't sustain a rate of growth around 6 1/ 2 per cent of
GDP. Well in this year we are forecasting 3 3/ 4 per cent. That is a
long way from 6 1/ 2 per cent, you see. So we have already got a very
heavy change in there. We have portended, forecasted, quite a heavy
reduction in activity as a consequence of those monetary adjustments
late last year. So, by and large, these are, at their best, only forecasts
and forecasts can be wrong. But, by and large, these ones now in a
growth phase, there is less risk to them in a growth phase and as well
as that they are quite conservative. So I don't really see that we run
any great risk of those numbers not being achieved.
At any rate, the superannuation changes are already in place. I mean
on 1 July this year, the metre ticks over to 6 per cent. So the large
companies will be paying 6 per cent in, another 1 per cent in on super
and the smaller companies then turn over at 5 per cent. From the year
1 July 1997-98, we start the 1 percentage point change on employee
contributions from superannuation and in 1998/ 99 we'll be putting in
the first 1 per cent from the tax cuts away. So you know there is going
to be a fairly big kick along to savings in all of this, even if to the
decimal point the Treasury estimates were not to be achieved because 
what has happened to us in this last year is we have hugely
succeeded them.
I mean in last year's Budget debate they were saying oh, oh, oh, the
Government's got this very upbeat assessment of 14 per cent for
investment. Well as I said to you earlier, we did 26 per cent this year
and we have come out of the year greater than our growth forecasts.
So, by and large, I think we have taken the conservative side of the
estimates.
Q: Mr Keating a lot is said of us, or Australia, being part of Asia Pacific
and competing with Asia Pacific. But it seems to me that the company
tax rate is going from 33 to 36 per cent, while the company tax rates in
our competing countries in South East Asia are actually decreasing.
Could I have your comments on that please?
PM: Well, I mean, I think Singapore is around 33 per cent, where we were
last year until we put this change through. I mean that is the sort of
general level of rates in this part of the world. But most of these
countries are not running an OECD style economy, you know, with a
general quality of services we have in a continent this large.
You see one thing worth bearing in mind here is that we are now the
second lowest taxed country in the western world. We are a decimal
point higher than the United States, who are the lowest, and we are
also the second lowest spending country of the 27 member states of
the OECD. We are the second lowest by a decimal point, again,
above the United States. So we are delivering a lot of high quality
services in health, education, roads, transport for a fairly small public
sector. But a number of things have changed in the revenue equation for us.
It was for good policy reasons that we wore away the tariff wall.
But that loss of customs duty is this year costing us $ 5-6 billion and
next year will cost a full $ 6 billion and it will have an ongoing cost of
$ 6-7 billion a year, every year, because we are just not getting the duty
because the barrier doesn't exist anymore.
The company tax change from 39 per cent to 33 per cent, the two
investment allowances and the accelerated depreciation package
which I had in that statement Investing in the Nation which we
published in February 1993 is now costing the Budget $ 3 billion a
year. So if we are losing $ 6 billion a year on tariffs and $ 3 billion on
companies, that is $ 9 billion, and Bass Strait is now running down
quite dramatically, quite sharply, at those very large, formerly efficient,
performing reservoirs in the Gippsland Basin are now into a secondary
recovery. So we are losing about a billion a year, over the last five
years, out of that. So you can say with just those changes alone, we 
are losing $ 10 billion a year or 2 per cent of GDP. Now it has got to
come from somewhere.
So what we decided to do was to put the company tax rate to
36 per cent, which is still well and truly competitive within the OECD.
In fact, it is on the bottom of the OECD, sort of, band of rates and still
reasonably competitive with the countries we trade with in Asia.
The other thing that I think is worth bearing in mind, is that Australia is
one of the few countries in the world which provides for dividend
imputation. We actually let private companies distribute and we give
them an imputed credit for the company tax paid. This is also now
delivering a benefit to shareholders of the order of $ 3-4 billion.
So, at the last election those great lions of business in the Liberal
Party wanted to stick the company rate up from 39 per cent to 42 per
cent. We have reduced it from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. So in the
last year they would have had a 42 per cent company rate, we had a
33 per cent company rate and we are moving it to 36 per cent. So, in
other words, we are getting from companies $ 300 million this year and
$ 1500 million next year.
In the climate of very high profits, the profit share in GDP, the
proportion of national income going to profits this year, has no historic
precedence. So if the companies can't pay another 3 percentage
points on the company rate, who can? I mean the people on wages
under $ 30,000. I mean who is it? And so that is why we have thought
it was the right thing to do.
Q: ( inaudible).
PM: Well APEC has a certain congruity to it. It is the countries who have
trading and strategic interests together and it is in the Pacific rim, it is
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation. It covers the two largest
economies the United States and Japan who have, of course, a huge
trade problem between them. It covers the largest emerging economy,
China, and it covers some of the fairly developed economies, like
Korea and, of course, the South East Asian, or ASEAN, economies.
Now from Australia's point of view, we trade with Japan. They are our
largest trading partner. Korea is our second largest trading partner.
We have a fairly big trade with the United States. We have strategic
relationships with the United States. The United States has strategic
relations with China, with Korea. So there is a congruity about APEC.
And I think the risk always with APEC is that it gets extended on a sort
of good-neighbourly basis, so well why not let the old Soviet far east
in. You know, the Russian far east, or India, or Peru. Well I think we
run the risk then that it is neither one thing nor another. It is not an
Asia Pacific body and these are countries that don't have the 
preponderance of their trade with the Asia Pacific. So I think it would
be wise for APEC to be fairly cautious about its membership into the
future for that reason.
Can I just say on the point about this other proposal, the East Asia
Caucus proposal. I mean I think our view has been that ASEAN is an
obvious sub-group of APEC and we are now having discussions with
the leaders of ASEAN about Australia, at some point, having a role
with AFTA, the ASEAN Free Trade Area, and in that way you would
have NAFTA being a sub-group of APEC, that is the North American
Free Trade Agreement. You would have Australia/ New Zealand CER
being a sub-group of APEC. You may have, potentially,
Australia-AFTA being a sub-group of APEC and then you would have
the other bloc economies, China, Korea, Japan.
So we think that sort of structure, basically, covers off the trade and
strategic interests in the area and I think, by and large, that has been
the view of most of the member states of APEC.
Q: ( inaudible).
PM: The question was for those who couldn't hear, it was about tax treaties
with Asian neighbours to avoid convoluted tax arrangements. Well,
you know, Australia we did have a foreign tax credit system. But in
such a system everyone has to account the rates of tax let's say
they are an international company. They have got companies in
Europe, companies in North America, businesses in Asia. You have
got to take the tax rates that apply in all these, aggregate it, bring it
back, we give you a credit for it and then you pay up to the corporate
rate or not.
When we reduced the company rate to 39 per cent, it was so close to
the average of the OECD countries some at 38 per cent, some at
36 per cent we thought we would remove this huge burden on
business of keeping this constant accounting going for
1 or 2 percentage points of difference. So we developed what we call
a white list of countries. If you invest in the countries which are on the
white list, you can bring your dividends home, no foreign tax credit
system, simple repatriation. If you are not on the white list, you are on
the other list, and the other list of countries which includes tax havens.
But in some countries which have very concessional corporate tax
rates and they have them for development reasons, we have a concept
called tax sparing and in our double tax agreements, we recognise tax
sparing. For instance we recognise tax sparing with Malaysia, we
recognise it with Indonesia.
In other words, if somebody wants to invest in those countries and take
the benefits of their concessional rates for a particular period of time, 
17
then we will give them a tax sparing credit. But if they want to invest in
Hong Kong and it is just a name on the wall of an accountant's door,
we have an active and passive income test.
So if you're Pioneer Concrete and you have been in Hong Kong
making concrete for 36 years, you pass the active income test. But if
you're pushing income through Hong Kong and you are just a plate on
a Hong Kong accountant's door, well then you don't pass the active
income test and therefore we tax you on an accruals basis when you
come home. Now what can be fairer than that?
ends 



x'
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL FARMERS FEDERATION ( NFF) ANNUAL
CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, 17 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Distinguished members of the conference.
I am very delighted to be able to come, on behalf . of the Government, and
speak to you and to record how appreciative I am, and I think the Government
is, of the fact that you are a body which does look beyond sectional interests
to the broader national policy issues and, as Donald said quite eloquently,
though some of these things are not universally understood in your
constituency, it is nevertheless a matter for you as a body to be able to
articulate them to understand, first of all to put together a comprehensive
approach to policy, to articulate it and to make it relevant to your
constituency. I don't think there is much more a Government could ask of you. But, more
importantly, there is not much more your constituency can ask of you
because we are in a complex world these days. A world of great opportunity,
no doubt, but a complex one and when we talk about agriculture today, we
are talking about all sorts of things not just commodity prices, but
competitiveness and we are talking about best practice and transport and
competition policy and infrastructure and the environment, the global
economy, the US Farm Bill, interest rates, the drought you name it. It is a
very large panoply of issues when one is speaking about rural industry and
its problems and the problems of adjustment.
But I think what is encouraging, certainly to me, has been a willingness on the
part of the rural community, the farm community, to confront these great
economic challenges and recognise the need to make greater changes and I
think one of the strong characteristics of Australia in this last decade or so,
has been not simply a willingness to change, but a willingness to keep it up,
to embrace change and to keep on going and I think that is very important. 
A lot of countries are somewhat resistant to change. Their political system
moves away from the prospect of change. As a consequence, their national
economies and societies are not getting the kick along they would otherwise
have if their community was more adaptable to change and more prepared to
listen.
Now I think that in your community, a lot of that has come from leadership, it
has come from the leadership of this body and let me just take this
opportunity to pay a tribute to the leadership of the NFF, in
Donald McGauchie and Rick who is leaving you I know, it will be a great
loss to you because he has played a really useful role in defining the issues
for you as a community, as a constituency and he has had the respect of the
Government and he has been able to relate to us in a way that I think has
been very effective indeed. So no doubt he will be missed.
Could I go on and say that it is probably very unlikely that the NFF and a
Labor Government find themselves as bedfellows, but in quite a number of
issues we have found ourselves in that position. Mainly because this
Government has always been interested in tackling hard issues and trying to
deal with them at source and, I mean, basically we have always been, if you
like, vulnerable to a good argument. If someone has got a good case, we will
listen and if the case is rational and its logical and it has all those others
societal characteristics that make it important, then I think we are always
there to listen and try and make adjustments and quite a few we have had.
We have made a few, of course, in this Budget and I will come to that in a
moment. But I was interested in Donald's speech and a couple of things he said.
He said, talking about the changes, the NFIF has already achieved
considerable success and he mentions the issues which affect in a very large,
and perhaps dramatic way, the whole of the rural sector. The decision to float
the Australian dollar, the deregulation of financial markets, reductions in
protection for all industries and this was always the big bug bear of course.
It was always a matter of great amusement to me in the 1 970s when I came
here. Of course Jack McEwen was still king of the castle round here and
Alan Westerman was still sort of one of the princes of the bureaucracy and
they had this scam running for years that they were going out to
manufacturing industry, doling on protection, while they were out there talking
to the farm community about what a terrible problem it was.
At any rate, we were the ones who finally knocked it over and in what became
obviously, through people like Bert Kelly and others, the identification of the
burden of tariffs on agriculture became very clearly understood in the late
and early 1 980s and by actually getting the tariff wall down, that has made a
very large difference to agriculture.
He mentions progress in the movement away from a centralised wage fixing
system towards enterprise agreements. Broad political recognition of the 
need to minimise pressure on interest rates by reweighting policy onto fiscal
policy. He mentions the changes in 45D and E of the Trade Practices Act
and the common law and negotiations of new trade arrangements such as, of
course, Uruguay and APEC.
And then he mentions the achievement of particular farm sector goals above
that, national competition policy but then income equalisation deposits, farm
management bonds, changes to drought assistance, review of the pastoral
industry award etc. Sales tax exemption for direct farm inputs, a better result
than other sectors in Native Title legislation, maintaining the diesel excise
rebate and extensive schools education program etc.
Well, the NFF has been involved in all these issues. But in making the point
about us being strange bedfellows, of course, they were all done by this
Government. All these decisions were taken by this Government.
So we have done a lot of things together and they have been of material
assistance to the farm community and they are the big brush things. You
could imagine how we would be going today at an exchange rate of
cents. And that, you see, getting that core competitiveness up,
Australia today is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 1983. Not 4 or
14, 40 and that has come about by changes in exchange rate, productivity,
wages etc.
But, the big challenge in the 1 980s, was to turn that big nominal depreciation
of the exchange rate into a real depreciation. I mean any country can have a
competitive depreciation of its exchange rate. We have watched Britain do it
against the European economies now for 20 years, but not anyone can have
a real depreciation, that is washing the price surge out of wages which is
basically what we did under the Accord.
So that core competitiveness which all of the primary export sector now
enjoys, from the exchange rate, happened because of the adjustment to
wages, a terms of trade adjustment for productivity to wages, in the course of
the 1980s. And under those Accords, the fact that we had pulled down fiscal
policy so dramatically, we were able to provide tax cuts and those wage tax
trade-offs of the 1980s, turned that large nominal depreciation of the dollar
into a real depreciation.
That happened, simply, because when I became Treasurer in 1983,
John Howard left me outlays at 30 1/ 2 per cent of GOP an Australian record.
And, as you know, it was a lift in the public sector in the 70s, under the
Whitlam Government and then the Fraser Government that dislocated private
investment and that put a very big call on savings. But by reducing it to
23 1/ 2 per cent of GDP by the late 1980s that is a 7 per cent of GOP
reduction and spending, and in today's dollars that is $ 35 billion we were
able through growth and through revenue and through those outlays changes
to fund a large continuing set of tax cuts and it is only by that way that we
didn't go the way of other countries with a set of competitive depreciations. 
So you were competitive for five minutes and you were uncompetitive five
minutes later as wages caught up with prices. And I think that is one of the
very great changes and I am very sympathetic to Bill Kelty and Martin
Ferguson and their ACTU colleagues, when they say we haven't had much
thanks for it, have we? And the answer is, they haven't.
But they did get in there for over a decade and try and manage it down. The
deal always was, of course, that we would compensate them by employment
and in the period between 1983 and now, we have had about 27 per cent
employment growth.
As a consequence, real household disposable income is 40 per cent greater
today than it was in 1983 because there are more people in households in
work. And so that is how that important national economic policy making was
made. The implicit arrangement of wage restraint for growth and employment
growth being the essential element of the Accord and it is by that method that
we have got that competitiveness back.
We are now seeing a much more, but lower tariffs, contestable economy. In
fact, a quite highly contested economy now. So now productivity is coming
out of the pores of the skin of the economy, naturally. In other words, we are
holding inflation down now, naturally. We are not holding it down with a
draconian monetary policy, killing growth and activity. We are holding it
down by the natural productive forces being, if you like, encouraged in the
economy and a change in the productive culture of business.
We have had very large productivity numbers in the last few years, as that
whole productivity surge and cultural change has gone through Australian
industry and it has gone through the farm sector as well.
I remember in the 1 980s, you know Margaret Thatcher was boasting about
and 6 per cent productivity and it was coming by massive lay-offs in British
industry by huge unemployment. But last year we had 4 per cent
productivity with massive lay-ons not massive lay-offs massive lay-ons.
4 per cent employment growth. Still producing 4 per cent productivity, which
is all the world of difference between the policies of this Government and the
policies of the British Conservative Government. So that at the end of the
section, she ended up with massive unemployment, an underclass, a divided
society and, in the end, no structural change to productivity. Whereas what
we are having here, is a long term structural change.
So I think that the way we can, if you like, help the farm community most
beneficially, is through these big brush changes to competitiveness,
exchange rate, wages, inflation, productivity, competition and, of course,
getting proper market access or the best market access we can through areas
like the GATT and, of course, through APEC. 
1 attended the OECD meeting in 1986 when we first got agriculture into the
OECD communique and I had a big brawl with Clayton Yeutter and
Malcolm Baidridge and a few other people at the time because this was the
moment of truth if it didn't get into the OECD communique of that year, it
wouldn't get into the G7 summit in Tokyo.
We pushed and shoved and stood the French up and the Europeans up, and
we did squeeze it in with the support of the United States and then as a
consequence of relations we tend to build up over time, the then
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, who was Reagan's Sherpa at
the summit, got it listed on the G7 agenda for the Uruguay Round and that is
how agriculture got into the Round.
Then we prosecuted that over seven years to get a result which while not all
we were seeking was going to take a lot of the pressure off the kind of
subsidies that we had seen growing and production and export subsidies we
had seen growing in Europe and in North America.
And here we are working together now Bob Collins and Bob McMullan with
you and others on the 1995 Farm Bill to try and again make certain, or ease
the pressure at least, against the Australian farm -sector from these other
sectors who won't expose themselves to the kind of competitive influences
that we have been prepared to expose ourselves, too.
So right through those years, we have learnt together and I think, again,
access remains one of the great issues for Australian agriculture and we have
sought to do our best with it.
Let me say a couple of things about the Budget and perhaps then come back
to some farm specific things.
The Budget, the other night, did respond to a desire and a wish by many
sectors, including your own, for a reweighting of the policy instruments off
monetary policy and on to fiscal policy and we have taken the Budget from a
deficit of over $ 12 billion to a surplus of $ 700 million this year and next year
we are into a surplus of about $ 4 billion and the following year a surplus of
$ 7 billion, in prospect.
What this means is that we have seen a great change in the bond selling
program of the Commonwealth. Last year we sold $ 21 billion worth of bonds
$ 21,000,000,000. This year, as a result of the Budget, that program will be
reduced to $ 6,000,000,000. So, in other words, as a consequence of the
Budget we have diminished the bond selling program by $ 15 billion, which is
a mighty sum and that is why long bond yields fell from over 10 per cent
ten days ago, to under 9 per cent today. And because if there is less paper
around, the paper gets more valuable, the price of it rises and the yield drops,
the interest rate falls and that is what, of course, engendered then further
changes in retail interest rates towards the end of last week. 
So we have already had that effect and we have this debate about whether it
is recurrent changes or asset sales, but I thought the man from Moody's not
that I quote them very often said look we are not particularly interested how
it's done, what we want is to know how the bond selling program is going to
be, what is the consequences for that. Well that is pretty clear form now. But
the other point is next year, without any asset sales, we will be in surplus on a
recurrent basis.
Now the changes we made to the recurrent budget are around $ 3 billion this
year and $ 4 1/ 2 billion next year. So we are over 1/ 2 per cent of GOP in
recurrent changes this year and next year we are just under 1 per cent of
GOP, which is a fairly big change.
And the important thing is that the underlying level of outlays drops to
24 per cent of GOP in two years. In other words, in two years time we will be
back to the outlays levels that we had before the Whitlam Government, or
around at the time of the beginning of the Whitlam Government. Back where
we were in fact in the late 80s, which was at 23 1/ 2 per cent of GDP.
Now you know you don't need to be a student of public policy to know since
those years you have seen an enormous change in the services the
Commonwealth provides in education, and in health, and in income support
and yet we are doing it. A much more sophisticated public sector, providing
much greater serves, yet we are doing it for the same outlays to GOP levels
largely and underlying terms as existed before the Whitlam and Fraser
Government's started spending a much higher proportion of GOP on
outlays. Now, this needs to be understood I know a number of you have
said " well, the Government should cut outlays more". Well look, there is
one thing I would say to you, and that is this: I have sat through, now I
have delivered 8 Budgets and 7 May Statements that is 15. We have now
had 13 budgets, 8 May Statements and 3 Prime Ministerial Statements.
That is 24 major budgetary statements, and barring 1 or 2 of those
exercises, I have sat through all the Expenditure Review rounds, across all
of the outlays. Ralph Willis, Brian Howe and myself are the longest serving
officers of the Commonwealth in public spending if you shook the Finance
Department by its toes, or the Treasury by its toes, no-one would drop out
of it who has served in more Expenditure Reviews than the 3 of us. And let
me just say this to you, because one of the things you ask us to do is to
listen and comprehend problems, and we do we listen to what you say,
and we take notice. And even if it doesn't fall on us obviously on the first
moment, we listen and we get the picture. And I want you to listen to this,
and just understand it you cannot cut 2% of GOP from outlays any more.
It is just not possible. You can't cut $ 10,000 million from outlays now. You
can't take the Commonwealth underlying outlays to 22% of GOP it is
impossible, without cutting into pensions.. for instance, one of the first
things that would go would be RAS, straight off the blocks. All of the
industry assistance things would go before income support goes.
Payments to industry the transfer payments, payments to schools which
are holding up these massive participation rates in secondary school, and 
into tertiary and vocational education they are all the sorts of things that
will get hit. Because payments to the States we now give them a real
terms per capita guarantee, which in a sense, isolates that area of the
Budget from reductions we have got long-term arrangements with
defence, so you take defence and the States out of there, to get into the
rest of it, you have really got to savage the outlays in a way which would be
unconscionable. Now, the underlying level of these outlays is now roughly 25.4% to 25% of
GDP. Now John Howard, my opponent, is running around saying ' We won't
touch revenue". He claims to want to lead the country, but wants to give up
one instrument of financial management he won't touch revenue " I'll do it
all on outlays". Then he says " we should be cutting outlays" or Costello is
saying for him " by up to $ 10 billion". Well, you can't cut outlays by up to
billion without cutting pensions, income support to the families,
payments to schools or the industry programs, which are important sectors
of industry. That game is up. You can certainly go back through it, and
continue to put pressure on the efficiency of delivery, you can change the
priorities of programs, you can yield savings we have done that with a
savings round this year of $ 1.5 billion. We cut outlays by $ 1.5 billion, but
there is a lot of unavoidable new spending in the Com~ monwealth, and there
are some discretionary policies so that the net changes and outlays were
$ 700 million, but the actual program of cuts was $ 1500 million. So, it was a
very large set of cuts taken by the ERC over 9 weeks, or 10 weeks. So, it's
just not... . you can go beyond it, but you won't have any political authority
no Government in this country would have the political authority to go
beyond it, and when the Coalition tell you they will cut waste and
duplication and they will cut $ 10 billion out of outlays, just don't believe
them. It's just tripe. Nonsense. And take it from somebody who had to sit
through it for 10 weeks a year, for 12 years it just can't be done. And that
is why we say that John Howard has given up economic policy, because
when you give away receipts changes to receipts and you are kidding
everybody you can make major changes in outlays, what you are really
saying is that you are abdicating your role as a financial manager, because
all the weight will then do is shift to interest rates.
Now, that change I have mentioned to you the bond selling program going
down from $ 21 billion to $ 6 billion has taken a lot of the pressure off
interest rates which is one of the things your sector needs, it's one of the
things of value to your sector and we hope that trend we have seen last
week will continue, and that there is a genuine change in sentiment in
financial markets as a consequence of the Budget. The problem we are
trying to meet is not to reduce spending this year it was not about trying to
hold down... . we didn't use the Budget as a demand management tool,
because the 3 monetary adjustments of late last year have basically done
that trick, you might know, that in the year to the September quarter, the
economy was growing at 6.5% a year, and expenditure all spending in the
economy was running at Now you don't have to be an
econometrician to know that if the spending is running at 8.5% and product 
is running at 2% is going to be satisfied by imports. And at it
was putting too much stress on the country's productive capacity. So, we
needed to slow it down. So, in the Budget, we are forecasting 3.75% for
GDP, so it's a long way from And those monetary adjustments last
year, were taken at the right time and we made them large adjustments
one percentage points, or 2.5 altogether: 2 of 1 and 1 of 0.5% to
actually get that slowing into place. So we don't need the Budget for an
immediate slowing of the economy what we needed in the Budget is a
medium term change for savings, because our problem is that we have got
a current account deficit which is running about 2% of GDP above the point
where it basically pays for itself. Each year, in the 60s and 70s, we were
running a current account deficit of 2.5% of GOP, but we had capital inflow
equal to 2.5% of GOP. In other words, we were able to afford a current
account deficit of 2.5% of GOP, and not aggregate debt. That changed in
the late 1970s and the early 1980s, when we got so uncompetitive, when
the terms of trade ran against us, when we had a wage explosion, and
double-digit inflation for most of the decade, by that stage the current
account was running it started at 6% of GOP in 1980-81 not the number
you will hear John Howard tell you about, but that's what it was, 6% of GOP
in 1980-81. In other words, the cat was out of the bag then. And we have
been running, on average, at 4.5% since.
So, if 2.5% is sustainable, and the average is 4.5% and that's not
sustainable, the problem is 2 percentage points of GOP. In other words,
our savings have fallen as to around that amount so as not to be able to
accommodate the investment phase we need for employment, growth,
activity. And the reason it fell, I think principally, was double-digit inflation.
Once double-digit inflation came to Australia, it took about a decade to
teach Australians that it wasn't any point putting money in the bank,
because the tax on the nominal interest rate, after double-digit inflation,
was negative reals, so they stopped saving and they started buying flats,
apartments, holiday houses etc. And we inculcated in a generation that
there was no point in saving. It is going to take now, with a much better
and lower inflation performance, some time to change that, so as a
consequence, we have developed a savings pothole, which started from
that period of double-digit inflation a decade or more of double-digit
inflation and what the Budget is about doing is doing that is to try and
overcome that problem. Let me just briefly explain how it happens. In the
Budget and the next couple of years, we will see a turnaround of about 4
percentage points of GOP. And let's say that part of it is cyclical, and part of
it's structural. The other great change we had in the Budget was to extend
superannuation beyond 9% to 15% for every working person, and we have
encouraged people to put 3% of their personal contributions away, which
we will then match with a 3% tax cut equivalent paid into their
superannuation accounts. This will add 6 percentage points of wages to
the 9% under the superannuation guarantee charge. This will take it to
Now, at the moment we have got $ 186 billion in super funds, and the
Treasury estimate that by 2020, we will have $ 2000 billion in super funds 
$ 2 trillion, It was $ 40 billion in 1983, it is $ 186 billion now, and they
estimate that it will go to $ 2000 billion..
But that's 2020, and our time horizon is a bit shorter than that, and if we are
looking at the year 2000, the savings and super would be less, but still very
strong. Now, what the Treasury estimate is that by 2020, we will add the
equivalent of 4% of GDP to savings, but they also estimate that by the year
2000, we will add 2 percentage points of GDP. So, lets say that on the
Budget side we have added 4% by the year 2000, on the super side we
have added 4% by 2020, but if we are talking about 2000, we have added
2% on super and 4% on the Budget. In other words, in the Budget of last
Tuesday week, we put in a 6 percentage point fix for a 2 percentage point
problem. Now, let me just say something about the Budget: not all of that is
structural, some of it is cyclical as the economy grows, the cycle changes,
revenue and outlays change, and at any subsequent slowing, that would
affect the cyclical part of the Budget. Well, let's take all of the cyclical
calculation out of it, and call the 4 percentage points of the Budget A
good solid 2% and underlying and super with an underlying 2% gives
you a very solid foundation for 4% savings to GOP to meet a 2% current
account problem. Now, that's why the Budget was important, and that's
why the Government can be relied upon to do a professional job as
always on-the hard problems.
And let me say about super now here's John Howard running around on
Thursday night last saying " we'll put a cap on super we'll put a cap on it
and we'll give tax concession to higher income earners". Well, he gave tax
concessions in the 70s, and by 1983, superannuation coverage was
Today, it's 90%. So, if we go back to tax deductions, what we will see is
superannuation contributions go up to the top end of the income range, and
not the lower and middle income earners where the great bulk of the
community is where the great bulk of the savings must come. So, we take
the view that by starting with a 3% case in 1985-86, and moving it up to
and then getting the superannuation guarantee into place taking it to 9% by
2002, and now adding 6% 3% and 3% from personal contributions and
the tax cuts, we have over a decade, put together a scheme that the
Liberals wouldn't have had the imagination or the wit to even approach,
much less implement. And you think there are some things.. . they don't
have any conversation with the trade union movement, and you can
imagine Peter Costello or John Howard going to say to the workforce of
Australia " please put 15% of your income away as savings", and they would
say " oh, sure we will sure. No problem". Well, of course, they can't do it.
You would think they would have enough sense to say well look, a Labor
government did what we could never do, let's let this one go to the keeper
let's at least lock this away. That's what Mr Connolly was saying a week or
2 ago, and saying in the press yesterday their superannuation
spokesperson who was defeated in Bradfield saying this one we should
let go to the keeper because there is a broad national change here. But
again, the ideology is out saying " oh no, we don't want lower and middle
income earners getting the benefit of the tax concession, so we will cap it 
and we will throw tax concessions again to higher paid earners". I mean,
some people never learn.
But, at least, there is here now a really substantial savings change. And
that's going to fund the higher investment we need for more employment,
and a more productive country. And we know, as we go through the
we are going to need more capital investment not less, more because
one of the problems of that 70s double-digit inflation, and the big call on the
public sector, is that it absolutely smashed to pieces the capital stock. And
we didn't have enough capital stock to produce goods and services, and
that's why we had a current account weakness all through the 80s. So we
have got to get the capital stock up that means more investment, that
means more savings to meet it but without those savings, that pressure
for investment will reflect itself in higher interest rates, and you know as
well as any sector, the problem those higher interest rates put on your
particular sector. So, the way to accommodate higher investment, and
higher employment, and reach the Government's target of
unemployment by the year 2000, is through more investment, but we can't
afford more investment if it only puts pressure on interest rates, therefore
we have had to augment savings. So, the Budget was a very important
document, I think, not just for the country, but particularly for the rural
sector, because it does the lay the basis of a very long-term and important
change to savings which we dearly needed and which we now have.
Let me just make one final point about outlays. In the Budget, the ratio of
outlays to GDP will decline by 2.7% over the next couple of years, which is
$ 13 billion to $ 14 billion. In other words, just left to themselves, they are
going to drop away to 24% of GDP. That's $ 13 billion $ 14 billion. But
revenue will increase by only 1 of GOP, so in terms of the structure of the
Budget, outlays are subsiding, and the revenue is only barely picking up.
So, in terms of the quality if you like, the balance between outlays and
revenue in the Budget you have got a $ 13 billion to $ 14 billion change in
the course of happening right at the moment.
Could I just go on and say that we want to be able to with this Budget and
this environment keep the environment up for the health of the rural
sector, this is not withstanding climactic hardships and the rest, and I just
want to say a couple of things about the banks. The banks have been
cutting back a lot of their operations in rural areas in the name of efficiency.
But I think they are being very short-sighted they are failing to see the
potential of Australia's rural industry, which is one of Australia's
comparative advantages, which represents one of Australia's comparative
advantages and the capacity of Australia's farmers to run profitable and
productive concerns. The banks have been cutting overheads, they don't
have the personnel necessary to provide farmers and farming communities
with the service they need. They seem to me to be almost incapable of
intensely managing typical rural loans in the region of $ 50,000 to $ 200,000
they don't seem to be able to get a handle on the management of those
loans at all, so they have taken the next best policy, and that is to basically 
back out. I think they need to take a longer term view they do have a very
privileged position in the financial community, and simply just resorting to
housing lending, and moving away from what I call intelligent rural lending,
is I think, a bad trend.
One of the things your President and Rick and I have discussed on occasions
is this question about whole of farm planning which, I think, is important. It
would be far better to get the banks interested in how a farm is managed to
be able to assess the quality of the loans by being able to assess the credit
being extended to farms, if in fact, there is a whole of farm plan. I think we
should be moving more towards this where we have consultants in each
district who are able to go and look at a farm and say what its capacity is,
what the soils are like, what it should be growing, how it should be grazing,
how the. farm should be configured et cetera.
Were that to happen and if whole of farm plans were advanced ahead of, if
you like, primary advances in loans the bank's security would be better and
we would have a far better relationship, a far more conducive relationship
between banks and farms and farmers and graziers.
So, when we look at our possibilities, the Asian markets around was and the
demonstrable ethic for hard work and adaptability which the farm sector has,
then they seem to me to mark themselves out farmers and graziers as
typically the sort of people banks should be lending to rather than cutting
back. So, I am going to take whatever opportunity I can to remind the banks
of their responsibilities here, but let's make their task a little easier by helping
them, if you like develop these relationships which make farm lending easier
rather than harder.
Can I perhaps finish my remarks by just saying, we have established a great
deal of common ground in recent years. We understand that our ambitions
are very much alike. I know from working in the last two years on issues as
diverse as Native Title and Landcare and the drought and regional
development that we can get a lot done together. I think we have become, as
far as the farm and rural communities are concerned, good listeners. We try
and earnestly work our way through the problems and see what we can do in
a systemic way and we will keep that up. As I say, we are working together
now at the moment in the United States on the farm bill and I think it does
show that the view the NIFF has taken, that it is not just simply a sectoral body
which is arguing for sectional interests but taking a broader view of national
interests, have served it particularly well because, I think, while ever it is has
adopted those sorts of policies it has been more relevant, stronger, more
influential and able to get, if you like, sector specific changes into place as
well as the broader, big brush issues.
So, I see enormous potential in our relationship. As hard at times as it has
been and in many places they still are, we have made great progress and I
think the points that Donald made about the drought are right. We are seeing
these rains, but we have seen them before, we've seen the beginning of rains 
for winter crops and yet the crops haven't materialised, but this time we have
an infrastructure of policy sitting behind, the problem of the drought and we
ought to be, perhaps, I suppose the term is cautiously optimistic about these
rains. They seem widespread and lets hope they are as good as they look,
but by the same token, let me endorse his remarks by saying let's not let the
pressure off on sustainability and drought management simply because we
have seen some change in seasonal conditions. We have had a major
structural problem here, cyclical problem, but becoming structural because it
is so long with the drought and now is the time to remember that we have
been making progress in drought management and these rains are a
reminder that it is a long term rather than a short term problem.
Can I thank you for having me over. Let me again, conclude my remarks by
commending Rick Farley for the role he has played. I wish him well in the
future. I know he is going to be a hard man to replace, but the organisation
has changed as a consequence of his being there and under the leadership
of people like Donald, I think, the future is yours, it is what we can make of it.
Thank you.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS SESSION
Q: On the theme of the drought and the fact that we have had some
useful rain in parts of the country and, indeed, some very big parts of
the country and that is very welcome. But, we do seem to have this
persistent problem in some areas and, as I said, those are some of the
areas that have been most badly affected for longest. I think, in the
pleasure that the rain we have had brings to those areas that it comes,
is always the concern by the people in other areas, in the areas that
haven't had it, that they will be forgotten and I think it would be very
much appreciated by those people, Prime Minister, if you could restate
essentially the commitment that you have given in the past that the
relief that they have got through the assistance measures that are will,
indeed, continue until such time as they actually do get back into a
position where seasonal conditions and production returns to some
sort of normality. And secondly, we have actually still got some
exceptional circumstances applications pending and we would like an
assurance that the Government will deal with those as quickly as
possible.
PM: Let me, Donald, say that I am quite happy to say that we had some
exceptional circumstance applications, I think, in Victoria amongst
other places pending and one will need to see with these rains what
the continuing assessment of these regions are. But, from our point of
view we don't regard the drought as being over simply because these
rains have come and that we would like to see these applications
progressed and we will be keeping these policies in place. We have
now got, I think from memory, about 6000 to 7000 and maybe more by
now farm families getting income support. We have seen about 4000
farm businesses received support under RAS and it is the sort of 
matrix of policy we have got sitting there now which is something, I
think, that becomes a real advance for the rural community because
now they are there they won't be going away. I mean, us having put
them there, I can't imagine the future if someone is going to basically
say no, the farm assets test is going to be applied regardless of
income in these circumstances. So, I would like to think we have made
a policy advance in some of these areas, but before we cry victory and
walk off the field, let's see what happens with the rains and let's
progress these applications.
Q: Prime Minister, interest rates have a major impact on farm profitability,
some comments made yesterday by the Treasury Secretary Ted Evans
and they have been interpreted by the media to mean that interest
rates may well have peaked. On the other hand, of course, there are a
lot of financial institutions that are providing other advice concerned
about higher inflation and perhaps a rebound in spending. Do you
believe that interest rates, especially those that are driven by Reserve
Bank policy on short term money market rates that have an impact on
business overdrafts and mortgages have peaked?
PM: Let's make these two distinguishing points. -That is, the long bond
rates set in the market without any reference to the Reserve Bank and
it is the long bond rate which has fallen by over a percentage point
and, I think, the large reduction in the bond selling program is probably
responsible for a large part of that. Short end rates are conditioned by
long end perceptions to some extent, but they are also governed by
demand management objectives. One of the points I was making to
you on my feet is that we have succeeded in slowing the economy
down so that now we are forecasting for the coming year three and
three quarters per cent rather than five or six per cent. Therefore, the
policy need of using further monetary adjustments to slow the economy
down seems remote. It would only come back into prospect if, in fact,
growth unexpectedly picked up to unsustainable levels again, but I
can't see it in the current environment.
Plus the change in the Budget balance is fairly substantial and that is
going to reduce quite a bit of public sector demand from the economy.
So, even if for instance, we were only conservatively estimating the
decline in GDP coming from private activity there is one thing certain
about the Budget, there is a further large complement in the reduction
of public demand. Put all that together and Ted Evans' view that the
underlying inflation rate may be a little on the up side in the Budget
estimates and that augurs quite well, I think, for the short run of rates
because, again, you have got always a demand in supply equation
there to be met and by such a very large change in the public sector
call on savings we are going to see a substantial change in that
demand supply equation and that should be good for rates. So, I think,
one of the objectives of the Budget was to take pressure of interest
rates and I think it has done that. 
Q: Prime Minister, up until now the. Industrial Relations Accord parties
have been exclusively the Government and the ACTU, given the
importance of progressing further industrial reform for competitive
reasons, what is in your view on the extension of the focus of the
Accord to include parties such as farmers, business, large and small
generally, in interests of progressing further constructive reform?
PM: If you go back over the history of the Accord, it started in 1983 from a
wage share in GDP that was inordinately high and the profit share in
GDP was well below the levels we had experienced in the 1960s and
as a consequence, investment had been sharply curtailed. So, in a
sense it was the ACTU constituency that had to give something away.
They were the people giving it away, the business community were the
people getting it from wages to profits. So, that is why of its essence,
in its original days the Accord was a matter between the trade unions
and the Government because the Government was seeking to redress
that shift in the profit share which had so dislocated investment. Now,
that was true for most of the 1980s. It is less true now because the
profit share is as high as it was in the late 1980s and, I think, now has
no historical precedent. This is the highest levels of profits, national
income to profits, I think, probably ever.
We are seeing a lot of, if you like, informal involvement of the business
organisations. You can see it in the change to enterprise bargaining.
You can see it in the support of the change. You might recall a couple
of years ago the MTIA were most sceptical about a movement to an
enterprise bargaining system because Bert Evans had a long memory
of what had happened with leap frogging in the late 1970s and early
1980s under the concept of comparative wage justice and so was, if
you like, less than confident that business could actually handle the
strengths which the Industrial Relations Act was going to give it. At
any rate, what we are seeing is a very great spread of enterprise
bargains, 65 per cent of all employees covered by federal awards are
now covered by a bargain of some kind or another and we are seeing
some very good bargains being struck and just a week or so ago the
metals' unions and the industry, I can't remember the place, made
what the Metal Trades Industry Association thought was a fairly good
agreement and as we see these, what you call, very good grass roots
agreements continuing to arise, they become industry standards. The
industry starts to get its pecker up and get its confidence, but people
are starting to really pull a lot of productivity out of the changes and
employees also are benefiting.
So, there is, I think, now a fairly conducive, informal involvement by
some of the industry bodies. The hotel sector, for instance, did a land
mark enterprise agreement with federal hotels and, I think, that
therefore the game has opened up. In terms of the Accord proper, of
course, because we have moved away from the centralised wage fixing 
system, there is less specificity if you like in the elements of the
Accord, rather broad commitments by the trade unions about
maintaining competition with our trading partners on inflation and
commitments by the Government about support for the safety net
arrangements for those people who can't access enterprise bargaining.
So, the Accord elements are becoming more simple. They are
because the system of wage fixation is less centralised and now more
complex. Now, I think, that it is possible for organisations like the NIFF
and the MTIA and the other business organisations, the Business
Council if they can drop their ideology, to actually be involved and be
relevant in this process as we see the continuing evolutionary change
to the labour market. I think this would be a very good thing, but in any
Accord process, with the government and the unions, there is a
commitment by the trade unions to low inflation, to competitiveness. A
commitment by the government to equity in wage adjustments. If a
business party joins it, there has got to be commitments too, it can't be
in a sense, there is no point in being in it with nothing to contribute and
that is why when we have mooted these things in the past, they have
never come to much because the business community has never
believed it was a principal party to the point where it was actually
giving something away or providing something. That has changed in a
more co-operative environment and maybe the time is arising where
that can be considered. I think we are about to move to another
Accord Mark VIII which will cover the next three years, but I think we
are seeing now, you can see for instance the ACTU's attitude towards
the NIFF or some of the other business organisations, how much the
game has changed, how less confrontational it is, how more
constructive it is and, I think, they would welcome expressions such as
the one you have made.
Q: Prime Minister, when APEC was formed trade was well and truly one of
its prime objectives, Is the reform of agricultural trade still on the
agenda and if it isn't, do you propose to make moves to bring it back
on the agenda because it is extremely important for agriculture in
Australia?
PM: The answer to that is very much in the affirmative and the value of
APEC is that, well you know this expression the north-south dialogue
we used to hear through the 1970s and 1980s, APEC is the first
tangible real expression of that dialogue. When you have got a body
in the pacific rim which are represented by countries such as the
United States and Japan, the first and second largest developed
economies. And then the largest, if you like, developing countries
China, Indonesia, smaller countries like Papua New Guinea so it
really is, in a sense, representing that north-south divide and, of
course, one of the things we argued all the way through the GATT was
that although Australia was a developed country it had a lot of the
trading profile of a developing country because of agriculture and 
therefore we put the Cairns Group together and successfully kept it
together for seven years to prosecute that argument. So, I think, there
is a lot of trust in Australia's position as an agricultural producer and
somebody who champions the cause of free markets or open markets
and freer trade in agriculture. That is going to matter in the Asia
Pacific where some of the agricultural nationals will want better access
and it is going to improve the living standards of developed countries
like Japan to actually improve access for agricultural products from
abroad. So, given the fact that the GATT took so long because we are facing
the subsidy problems of the European and the European Common
Market, APEC representing half the worlds production and about half
the worlds population, gives us a chance to do a far more precise and
refined approach to agriculture than we were even able to do with the
Common Agricultural Policy and the GATT. But, we are going to see
changes too and I think the other thing about APEC is that it will bring
on, over time, at least it will encourage a debate about another general
trade round because if half of the world is liberalising its trade, the
other half of the world has got to be thinking about it.
The other thing is, as these Visigrad countries join the European
community, where they have large scale common agriculture, once
those areas have been farmed with modem agricultural machinery and
the agriscience and the understanding of productivity becomes more
entrenched in those countries, the weight of product that is going to be
dumped onto the European financial system is going to be so great, I
think, in the end it will actually dislocate the Common Agricultural
Policy. I think that has been all right to the moment where we have
essentially small, in many countries for instance in France, quite small
farm agriculture, but once you get those broad acres of the Visigrad
countries coming to higher production, I think, the game is going to get
very nasty indeed for European budgets and they may be looking then
for an opportunity to start to see their problems being resolved in a
broader context and that is where I think APEC can be just the ticket.
ends 



IVI
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P4J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE JUSTICE $ TATEMENT
BRISBANE 18 MAY 1995
Today it Is my privilege to launch the Commonwealth Government's Justice
Statement a $ 160 million program of reforms to improve our justice system and
make Australia a more equitable, democratic arnd just society.
It is another practical demonstration of the Commonwealth Govemmenfs belief
that Australia will be stronger and a better place In which to live if all Australians
are able to share In the benefits of this democracy and, equally, share a faith In
the ideas and values on which that democracy is built.
The Justice Statement outlineS action the Government will take right across the
legal system.-to reduce ctime, protect consumers, reinforce human rights, sImplify
legislation, improve legal aid serVices and make the resolution of disputes outside
the legal system a practical alternative to legal proceedings.
In launching this Statement today I will concentrate on some of the measures to
achieve our three main objectives for reform.
The first objective is to bring justice to people, not people to lawyers.
We want to help people resolve their problems before they get caught up in legal
action. Many Australians first encounter the legal system in the difficult and stressful
circumstances which almost invariably surround proceedings in Family Law.
We will substantially increase funding for those family support services that help
families through difficult times and, wherever possible, stay together.
With the right support, many families are able to resolve ' their problems without
legal intervention and its financial and emotional costs. 
TEL: 17. ay. 15 INU. ULL
2
In doing this, we will also enable the courts to deal more Promptly with those
cases which cannot be resolved by othor means.
In total, we will provide $ 54 million over four year* for the expansion of family
services throughout Australia: services which have been shown to help couples
enter reletionships witrn a oetter understanding of the oommitment they are
making, and families to work through protbleMS which May arise over the years.
We will doUble the iurnber or marriage and relationship courses, piovide a~ 50 pidl
cent Increase in family skills training, and " rate up to 20 new financial
Counselling services. The Family Court's counselling services will be increased
by 25 por oent andi more then 15,000 additional people each year will be assisted
by family mediation.
We will specifically extend these programs to assist families in regional and rural
a reas.
The Guvivinnint will also allocate an additional $ 2.4 million over tour years to
improve the way family support services deal with family violence. We know from
consultations with women in the communit that violence and fear of violence are
pr~ ority Issues.
One of the aims of the now funding will be to rind ways of preventing relationships
beomn violent. But Staff Will also be trained in the best methods of responding
to family violence, innClUdng the means by which they can help women who want
to leave a violent relationship, or people living In violent circumstances who want
the relationship to continue but the violence to stop.
Our strategy Is also geared to provide families with the means to resolve disputes
outside the formal proceose3 of the courts.
Aiternative proceses, such as mediation, have Increasingly proved to be
effective means of dealing with family breakdowns.
R'ecause mediation glvpq ppople a greater stay In Mhe dacdqlons whirh affism their
lives, the results are more likely to be acceptea and more likely to endure,
We will encourage the shift from litigation to mediation by increasing the numbier
of family mediators and funding the establshmient of new community mediation
services around Australia,
Alternative means, however, are sometimes inappropriate -for example, in
disputes where there is Inequality or bargaining between the parties or where
there Is a history of domestic violence, The Government will fund the Family
Court to train mediators and counsellors in ways which will -enable them to
recognise situations which demand resort to the legal system. r UZ/ V( 
TEL 3
As part of our objective to bring justice to the people we have developed ' Safer
Australia', a national strategy to reduce crime and build Safer communities.
Crime has debilitating, often devastating. effects on families and local
communities. It carries significant social and economic costs.
Although the State and Territory governments have primary responsibility for law
and order, the national government can play a role where it is appropriate to its
functions in the task of providing a secure environment for Australians.
We will continue working with the States and Territories on issues such as gun
control. We will tighten Australia's already stringent gun importation restrictions
and ban the importation of handguns that can be adapted to duplicate machine
guns. We will also provide $ 1.2 million over four years for community surveys to identify
problem areas and develop responses to reduce crime. We will support local
pilot projects which may make communities safer, such as improved lighting in
public areas and better safety and surveillance In car parks and public transport
centres. We will provide $ 2.8 million over four years to test local cdme reduction
measures that will have application elsewhere In Australia.
The second main objective of the Govemment's justice strategy is to ensure that
Australians have access to legal services which are affordable and responsive to
their needs and circumstances.
As a first step, the legal aid system will be reformed.
It was the Whitiamr Labor Government 20 years ago which first recognised the
Importance of comprehensive legal aid arrangements.
Through our funding of legal aid commissions and community legal centres, the
Commonwealth remains the major source of funding for community legal
assistance and the initiatives In the Statement reinforce that position.
But despite its level of financial contribution, the Commonwealth has had little say
in the distribution of the legal aid dollar.
This will change.
It is our view that the Commonwealth has an important role to play in ensuring
national consistency in the delivery of legal aid services. T1EL.: May. 95 22: 35 No. 022 P. 06/ U( 
TEL 4
Uniform eligibility criteria, Uhflhormf performance measures and best practice
principles will be developed to provide. as far as poSSie, equal acress to legal
aid, regardless of where people live.
An Australian 10901 Assistance Bonrd will be established to coordinate legal aid
planning and policy and increase access end equity.
We will also provide a total of $ 24 million over four years to Increase legal aid
. qprviceA~
At present there Is an Italance In legal aid funding. Criminal law cases currently
absorb the major proportiori of the budget. While the Government agrees that
anyone accused of a 6erious criminal matter needs legal representation, other
legal problems can have different, but equally -serous, consequences for the
people concerncd, For instance, women seeking protection from violence may
be in grave danger, and unemployed workers may faco eviction proceedings, and
yet not have access to legal assistan'ce.
Over the next four years, Thp Government will provide an 2dditional $ 16.8 million
to legal aid commissions to provide more ASSISncA In fgamily law and civil law
111tturs. Traditionally, legal aid has provided assistance for the most needy inOiw ui ty.
But many other Australians cannot afford private legal advice and representation.
Contingency fees offer one solution, Under thcso arrongements, in cases where
there Is a prospoct of an award of money, law~ yers provide their services with
payment contingent on a successful outcome.
But even when lawyers offer their services on a contingency basis, other uip-front
tfe ofteni have to be met by the client In order to take legal action, * Such as those
for expert witnesses arid medical reports. Those di.% buiserrierit costs can be
prohibitively expensive.
The Government will set up a $ 10.5 million National Disbursements Assistance
Fund to moot the up-front costs of litigation where lawyers are acting on a
contingency or no fee basis. These disbursements will only have to bo repaid if
the client wins the tAse.
WO knoQw tildt worirluriity legal centres are a cost effective and well-accepted
method of providingj help to thousands of Australians.
The centres are In touch with the needs of the local communities in which they
operate, and provide assistance on a varioty of legal issues, including credit
2dvice, family low, child support and social security matters. T1EL7:. May.' 95 22: 35 No. U22 IV. UL4/ u( 
TEL: ar. ic.
This Statement Provides a doubling of funding for Community legal centres, with
an additional $ 30 mill ion over four years.
Nine new community legal services will be established in high growth urban and
regional locations.
In a major new initiative, the Government will establish the National Women's
Justice Strategy to redress the inequities women face In obtaining access to
justice, The strategy will be part of the expanded community legal centres program. Its
centrepiece will be a national network of women's legal centres,
At least one specialist women's legal centre will be established to servie the
needs of women in every State and Territory.
The centres will provide advice through an Australia-w~ de toll free telephone
service. The centres will also be given funding to cater for the needs of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, the least well-served by the justice
system; and outreach services will be provided for women in rural and remote
areas. The third objective of the Government's justice strategy is to reform the legal
profession, courts and tribunals to make them more accountable and accessible.
Reducing the costs of legal services and promoting a greater consumer focus will
increase access to justice.
Competition reduces costs. And competition is coming to the legal profession.
Last month, the Commonwealth and the States reached an historic agreement on
the implementation of a national competition policy. The policy will apply to all
professions. It will ensure consumers in the legal market enjoy the same
protection as people in other sectors. Unnecessary regulation will be removed
and a more competitive and accountable legal profession created. Consumers
will have greater choice and lawyers will have greater flexibility to meet consumer
needs. Lawyers will benefit from these reforms through the creation of a genuine national
market in legal services so that qualified lawyers can practise freely anywhere In
Australia. But more needs to be done. ~ 05 00: 5 Wo 0F22 P. 05/ 07 
TEL' 17. May. 95 22: 35 No. 022 F. uU/ Uv
6
While the Commonwealth's constitutional power to regulate the legal profession is
limited, the Government will take action in areas that are within its power to
provide better services for consumers.
We will require lawyers acting In Federal matters to disclose to clients the likely
costs of legal action, and canvass with them the possibility of alternative
procedures. We will overhaul the fee scales that apply In Federal courts with a view to
developing a simpler structure and more accurate charging rates.
The Government will work with the States and the profession to accelerate
reform, but we will not hesitate to act if reforms are delayed.
If the States do not do so, we will legislate to permit contingency fees in Federal
matters, other than family and criminal law, and we will Introduce legislation to
permit advertising by lawyers.
The Government is also working to improve the operation of our courts and
tibunals. Justice Is not well served if people do not understand what happens in
our courts or have difficulty using them.
A t the Justice Forum held last year I expressed an interest in the creation of
charters for courts which would set out the standards of access and service which
people can expect In courts and how they might be treated,
I am pleased that the courts are keen to take up this idea, and we will be
supporting their Initiative with funding.
We will also provide funds to develop facilities in our courts which cater for the
needs of people with a disebility and people caring for children.
The Justice Statement also addresses deficiencies which have been Identified
within our courts, particularly in the Family Court,
Extra staff will be provided to the Family Court to deal with Its current backlog of
Cases and handle peak case loads. Additional funding will be provided to
increase Family Court services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
And we will fund an expansion of court translatino and interpreting ocrvices, to
etboth Indigenous peoples and people of non-English speaking backgrounds.
We will al~ so provide funding for professional development courses for judges,
focusing on Issues such as gender and cross-cultural awareness. 
TEL: 17. May. 95 22: 35 No .022 P. 07/ 07
7
This statement concerns Australian justice and the Australian people. it is 8
Justice statement and a comprehensive one but it goes much further than that.
It we can create a justice system which is simpler, cheaper and more accessible
we will extend our democracy and strengthen belief in it; we will increase respect
for our laws and the ideas and principles on which they are based. This Justice
Statement Is an Investment in Australian democracy.
It Is also an investment in the quality of Australian life. If we can reduce crime,
find solutions to domestic violence and family breakdowns, and mitigate the
trauma which accompanies these tragedies, Australian communities will be better
places In which to live and work and raise children,
That Is the bottom line of this justice statement-in the end our legal system is
much less about the traditions, -symbols and Institutions of the law grand as they
may be than it is about providing a safe and secure environment for all
Australians. There can scarcely be a better means of encouraging trust in the law and faith in
Australian democracy. 



/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
KEIO UNIVERSITY, TOKYO THURSDAY, 25 MAY 1995
It Is a very great pleasure to be here at one of Japan's most eminent
academic Institutions. I thank Keio University both for its kind Invitation
to speak and for the honour which has been bestowed on me today.
I am very much aware of the role that Kelo University has played In
Japan's history. Its fame parallels that of Its founder, Yuklchi Fukuzawa,
a man of remarkable vision who believed that Japan had nothing to fear
and much to gain from being open to the world, and through education,
economic development and modernisation, made an outstanding contribution to
this country.
Today, the University he founded continues to play an influential role In
the life of modern Japan. I understand that about one In every five of
Japan's Diet members and many senior business executives attended
this University.
I am pleased to see some of these illustrious Kelo graduates here today,
and I look forward to meeting others during my visit among them MITI
Minister, Mr Hashimoto, for whom I have a very warm personal regard.
Keio University has strong ties with Australia. Its Australian Studies
course is a constructive link In the relationship between Australia and
Japan and a practical example of our mutual recognition that we must
continue to broaden knowledge and understanding of each other.
We would like to see the ties made stronger, and I will be doubly
honoured by this occasion If In some way It serves to strengthen them.
For all these reasons this seems an appropriate place to offer an
Australian's view of modern Japan a very friendly Australian's view, I
might say.
It Is part of my privilege today to know that among this distinguished
audience are some of the next generation of Japanese leaders. The
young people here carry a share of the responsibility for Japan's future,
and hence for the f uture of our f riendship.
Today, In part, my remarks are addressed specifically to you.
I want you to understand the significance and the magnitude of our
relationship, the good It does now and Its potential for good. I want you
to form an understanding of Australia and Australia's view of the region
and the world. 
However, the weight of my remarks must be directed to the older
members of the audience. This is where the weight of responsibility fails
as It always does, In every country on the present generation of
leaders. Ultimately the future depends on their capacity and willingness
to renew their vision.
This visit my third to Japan in three years occurs against the
backdrop of the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Pacific War.
The Second World War brought vast suffering and destruction to the
peoples of the Asia-Pacific. Millions died, Including 2.4 million
Japanese. More than 17,000 Australians died, nearly half of them as
prisoners of war.
We should not forget these things or fail to reflect upon the reasons for
them not to keep an old animosity alive, but to strengthen the
foundations of understanding on which friendships are built.
We ignore history at our peril. I don't believe we can deliver a secure
future to our young people without coming to grips with the realities of
our past. That Is a lesson I think we are learning, In other contexts, In
Australia. I am encouraged to hear that Japanese students are also beginning to
learn more about the war. It is knowledge which will serve them well:
and it will serve Japan well as this new generation takes on the
responsibility for the future.
In particular, It will help as Japan seeks acceptance and legitimacy for
leadership in the region a status which Is In every practical sense
Japan's due.
I said on another occasion that among the countries of our region " a
common awareness of the history we share will strengthen the basis of
trust and cooperation between us." I am no less convinced of that now.
That Is why I think that, on this anniversary of the end of the war in the
Pacific, Japan can make a very substantial contribution to the region's
future If, as you decide upon the way forward, you also decide to
confront the past.
Learning the right lessons from the past Is, of course, the essential task.
I believe the lesson Is openness.
The global economy becomes a more and more pervasive fact of life.
The revolution in Information technology and communications speeds
that process while reaching Into all our lives.
Today we might be forgiven for thinking that openness is not a path we
can chos to take, but rather one we are being forced down. And, If we
take that view, we might easily take it as a corollary that the national
Imperative Is resistance that we must close our shutters and protect
both our Industries and our cultural differences.
I don't take this view. I think the Internationalisatlon of economies and
the revolution In telecommunications offer unprecedented opportunities,
not only for business but for cultural expression and creativity. 
It puts a premium on our cultural differences. It encourages cultural
definition and renewal. With such a rich and famously resilient culture
and such a strong sense of Identity, It therefore seems to me that Japan
has little to fear and everything to gain from an open, pluralist regional
and world environment.
The option certainly remains to turn inwards and shut out the world but
it was always a poor option, and It Is a worse one now.
It Is the option Australia took for years. For generations we Isolated
ourselves behind high tariff walls and racially based Immigration
policies. We looked through a narrow window on the world which
afforded a view of little more than the country in whose Empire we had
once been a colony.
Long after we became a nation we continued to look to there for our
political, economic and cultural sustenance.
We Australians were delivered an enormously rich British and European
heritage and the best of It we will always cherish and maintain but when
we began to lift our heads and looked to Asia and the Pacific we saw
how much more was open to us.
We saw how much more there was to being Austraiian.
This awareness of the region has been a major factor obliging us to
realise that economically and culturally, we have to be open. And that
we have to change. Indeed It was our awareness of Asian rates of
growth which more than anything else propelled us in the eighties into a
decade of radical economic reform.
We have pulled down the tariff wall, floated our currency, deregulated
our financial markets and restructured our Industries.
In short we have done the hard things we had to do if we were going to
succeed In the world and give new generations of Australians a chance
In the future.
There have been great rewards life-saving rewards.
Our productivity and competitiveness have dramatically improved In the
past decade.
Our culture has been enriched by new waves of migration, including
from Asia one half of our Immigrants each year come from Asian
countries and by vastly Increased awareness of other societies.
From our diversity has come strength. Australia Is a rich multicultural
society, a much more worldly one and a peaceful one.
The arts have flourished: exposure to the world has stimulated them and
with that we have seen a reappraisal of who we are, a redefining of our
national Identity.
At the same time we have begun to confront difficult truths about our
own past. The dispossession of Australia's Indigenous peoples and the 
destruction and brutality which accompanied It are notorious facts of our
history. In the past two years we have begun to set a few of the wrongs right.
Our courts have acknowledged the claims of Indigenous Australians to
land. And the Australian Government has responded by legislating to
protect those rights and to compensate Aboriginal Australians from
whom native title has Irrevocably passed.
In seeking reconciliation with indigenous Australians we are reconciling
ourselves with the past and, for all the legal and political turmoil It has
brought, I believe it Is making us stronger.
As the Japanese people well know, the process of change Is rarely easy
and never painless. But nothing Is so rewarding as a hard decision well
made. Change can be exhilarating as well as painful.
We have a lot more to do in Australia, but with such recent measures as
massive Improvement In our savings position through a new national
superannuation policy, the implementation of a national competition
policy, and a huge investment In training and education, we are doing it.
We are seeing the nation fundamentally re-shaped and re-oriented: reshaped
as a modern, multicultural society and a diverse, productive and
competitive economy; and re-oriented towards the countries of the
region In which we live and where we know our future so substantially
Ilies. For several years now, Japan like other developed nations Including
Australia has been faced with a complex range of economic, social and
political challenges.
As a friend and partner of Japan, Australia has a close and sympathetic
Interest In how Japan responds to these challenges.
While the process is some way from complete, Japanese politics and
society and the Japanese economy are undergoing an historic
transf ormation.
Political debate in Japan has Intensified In recent times. Some may see
this as a sign of uncertainty and a fissure breakdown In the cohesion of
Japanese society.
But I am firmly convinced It is a healthy development. Perhaps even a
necessary development.
Similarly, Japan's economy is gradually opening up to the world and to
the imperative of structural change, promoted by its own success which
Is reflected In the value of Its currency.
Japan has identifiled the challenges it must confront to remain a dynamic
mature economy in areas such as the taxation structure, the
agricultural sector, reducing government regulations and understanding
the key Ingredient of ministerial Initiative and political authority. 
Japan has also been feeling out a role in regional and International
affairs which will better align its responsibilities with Its economic power
in the United Nations, In APEC and through its generous development
assistance. As a friend, Australia warmly welcomes these developments.
And as a friend, we feel we can encourage indeed urge Japan to
sustain the momentum of reform
Only a robust and responsive political system which promotes political
accountability and Is capable of generating genuine political leadership
can make vital decisions of reform.
We are confident Japan can build on the foundations of political reform
it has laid over the last few years to establish both healthy public debate
about policy ideas, and a bureaucracy which Is not only responsive to
government leadership but capable of acting creatively with Ministers.
Political parties have to work hard to make themselves relevant to the
needs and the aspirations of the Japanese people especially young
people like those at this university. Cynicism about the political process
is not unique to Japan, but It Is corrosive wherever it occurs:
It dims a country's vitality and diminishes its faith in itself.
I have no doubt that Japan's young people want to make a contribution,
just as I know Australia's do. It Is not good enough to meet their doubts
with cynicism of our own, or to attempt to sell them stale goods from
another age.
It Is Incumbent on our generation, if not to f Ire their Imagination, then at
least to give them an environment where the Imagination can flourish
where the future can be imagined.
We have no greater responsibility than to give our young people reason
for confidence and optimism. Nothing short of that will release the
human potential on which the future depends.
Above all, it Is crucial that Japan's political and economic leadership
itself Is Infused with Imagination. to Imagine something better and to
craft the economic and social reforms which will make it a reality.
Success or failure In this will not only determine whether the Japanese
people are able to fully enjoy the high standard of living that they have
worked so hard to achieve: it will also determine whether Japan lives up
to Its full potential as a major financial and trading hub within the global
and East Asian economies.
Japan cannot rely on other countries to fix its exchange rate problems.
Only Japan can make the hard decisions needed to push ahead
vigorously with deregulation In order to release the energy It needs to
prosper as a mature economy.
Only Japan can tackle the structural problems which obstruct better land
utilisation and control the amount of savings that Is Invested In housing
and other social infrastructure. 
Australia, like all Japan's foreign partners, wants Japan to engage In
large-scale deregulation and economic reform because we know It will
Improve our access to your markets.
But the main stimulus for reform of this magnitude cannot come from
abroad. It must come from a conviction within Japan itself that this Is the best
way to break out of the current cycle, and the best way to improve the
economic and social well-being of Japan and its people.
I have no doubt that the wisdom which underlies Japan's phenomenal
success In the past 50 years will prevail again; that the people
themselves who are the source of Japan's great strength will
accommodate the change and embrace it.
Japan has one of the best educated, most innovative and hardestworking
populations in the world.
It Is no less a strength of yours In the present circumstances that the
Japanese people are committed to democracy; or that they are
generous enough to make Japan one of the world's largest aid donors.
And their stoicism is legendary I need only mention the dignified
resolve with which the people of Kobe have set about rebuilding their
city and their lives since the terrible earthquake.
Knowing this about the Japanese people, no one can ever doubt that
they will make these crucial reforms and profit by them.
Some argue that Japan's social and cultural traditions stand In the way
of far-reaching political and economic reform. I am sure that this Is not
the case. I have no doubt that, on the contrary, Japan's traditional
values and Identity will be a source of strength In seeing through
reforms. So will the national cohesion, that sense of national purpose and
community for which Japan Is renowned.
Japan's sheer economic weight should also provide Japan and Indeed
the world with cause for confidence about Japan's future. We hear a
lot about the growth rates of Asia's emerging economies.
But It Is important to remember that, at today's exchange rates, Japan's
economy still constitutes over 70 per cent of the whole East Asian
economy. An economy of that size will maintain its Impact on the global
economy and continue to command global attention and respect.
Japan has always been and remains a driving force behind the Asia-
Pacific region's economic Integration, It remains for many countries the
model. A heavy responsibility accompanies this Influence: Japan's weight In the
International economy means that policy decisions taken here have farreaching
effects. 
It also means that Japan's reform efforts should enjoy the support of Its
friends in the international community. Far from resenting Japan's
economic success, I am sure the world wants to see it continue. It Is a
balanced equation: Japan needs the world, and the world needs Japan.
That is why I am concerned about the present trade dispute between
Japan and the United States. This is not an easy issue and I understand
some of the frustrations on both sides.
But I would urge both sides to look beyond their present differences and
consider the ramifications not just for themselves and for smaller
trading countries like Australia which stand to get caught In the crossfire
but, more Importantly, for the entire Asia-Pacific region.
The US-Japan relationship is a linchpin of regional stability and
prosperity. The US-Japan Security Treaty Is absolutely fundamental to
the security of the Pacific and more widely.
Quite simply, no-one can afford to allow bilateral trading differences
between these key Asia-Pacific partners to jeopardise any part of
political and security structure of our region or to imperil the sense of
regional community which is now emerging.
The last countries to countenance this should be Japan and the United
States themselves.
And, of course, no one can afford the economic consequences of a
prolonged Japan-US trade dispute.
I believe these are key reasons for Japan and Australia's shared
commitment to APEC as the primary vehicle for regional economic cooperation
and Integration and, In particular, to implementing the APEC
leaders' historic agreement In Bogor last year to free regional trade and
investment. APEC Is, In many respects, tailor-made to meet Japan's Interests. A
former Japanese Prime Minister told me that Japan of all countries
stood to benefit the most from APEC. I would now go further and say
that Japan, for Its own economic and strategic interests, has to ensure
that APEC succeeds.
APEC provides a means for Japan to manage its trade problems with the
United States In a way which will strengthen the International trading
System.
APEC provides a regional framework In which governments can take the
hard decisions on economic deregulation and structural change.
Because this growth will always be able to show something In return a
reciprocal benefit.
This will help to ensure further opening of markets and continued high
growth rates in the region and thus enable structural adjustment to take
place In a multilateral context where everyone is a winner.
In a period when there seems to be no enthusiasm In Europe or the
United States for further global trade liberalisation, APEC Is the only
body In the world which can act as a catalyst for a new global round. 
In helping to meet these objectives, APEC provides a multilateral
framework, bringing Japan together with the United States and China in
a way which emphasises their common interests in regional stability and
prosperity. APEC can multilateralise the interests of these three great
states in the Asia-Pacific.
Japan has an unprecedented chance to take the reins of leadership
when it chairs the APEC leaders' meeting in Osaka. If it siezes the
chance it will secure its interests.
It is essential that we agree in Osaka on a comprehensive action plan for
implementing the historic decisions we took in Bogor last year.
This should, in my view, not only map out in as much detail as possible
how we each plan to meet our free trade and investment commitments
by 2010 or 2020, but also include concrete steps to address
impediments to trade and investment in the APEC region.
Our business communities now rightly expect APEC now to deliver real
results. This meeting points to a future in which all countries have a common
interest in peace and stability. Above all else, it demonstrates how far
the region has come in the 50 years since the war ended indeed how
far it has come in the last five years.
You can be assured of Australia's full and active support on this.
Australia has been delighted to play a role in the creation of APEC and
its transformation into an executive body without parallel In the region.
Australia also has confidence in Japan's capacity to take on a more
active independent international role beyond the region.
However great the temptations to resist the tides of globalisation and
economic integration, the logic of Japan's economic stature, its central
place in the international trading system, its importance as a source of
investment and technology and its post-war record as one of the most
democratic and stable countries in Asia, make it inevitable that Japan's
international role will grow.
It is for that reason that Australia firmly supports permanent Japanese
membership of the United Nations Security Council.
For while Australia sees Japan remaining a central player in Asia, we see
Japan's links outside Asia particularly with the United States, but also
with Europe as fundamental to its future role. As a trading and
investing economy, Japan has long recognised its critical interest in the
maintenance of an open international trading system.
Japan will remain pivotal to regional economic integration. But it will
also be a vital force for continuing global economic integration.
So Japan can be confident that its friends want it to play an important
role in the world.
And those of you here today who have personal experience or
understanding of the unique partnership between our countries will
know that Australia is one of the best friends Japan has. 
It Is entirely appropriate to enthuse about the bilateral relationship
between Japan and Australia, but we cannot take for granted what we
have achieved together over the last fifty years.
During this visit I hope to highlight this unique and dynamic partnership.
But having emphasised the value of our relationship, I also want to make
people think hard about what we have to do to sustain Its momentum
and vitality.
This demands that we build on the traditional complementarities
between our economies and find new areas for prof itable co-operation
as our economies evolve.
There Is no doubt about Japan's critical Importance to the Australian
economy. Japan was the earliest Influence on Australia's reorientation
towards Asia. In the late 1940s and early 1950s Japan took just 5 per
cent of Australia's exports.
By the mid-i 960s Japan had become Australia's largest overseas
market. Today Japan takes 25 per cent of our total exports.
Today, Japan Is by far Australia's largest trading partner and Australia is
Japan's third-largest source of Imports. Last year our exports to Japan
were worth $ 16 billion.
Bilateral Investment links between Australia and Japan have also been
extremely important, particularly for Australia's economic development.
Japanese Investment In Australia stands at just over $ 50 billion. And
Japan is Australia's fourth largest destination for foreign investment.
For its part, Australia has made a crucial contribution to Japan's
industrialisation and economic advancement as a leading supplier of
industrial raw materials and energy.
We supply over half of Japan's coal Imports and a growing proportion of
its LNG needs. Australia is the single largest supplier of Japan's non-oil
energy needs. Australia, quite literally, has fueled Japan's post-war
growth. But our trading relationship has expanded beyond Its traditional focus
on raw materials and energy. As Japan exports more and more hightechnology
manufactures and services, new complementaritles with
Australia are emerging.
Where once Australia just fed Japan's smelters and furnaces, we now
increasingly feed Its people for example we supply 30 per cent of your
beef consumption and are the largest supplier of your Imported dairy
products. Last year, Australia supplied 183,000 tonnes of fresh rice of the highest
quality to the Japanese market. The opening of this market was a very
bold step for Japan, but because of the decline In your own farming
population, a vital one.
The Australian rice Industry among whose founders in the early years
of this century was a visionary Japanese farmer named Jo Takasuka 
will be a reliable supplier of fresh rice between Japan's own harvests.
We want to build up this market.
" Food security" Is an Issue which has preoccupied Japan for many years,
and it Is an understandable concern.
But it Is a term which has to be redefined by the changes taking place in
Japan itself and by the realities of Interdependence In the global
economy. Food security for Japan needs to embrace the concept of reliable
suppliers of quality foods from non-Japanese sources. As the long
record of our economic relationship shows, you can have no better
partner In this than Australia. And it helps to have a partner with
complementary seasons.
Australia has become one of the most popular places for Japanese to
holiday. In 1994, nearly 730,000 tourists came to Australia f rom Japan,
and the Australian Tourist Commission estimates that more than one
million Japanese will be visiting Australia annually by the year 2000.
At the heart of the post-war expansion of Australia-Japan commercial
relationship lies a dense web of person-to-person ties. These are
essential to the future of our relationship. And there Is no better medium
for their expansion than education.
Australia now ranks behind only China and Korea ( and Japan itself) in
the number of students studying the Japanese language. In 1990, 50 per
cent more students were studying Japanese In Australia than In the
United States, the United Kingdom and Canada combined. In 1993 more
Australian year-12 students studied Japanese than any language other
than English. And Australia is unique in the proportion of primary and
high-school students studying Japanese.
Moreover, there is lively exchange of students between the two
countries. At the school level, Australia and Japan have exchanged
more than 10,000 students.
More Australians go to Japan to experience life in a Japanese secondary
school than from any other country. And more than 4,000 Japanese
students are studying In Australia at post-secondary level and above.
Australia's hosting of the 2000 Summer Olympic Games and Japan's
hosting of the 1998 Winter Olympic Games presents enormous new
opportunities to build a new range of personal, sporting and commercial
contacts between Australia and Japan.
It Is fifty years since the war ended. The friendship which exists between
us now was not then within the reach of anyone's imagination.
That It has grown Into relationship of such strength is a tribute to
Australians and Japanese who saw beyond the enmity and recrimination
and the vast cultural gulf dividing us.
There are always a few who see beyond the conventional wisdom of
their own generation: people who see the wave forming well before it
begins to break; who see necessity before it becomes oppressive and
who have the conviction to confront It, the wit and skill to make a virtue 
of it. People who, like the founder of this great university, do not fear
change and welcome the future.
We must leave the way clear for people of vision. We have to resist that
conservative pressure which, with age and experience, tends to close
the eyes and the minds of every generation. We have to keep our
minds and our eyes open.
This relationship of ours is the product of such a way of thinking. And
that is how it will be sustained. Our friendship has been a source of
immeasurable good for both our countries. It can be so for generations
to come.
We must never undervalue it, never take it for granted, never cease to
encourage and expand it. We must remain open to each other and to
the opportunities which exist for us.
And we have to keep alive the faith and engagement of the young.
This has been the role Keio University for a very long time. It is why Keio
has been, and remains, such a vital part of Japan's modern history.
And that is why I am so honoured by this occasion.
ENDS
L 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCH HOSTED BY JAPANESE BUSINESS ORGANISATIONS, TOKYO.-
THURSDAY, 25 MAY 1995
It is a great honour to address you today and I thank you for the invitation you
have given me.
This Is not the first time I have spoken to these important organisations and
to many of you in this room, of course.
Among the people here are some who have been active in Australia-Japan
trade for more than forty years.
Having been present at the creation of the Japanese economic miracle, you
know what radical change involves. You know that the need for change goes
on and on so much so that those who have been making the changes could
sometimes be forgiven for thinking that enough has been done. But you
know that this is not a thought a country can ever entertain.
If you have been watching Australia, or dealing with us in recent years, you
will be aware of the radical change which has taken place. The Australian
economy has been completely transformed; it is vastly more competitive,
more diverse and more integrated with the world and the region.
And you will also be aware, I trust, that the changes are still coming that we
have not entertained the thought that we have done enough.
Our old frends here know Australia's story. They have been part of it. A very
Important part of it, because the relationship between Japan and Australia
which has developed steadily over the past 50 years, is an essential thread in
Australia's economic development and, of course, in Japan's.
But it is to those of you who are new to our relationship that I mostly want to
address my remarks today.
Because I think we are entering a new, slightly uncertain, but very exciting
phase in this relationship. 
After the war ended fifty years ago, far sighted business people and political
leaders in each country recognised the complementarities, between our two
economies and worked to build those links between us which helped,
fundamentally, to fuel economic growth in both our countries.
Over the years these great business links the iron ore, coal and other
primary products have continued to be central to our trade. But in the
recent past new elements have entered.
Processed food, manufactures, high-technology and services have become
increasingly prominent. Sophisticated products like computers, software,
high-speed ferries and specialised medical equipment have joined the list of
our exports. And more than 20 per cent of all international visitors to
Australia, and 6 per cent of all international students in Australia, are now
Japanese. Our patterns of trade have changed as Japanese companies have begun to
invest elsewhere in Asia, and we have begun to supply them in these " third"
countries. Developments like these clearly point the way to the future of our
relationship. They reflect changes in Australia and Japan which are offering
us new opportunities as our 50 year old partnership enters a deeper, more
complex and rewarding phase.
The liberalisation and deregulation of the Japanese economy is one of those
changes. That process is now underway. and I believe it is irreversible and in
Japan's own interest as well as the world's.
I know many of you here, representatives of Japanese business, have been
at the forefront of the demand for thoroughgoing economic reform and
deregulation. I am sure that it is crucial for our Japan's future. But I have to
tell you frankly that much more needs to be done.
The Keidanren, for example, has estimated that deregulation could deliver a
net extra 740,000 jobs and increase the size of the Japanese economy by
about 40 per cent over the next five years.
In Australia's view, these reforms have not yet gone far enough. But we are
convinced that progressive implementation of reform will be a powerful
catalyst to free dynamic forces in the economy. Japanese consumers will
benefit.
And, reflecting smaller trade and current account imbalances brought about
by higher levels of imports and domestic consumption, the yen will fall.
So when we urge Japan to maintain the momentum of reform we are not
entirely altruistic. We know it will open up substantial new opportunities for
Australian exporters. 
Of course, it Is up to Australia, and our business people in particular, to take
advantage of the opportunities.
We know that Australian businesses have been heard to say from time to
time that Japan is " too hard' a market to penetrate.
We would not be urging these reforms on Japan Nwf e did not think Japan
should be " easise. But Australian business would be foolish to turn their
backs on a market of such a phenomenal size and where the rewards to be
had from success are so great. Bear in mind that a percentage point of
growth in Australian exports to Japan equals in value terms our whole current.
export trade to Vietnam.
There are obvious opportunities for our exporters: if Australian firms are
sufficiently hard-working and persistent, and their products and services are
of the highest quality as many of them are they should succeed, most
obviously in such sectors as construction, foodstuffs and health and
education services.
If the very real difficulties of the Japanese market still frighten too many
Australian business people, it has to be said that the Australian Government
does not have an antidote for fear. But the Government can help our smaller,
newer exporters to find niches niches in sectors of the Japanese market and
niches in the regions of Japan. I will be opening a new Australian Business
Center designed to address part of this problem later today.
But the fact remains we will all succeed more often and go much further
towards realising the opportunities inherent In our modem relationship if
Japan further deregulates Its markets.
So what does Australia bring to the partnership?
To begin with, we bring one of the industrialised world's ten largest
economies, a country rich in natural and human resources and a commitment
over decades to a partnership with Japan.
We bring a real friendship for Japan with us.
We also bring creative policies and the determination to implement those
policies. Beginning In the 1980s. we recognised that Australia could no longer live well
enough by exporting iron ore and wool and other primary products to the
world while our manufacturing industries grew inefficient and lethargic behind
high tariff walls. 
But we changed. We slashed tariffs, floated our currency, deregulated our
financial markets, eliminated import quotas and liberalised foreign investment
guidelines in all sectors,
All this was done within the context of an unprecedented accord with our
trade unions, under which we moved from a centralised to a more flexible
wage-fixing system.
Some of the results of this revolution because it was a revolution in
Australia are well known.
Last year we had the highest growth rate in the OECD at five per cent
while at the same time corporate profits reached historic new levels.
And while inflation has been running at around two per cent for the past three
years. Some of the other results are less well known. They relate to Australia's
competitiveness in the world.
Our international competitiveness Increased by around 40 per cent over the
past ten years.
We now have one of the lowest overall levels of taxation in the industrialised
world. Prime CBD rentals in Melbourne and Sydney cost less than in Singapore.
Less than in Shanghai or Ho Chi Minh City, as Well.
Living costs for expatriates in Sydney are lower than in any other major city in
the Western Pacific. And, for reasons I hope all of you already know, or will
soon know, Australia's Oquality of life" ranked second out of the 41 countries
measured In the World Competitiveness Report.
And we have not stopped. A country which abandons policy change
abandons its stake in the race for the future. I will give you just three
examples of changes we have made in the past 12 months.
A year ago, we took the decision to make a massive investment in the skills of
our workforce. We directed programs towards training young people and the
long-term unemployed.
We boosted our technical and vocational education system and made it more
responsive to business more suited to the modem economy in which the
knowledge and skills of a countrys workforce and its capacity to retrain
regularly, are basic determinants of economic success. 
The increased competition that has flowed from lower tariffs has made the
Australian economy much more dynamic; but the primary influence has been'
on those sectors exposed to foreign competition.
To extend this quite fundamental change to the rest of the economy, we last
month reached an historic agreement with our state governments to boost
competition in our utilities and our ports, in our professions and our
agricultural marketing authorities in water, airports, government services
right across the domestic economy competition will be intensified. The result
will be a much more responsive and dynamic economy and a significantly
lower cost structure for business.
Australia's most single important economic challenge is to lift our savings
performance. The need Is manifest in a current account deficit that has been
too large for the past 15-20 years.
We also need to lift our savings performance because, like Japan, our
population in Australia is ageing: not as rapidly as Japan's because of our
higher rate of population growth. But we stilt may see the proportion of our
population aged over 65 increase from 12 per cent to 18 per cent over the
next 30 years.
There will be a correspondingly shrinking proportion of the population in
employment providing for those in retirement. The appropriate response to
these changing demographic forces, of course, is to save and invest more.
This is what your government has done very impressively over the years.
According to OECD statistics, your public sector gross debt represents about
per cent of GNP. But the corresponding figure for net debt is just 8 per
cent, a difference of about 70 per cent of GNP.
This difference is largely accounted for by the accumulation of assets, in
retirement accounts.
We have taken up the challenge to increase our saving rates through
measures tailored to Australian circumstances.
First, we have tightened fiscal policy. By international standards, Australia
does not have a problem with a large amount of public debt on the books.
In fact, we have the lowest level of public debt in gross terms among OECD
countries, arnd one of the lowest in net terms.
However, the reliance of our economy overall on foreign savings requires us
to go further on the public accounts, and that is what we have done in this
years Budget. Our Budget will return to surplus In the coming financial year,
and be in surplus without relying on asset sales and the like in the following
year. 
The second element of our savings strategy is directed at retirement incomes.
A decade ago, we had only 40 per cent of our workforce in superannuation,
or private pension provision. Today, it is590 per cent. Today, our
superannuation funds hold about $ 186 billion in assets.
We are going to increase contributions from around 5 per cent of income to
per cent by early next century. This will mean that every Australian
person will be saving at least 15 per cent of their income. The result will be
superannuation funds, private pension funds, of about $ 2,000 billion by 2020
a pool of savings about double our GDP in today's prices. That is, 200 per
cent of our GDP.
So in one year we have taken major initiatives on national savings, vocational
training and domestic economic competition.
Australia has been for some time a high quality, cost-effective place to do
business. It is becoming a bete place to do business. We expect more and
more Japanese companies to recognise this as many already have.
Toyota, for example, invested some 30 billion yen in its Melbourne plant last
year. Mitsubishi are expanding their Australian operations on a similar scale.
The Shimadzu Corporation, makers of precision medical and laboratory
equipment, chose Australia for its new manufacturing and research operation.
In Japan's financial year 1993, over 30 per cent of Japan's foreign direct
investment in mining went to Australia and 70 per cent of its FDI in food.
Of course, it is much easier to reform when others are doing the same and
against a backdrop of a strengthened international trading system.
That is why APEC is so important to both Japan and Australia. For each of
us, APEC accounts for 70 per cent of our country's trade.
It is worth recalling the weight and seriousness of the historic declaration
made under President Soeharto's chairmanship at Bogor last year and its
boldness. The leaders of all the APEC economies met freely together, and after a
preparatory process involving our own special assistants, agreed to achieve
free trade in the region by 2010 for industrialised countries and 2020 for
developing countries in other words, an integrated market of two billion
people. Japanese business, with your vertically integrated structure in the region, will
be a major beneficiary of this process. 
This year, the task of co-ordination and chairmanship falls to Japan. The
meeting being hosted in Osaka in November will be critical to the region and
critical to Japan.
The job will be to give form to the APEC declaration, to guide the
implementation of the Bogor vision.
I am confident Japan will meet this challenge.
I am particularly confident because I know him that Prime Minister
Murayama, who played such a good role at Bogor, understands the historic
opportunity and will do all he can to grasp it.
I believe it is one of Japan's great post-war multilateral opportunities, the
benefits from which can greatly exceed the Uruguay Round outcome.
And, for its part, Japan can be confident that, in its efforts to consolidate
APEC's achievements and contribute to the emerging Asia-Pacific
community, it will have no firmer supporter than Australia.
I am grateful to all of you who came today for the courtesy you have extended
to me.
ENDS 



Idary students
s hosting
inities to
tween wveen us
stra liens
vast -heir
; ns to
-ie the
jie who,
; ome the
that
i6 the
indi and
id that is
1surable to the
Keio has
6585 PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P J KEATING MP
NEW AUSTRALIAN CUISINE LAUNCH
THURSDAY 25 MAY 1995
It is a great pleasure to be here, among Australian and Japanese friends. to
sample a truly unique culinary feast.
The ' New Australian Cuisine' campaign reflects a number of important
elements in the modem Australia-Japan relationship.
At one level it is about contemporary Australian taste. At another it is about
our largest manufacturing industry.
In a sense, food is a touchstone of the change in Australia not abandoning
traditional culture or traditional industries, but modifying them. adapting them,
adding value to them.
The change in taste and style is increasingly towards the cultures of our
region Thai, Chinese, Malaysian, and of course Japanese.
Neil Perry who has prepared this selection today is one of a number of
leading Australian chefs who blend a Japanese influence into Australian
food. And food or food processing is Australia's largest manufacturing industry.
It will get larger we expect it to treble its exports by the year 2000.
Japan is a priority market and one of the key investors in the industry.
In 1993, 70 per cent of Japan's overseas investment in food processing went
to Australia.
For Australia's part, we are the third largest supplier of foodstuffs to Japan,
and exorts are growing at a rate of 10.5 per cent.
Australia is Japan's largest supplier of dairy products. We supply one fifth of
Japan's imports of beef. 
Food is the fastest growing area of our trade with Japan and as I said earlier
today the potential is there to dramatically enlarge it
Australi3n food is the product of a clean environmcnt. It is fresh and pure, it
grows inth e Japanese off-season and it is eminently suitable for use in
traditional Japanese cuisine.
Because Australia is one of the most efficient agriculture producers in the
world, Australian food is also cheap. And so, I might add, is the wine. And
the wine is as good as the food which is to say as good as any to be got. Al
These days we export less dried, canned and frozen food products and more 01
fresh, clean and live like abalone. lobsters and salmon and asparagus et01
margoes. Among the processed foods we export are Australian-maae T
noodles like soba, udon and kamaboko.
We see enormous potential in the Australian food growing and food
processing industry, and the trade with Japan at once provides the greatest
opportunity and the best measure of suc
Food of course. is not just about trode dollars it is also a cultural exchange,
It is a means, perhaps the best means of getting to know each other.
Maybe even getting to know ourselves: " No man is lonely eating a bowl of
spaghetti", Robert Morley once said. I have the same sense of communion
with a plate of seahimi.
This campaign we are launching tonight is a perfect illustration of the cultural
dimensions of food.
Let me welcome the six Japanese food writers who are heading off on a
gourmet tour of Australia. I wish you a very enjoyablo and productive visit
as I do the Japanese chefs, representatives of cooking schools and other
food industry leaders who will follow the food writers.
Once again, let me say thank you to Nail Perry for coming to Japan and
preparing this food tonight
And thank you also Mr Toyosnima, Chairman of JETRO for his participation
in this launch and the opening of the Australia Business Centre.
WA greatly appreciat JETRO's support
Now It Is my pleasure to launchi m New Australlan Cuisine campaign 6587? 6588 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J K] EATING MP
OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS CENTRE, TOKYO
THURSDAY, 25 MAY 1995
1 am very honoured that Mr Toyosbirna Chairman of JETRO, is
present today on the opening of this Australian Business Centre.
9 The Centre brings together in one location Australias
Commonwealth and State official export, investment and tourism
promotion bodies.
0 The Centre is the first of its kind for Australia
and it is fitting that it should be established in the capital of our
greatest trading partner.
It reflects our recognition of the continued importance of our economic
relationship and confidence in its future.
a And, it shows our determination to work hard in this market, to
diversify the base of our trade, to support long-standing business
relationships and to help new ones get established.
a Between 1990 and 1993 Australias exports of goods and services to
Japan grew by nearly 20 per cent in Australian dollar terms and by
over 4 per cent in US dollar terms
in either measure the growth in our exports exceeded the growth
in Japan's total imports of goods and services. 
Our highest value-added exports ( ETMS) grew at a trend rate of just
over 11 per cent in the five year period to 1993-94.
And our export of services for the five year period to 1992-93 grew at
a rate of just under 12 per cent.
Japanese figures for Japan's 1994 financial year say imports from
Australia grew by 11 per cent over 1993.
But there is no doubt we could and should do a lot better, The
Government can help: with initiatives of this kind, with Austrade and,
most importantly, by creating a competitive economic climate and one
favourable to exporters. But in the final analysis its success depends
on Australian business.
The scale of Japan's economy needs to be understood by Australian
exporters a one per cent growth in Japan's GDP increases Japan's economy
by the size of New Zealand's GDP
a small slice of a Japanese sectoral market, like housing or food,
can be worth many times more than a large slice of the market in
other countries.
There is no question about the opportunities which exist in the
emerging markets but no Australian exporter should ignore the
rewards of succeeding in Japan.
And it should also be understood that, while Japan's market is difficult,
it is opening up more and more
we must take advantage of the inevitable changes which are
taking place in the structure of the Japanese economy, which are
being speeded up by the appreciation of the yen.
The lesson for Australia is that our opportunities are growing faster
than perhaps many understand 
tme competition will be hot. There are no easy pickings. But the
proof is there that competitive and determined Austalian
businesses do succeed.
This Centre represents a further important step in focussing Australia's
marketing efforts in Japan
three years ago Australia opened four consulates throughout
Japan to service Japan's regional economies
we are now opening for business in the very centre of Tokyo,
making access for businessmen and tourists much easier as we
approach the Olympics in Sydney in the year 2000.
This centre also demonstrates the Commonwealth government's
determination to work closely with the Australian states to promote
Australia abroad.
I would like to congratulate all the centre's members and wish them
well in this important venture.
It gives me great pleasure to declare the centre open.
ENDS 



. TRANSCRIPT-OF THE PRIME-MIIT HEON P J KEA-TING MP
SPECH-AT'THE LANKO ! I E UT AA CSINE:
PROMOTON, NEWOTANI OT T OrI2MA195
E,&amp; OE ' PROOF! COPY
ls very igreat ' 06asure to bpi~ r ami utala n a ae rinds.:
tosapl atrlyunique culinary hfas f. sioetr, 4 mstfitha bo
ac6o mlihe by-MrNeil Pehr.*" amu4tmisiian,-chef frorru! dney Who~ i
d~ mnstaligtoyouthe cuisule, ne usieoAustralia.% Y : 04* ft6w that:.
S Autraia s. a very mu tc~ uzVcUntr. a ht~ h otWryasi a
cIianed damaically so that)*' oeA bf oulff~ a trets no I hat inutcultrls
an46 reflected lhiih sfoo teitrsi~ ie HSSt we: le9d,
-ghd Vthe interesting changei 1i. r AuWralia'. cusie W a-gvng you . a
sample oo~ o f this tonight' ' Idrt coun atik.-41j
ustr-iais enionment~ Ily.: vey ~ er onrac h od
Cdommensurably clean. S We~ hn n our.: stre nthsi u'caaiy
gr6o loa , i roduce food,-and. to.: prcsAd. Is oAefalaslr t
. Wrariftunng6' ndustry, and' eafreg~ exert, t t aid to.. tbl tS
OepPr s-by the. ar 2000.
Theq other feature which we 1h1ink~ is -asl t~ ghfrAsraH6a is. tat. rf
. ows! Jin * the : apanese off-season,* i~. s:: e'minently. suitWbe: for. use in.
It. aditibhnal Japanese cuisine.-*
omr ight. know' that Australi~ ns4 h~ v ciojj . itr -health*
oier. the last .20: years, and ci01d more moicious-of thwr .1et,. andaJpa
Iapodcsis increaiiungIf at that end-ofithe spectm. think. we
do' ant t clo our arteries, -ind weido Ntint -to: drog yours
Wth nk that our food can -be-used ~ as'pat of Japanesezcwsmne4 a4nhd -we. are.
ine'Igy moing towardsthe' , culie and. cu ture of o6' u ~ region iinfod
suh as.. Thai,: Chinese all thet mariettes:-hbhieecokn alyin 23) 
2'
and of course, Japanese. And leqt.. me as sure the audience, I have taken
many a decision over a sashimi and sUshi~ in my day.
I think Australians have a mucb -closerSwareness of the culinary interests of
the region, and. especially Japan do honestly believe that the kinds
of foods, and -varieties of food' Austaliaprduces, can suit not. only. traditional
cuisine,, in Japan, but also those -innoiovatidn wkwch you as a -community are
moving: towards, and which we thihk we ca~ encurage you in.
One of-the things we feel most prouda~ t n of the. beverages -we feel
mo st proud. about, is of. course;: j ie n utainw-inueta iisn.,.
retatively . Inexpnsv byw-d. tn Ard nd of a very. hig q: cuality, so we
wI 6seemore fit drunk here.; we a~ o' seeingi other: fresh,* cle aner
' live : prpdutts:;-: like abalon~ e, -ajio1 n, bters, asparags marigp'fth -and
. Wong ithepcSse f yeda: wre-' oxp Australians-:: nacd odIs
tike soba -,. nand kamabokb,
( i~ aubl). . uppte o foAuff~ o Japantban our exports . are growing -at..
abot." idia year. We are! -Jap' 1argsupplier0 odaypodcsw
suplyabout one-fifth of Japans irprsq ef'n eaei 1993 -just a.-
cor ot years ago 70% ofJ arn'soversas*&amp; e~ mnti odp troce
wen t' itrt. 8&amp; So, food gjs the 4astot growing area o o raewt
Japr, ind wthink we can 16b's~ liAl n~ g it.
01-course, -the-: best thing AbkA, M~ xotrfo Is not -simply. about.-trade
d611ar j. 4ri4 41( y:-as we alko abo turwal dxhng. VnheneOeO
weeat-with: peOple from othe' ' cou6 tries is .8lwaysacu ua exchne and
Itikthis: carrpaign we are' Ial 6N~ cing. to ' itt perfect -I faion of , thecultural
dimenion~ s offood.-
obrtMorley-j, 13. ri tish rawonte" onc -said: no-man is.: lone~ y eafing ; a bowl
of spaghetti. ' Well, I would tike; t o ay that*~ rm at aetesm es
of communwion wiha plate Of. s1ahir.
Sfoodis. a tUltural matter: isb: sen4s smero I woldl" f
oitt particularly thank Mr." Toydos ihe. -Chairma oJETRO, fr his.
particiatfon in thslunch, ahdf hepeni6g of teAustralian. Busines.
Cenre. Letme. again thn., c.~~ yfo oni to Jaa npeparingi this..
food toniht' -wer are all very nuch-' its; O1bLt Col lowlo the: 6
Japnesefood: wreiters who arei tedn ff ' on gourmoet. totkw of . Australia,
ad say.-thatbt agetpesr o st&amp; s any of yo6u have come along,
to einoled n hislanch-ofthb'NewAustralian Cuisine. oi snwm
plesur tolaunch the New Austrdfibn CUisuie campaign.
ends. 4~
41I 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
YOKOHAMA WAR CEMETERY AT HODOGAYA SATURDAY, 27
MAY 1995.
We are here to mourni the loss of the 280 Australians buried here and to give
thanks.
We mourn because they died young and far from home and did not have a
chance to live out their lives in the country they loved, among the people they
loved. We mourn because they were Australians like ourselves and they suffered
cruelly. We mourn because they remind us of the 17,000 other Australians who died
in the war against Japan, almost half of them as prisoners; and of the
millions of others who died in that war.
And we give thanks because it was by the courage and sacrifice of people
like these that our country was saved.
It is because they loved freedom that we enjoy freedom.
It is because they loved and believed in Australia that we have an Australia to
love and believe in today.
We give thanks because they set us an example by which to live. Their
graves remind us of our duty to Australia.
These Australians endured forced labour and imprisonment.
They died of inhuman treatment and neglect.
We know that what they went through others went through in prison camps in
other parts of Asia in Burma and Thailand, Borneo and Ambon.
We will never forget the evil that was done to our fellow Aus tralians. 
2
And we believe that Japan should not allow these events to be forgotten.
We believe that our friendship will be stronger if the truth about these events
is known to the Japanese people and we are pleased that the Japanese
government has taken steps to make it known.
As Australia remembers the end of the war this year we honour all those who
fought and died. And we remember all the innocent lives that were lost.
We pledge ourselves to see that these things do not happen again.
For that reason we also pay tribute to those who have had the vision and
faith to build a partnership between our two countries.
They saw that their duty to the dead was a duty to the living.
We could pay no greater tribute to the Australians buried here than to
dedicate ourselves to another fifty years of peace and friendship between
Australia and Japan.
Among these graves we remember the terrible suffering and destruction that
the war inflicted on a generation.
And we are reminded that our greatest gifts are peace and freedom and our
greatest duty to preserve them.
For that we give thanks to these Australians.
They died so far from home, but we know they are here and we will never
forget them.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE " TECHNOLOGY AUSTRALIA ' 95 EXPO",
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 30 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Well thank you very much John ( Plunkett). Could I begin by especially
welcoming our very distinguished guest, Professor Habibie and members of
the Indonesian delegation.
It is a great pleasure to be launching this at a time when the Indonesian
Minister most closely associated with research and development is in our
country. Could I also acknowledge my colleague Senator Cook, the Special
Trade Representative John Button and, of course, our former long standing
Minister for Industry, and members of the Industry Research and
Development Board, representatives of companies exhibiting here today and
ladies and gentlemen.
Well this is a very nice honour indeed to be opening this the first of these
Technology Australia exhibitions which can showcase the innovations in
Australian industry which have occurred, in part, in association under the
IR&amp; D Board arrangements.
It is true that one of the great comparative advantages that Australia has,
probably its greatest comparative advantage, is its education system and by a
revolution in our education system by, huge participation rates in secondary
school, the creation of 60 per cent of extra places in higher education, the
development of a vocational education system of standing. This is the
foundation which our industrial development and research and development is
built upon.
The other change in the recent past is to recognise that Australia has always
had a fairly deep pure research base and to get to know how to apply that.
But we could never apply it adequately in the past when we were massively
uncompetitive because the size of our domestic market was not of sufficient
size to be able to carry the products we were able to produce.
So much of what we do now is focussed on exports and we know that in the
product innovation business, which is the business we have to be in, we can't
be in the export trade unless we are competitive and the changes in
Australian economic policy and industry policy, over the last decade, have
meant that Australia today is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 
1983. Not only that and important as that is in making opportunities for
exports and therefore developing products we have also had now a
substantial premium on private research and development, which is itself now
making a very great difference to the nature of the products we are producing.
Our excellent scientific institutions, long standing ones like the CSIRO and the
universities and the medical research institutes, have always been producers
of innovative, high quality technologies. But we have encouraged, and sought
to encourage, private research and development because we did lag behind
many OECD countries in the private R&amp; D effort as distinct from the public
R&amp; D effort. And back there in the 1980s, when we were wrestling with this
when John Button was Minister for Industry and Technology, we looked at
R&amp; D through grants and the IR&amp; D Board has been an important component
and, if you like, sifting through, finding those things that deserve support and
doing things in partnership.
In a tax system which is fairly free of tax breaks, where the benefits have been
passed along to a lower corporate rate, the one tax break we have left in the
system is the write-off of 150 per cent for research and development
expenditures. We have done that particularly to encourage and to be seen to
encourage research and development so that private companies will take it up
and we know that it has been a success and it is now one of the consistent
underpinnings of our private R&amp; D effort.
I think the other thing that the Government is particularly proud of are the
Co-operative Research Centres. I think we now have just on 70 of these,
maybe less 60 odd, and the range of things that we are doing is most
particularly pleasing. But I think as much so, is the fact that we have the
institutions like the universities and the CSIRO in there with industrial
companies, working on technologies and being able to apply them virtually
automatically and instantaneously.
So, in other words, instead of just an institution or some other private
company developing something and having limited capacity to apply it or,
even more perhaps importantly, limited capacity to maintain the research
effort, by funding Co-operative Research Centres by getting that private and
that public quality to this research effort. We have, I think, made a bit of a
breakthrough in the way research and development is done in this country.
Could I just say a couple of things about the IR&amp; D Board. It has made
1,000 grants totally over $ 250 million. We have got 4,000 companies
registered now for the 150 per cent tax concession involving total deductions
of $ 1.5 billion and registered syndicates involving research of approximately
billion. Add that, of course, to what we are doing in the Co-operative
Research Centres and there is a lot of induced research and development
going on and that is reflecting in the nature of the products we can see about
US. Now I am especially pleased that in the Great Hall we have some space to
showcase some of these things. I know just going around the country
recently, I was at Sola, a small Adelaide based company, it has grown into
one of the world's largest producer of plastic spectacle lenses, manufacturing
now in 11 countries. Or, Cochlear which is here, which is the leader in 
implants for the profoundly deaf, which exports 85 per cent of its product.
Hawker de Havilland is here with its new superlight fuselage for helicopters,
which again will have domestic and international application. I think our new
air traffic control system is on display.
All of these innovations, I think, do focus on best practice and one of the
things I am particularly pleased about with Peter Cook's involvement in the
trade portfolio and now in industry, is the way the Best Practice program has
grown and the way in which Australian companies have taken on
Best Practice, world Best Practice as being something very important.
Now we like to think that we can do things. We are developing not just
something in Australia, but something in South East Asia, a base, an
industrial base, some really deep industrial infrastructure and that is why I am
particularly pleased that Doctor Habibie is with us today. Because this great
nation to our north, Indonesia, nearly 200 million people, growing now
consistently between 6 and 8 per cent a year, offers great opportunities for
economic and industrial co-operation and there can be co-operation which
goes not only simply to the commercial applications of technologies, but doing
things together in the fields of defence. We already have a substantial
defence co-operation between us and there is no doubt in terms of equipment
procurement it may be possible in the future that we can do things together.
At any rate, I think, it is in South East Asia's interest to be able to develop, in
its own region, competent industries, apart from their commercial and trade
orientation, competent defence industries too that add to the security of the
region and give it a home grown capacity to be able to develop an industrial
base. So, again, I would like to most especially see these growing linkages with
Indonesia and particularly in this field of high technology and I am particularly
pleased and honoured that Professor Habibie could be with us today and has
taken the interest he has over the course of his visit in some of the higher
technology industries of Australia to see what applications they might have in
some joint co-operation.
At any rate, Professor Habibie I would like to, again, welcome you here to
Parliament House and to this exhibition and to the members of your party and
I am sure you can join with me and Peter Cook in offering our exhibitors our
congratulations at being able to demonstrate this today and to, again,
commend the Industry Research and Development Board for their initiative,
for their guidance, for their innovation in those things that will make Australia
stronger and better.
It is with very great pleasure that I declare open officially now this exhibition. 



A
' I
S. n
PRIME MINISTER ** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ONE NATION TRAIN, MELBOURNE, 4 JUNE 1995
1 think we might all be forgiven a smile of satisfaction today. From Tom
Hopkins who is 103 and first dreamt about this while driving locomotives
before the rest of us were born; to Gough Whitlam who is younger than Tom
but no less a dreamer of great things for Australia; to those of my own
generation who came to believe in them too and find ourselves privileged to
be the people who finally did it.
This is a great day for Australia and nothing less.
A standard gauge rail highway from Brisbane to Perth is a century old
Australian dream today it's an Australian reality.
Three years ago when we delivered a statement called One Nation. We
called it One Nation because we wanted to assert a simple idea that we are
stronger when we work as one.
One Nation imagined a stronger Australia an Australia that worked more
efficiently. The aim was to close the gaps between Australians the physical
gaps and the cultural ones.
To close them with railway lines and better road and airline systems; to close
them by social undertakings to help Australians on margins; and to close
them by reminding Australian men and women that for all the distance which
divides a West Australian from a Victorian or a South Australian from a
Queenslander, or a suburb of Sydney from a farm in Tasmania, we are all
Australians and we share a great common interest.
One Nation aimed at making Australia stronger and fairer. 
And I think in the past three years we have made a lot of progress in this
direction we've got extraordinary growth in jobs and national economic
growth, we've got a new national training system, we've got nationwide labour
market programs, we've got a national competition policy, we've got the kind
of agreement on national goals we haven't had in a long time and we've got
a six and a half thousand kilometre standard gauge national rail highway from
Brisbane to Perth via Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide.
There is nothing like a train.
There is no symbol of progress like it. No symbol of unity like it no symbol
of strength.
But of course this One Nation train is much more than a great symbol.
It brings all Australians much closer together in a material way.
It will produce material benefits.
It will give us in the next century what we have been denied in this an
efficient national rail system.
Over three years we have spent $ 429 million to upgrade and invigorate
Australia's rail infrastructure.
We erected new bridges which could support greater loads travelling at
greater speeds.
We added crossing loops in key locations to eliminate delays.
We laid new low-maintenance sleepers, and constructed new track
alignments with fewer tight curves and flatter grades for a better ride.
The centrepiece of the rail infrastructure investment program was the
standardisation of the line between Melbourne and Adelaide the missing link
in a national standard-gauge rail network. And that's what we celebrate
today. Sixty kilometres of new track has been built, 30 kilometres converted to dual
gauge, and 740 kilometres regauged by moving the rails 6.5 inches closer
together.
We now have a great national asset.
With the National Rail Highway we can more fully harness the energy of
Australia. 
It will buttress economic development and make us more flexible and
competitive. As our industry increasingly adopts a national dimension, so will
it be serviced by a truly national rail freight system.
Trains will be longer and their travel time shorter. The One Nation train slices
two hours off the Melbourne-Adelaide leg and eight hours off the Melbourne-
Perth trip.
It untangles Australia's railway tracks.
And it enables us to put the interstate rail freight system on a much more
efficient and competitive footing.
With the support of the States, we established the National Rail Corporation,
so that interstate shippers need only deal with one organisation rather than
four when moving goods around the country.
National Rail has set about renovating the institutional culture and work
practices of the Australian rail industry. With a ground-breaking enterprise
agreement and the introduction of best practices, the interstate rail freight
industry has been turned around.
And it will shortly be acquiring a lot more horsepower in the form of $ 400
million worth of new locomotives.
Locomotives which will be built and maintained in Australia: an investment
which is expected to create in excess of one thousand jobs. And the new
locos will be vastly more fuel efficient than the current fleet.
The Government is determined to press forward with efficiency gains. And
the surest way to increase in the railways is to promote competition on the
line. That's why the Minister for Transport has proposed that all the interstate track
be managed by a single organisation, Track Australia, ensuring competition
between existing and new rail operators.
That leaves rail operators to concentrate on the customers.
We devised One Nation to get Australia moving. One element of that was to
make the railways run more smoothly. But the commitment also required that
we improve air, sea and road transport, and dovetail them all together.
Today, after three years of work, the Australian people have a far more
integrated and cohesive transport system than ever before.
We have safer national roads, more efficient ports and a better aviation
system. And all these modes of transport are linked to each other. 
This Dynon Road Freight Terminal is a good illustration of the distance we've
come in a very short time.
Before the One Nation investments the place was heavily under-capitalised
and lacked both effective lifting equipment and long tracks for the efficient
assembly of trains.
Now, the Terminal has new assembly tracks and highly effective mobile
gantries. And the whole operation is safer and better lit.
Before One Nation, containers arriving at the docks and destined for the rail
station had to be driven along a roundabout route of 2.5km, crossing
Footscray Road, the busiest truck corridor in Victoria.
Now, goods are delivered straight to the tracks via the newly-built Dock Link
Road. The Road cost $ 5 million, and it paid for itself within weeks of opening.
National Rail estimates a saving of $ 20 per container.
So this is One Nation at work.
And it means we can transport people and freight across the continent and
get it onto ships or planes for export faster, cheaper and more reliably.
The train I am about to board the One Nation train will be first to cross the
continent, via all State capitals, without interruption from break of gauge.
Construction of the national rail highway began a long time ago, and as I said
we are privileged to be part of the generation which completed it.
It has been a difficult journey. But then, the most worthwhile things are very
often the most difficult.
Many people deserve our congratulations today.
I've mentioned Gough Whitlam, who has never let up in his pursuit of national
gauge compatibility. Let me also pay tribute to Laurie Brereton, the Minister
who got the work done on time and on budget.
And speaking of work, let me thank the men and women of National Rail who
planned and co-ordinated the gauge standardisation.
And let me also thank everyone of those 3000 Australians who did the hard
physical tasks of the project.
I hope today that their satisfactions matches that of their fellow railway worker
from another age who is with us today Tom Hopkins. 
Today is special because we have all been a part of a very long chapter in
Australia's story. And when we say that today we have ended the chapter,
we recognise that before us came countless Australians who down the years
worked towards the same goal and dreamt the same dream.
Our own and future generations of Australians will benefit from this One
Nation train, but I think we should launch it in the name of all those who came
before us.
As the train leaves Melbourne and moves on to Adelaide and Perth, Australia
will move with it.
It will bring Australians closer together, it will make Australia stronger.
And I hope it will inspire us to believe that much more in what we can do
when we think, plan and work as one nation.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RESPONSE TO CIVICS EXPERT GROUP REPORT, 6 JUNE 1995
Thank you for your invitation to address this conference today. Your
discussions concern matters of great importance to Australia, and I am as
grateful for your interest in them as I am for the invitation.
That we set in train the process which has led to this investment in Civics
Education gives me great satisfaction. From the Government's point of view
it has been a special project: and it is one which has already produced
considerable rewards.
The big returns will come later of course: but to have received a report of
such quality from the Civics Expert Group and so promptly, and to have
generated such interest, activity and good-will has made this a particularly
gratifying initiative.
Sometimes in politics at least in the politics of reform you strike a seam
immediately. I have no doubt that we have struck one with Civics Education.
The response is proof of an urgent need better still, the report and your
presence here, proves that we have the capacity to deal with it.
One hundred years ago, the Australian people were engaged in a debate of
great moment. Whether the peoples of six separate colonies could find within
themselves the courage and confidence to come together as one nation one
indissoluble Federal Commonwealth.
These Australians were also engaged with the worst drought in Australia's
history, the worst depression, the most traumatic strikes and lockouts and
the usual business of living. They nevertheless found that it was possible to
cope with these oppressive circumstances and still carry out their democratic
responsibilities.
Their general education levels were much lower than those of today's
Australians: their means of personal advancement were much more limited.
The imperatives of daily life were at least as demanding. Yet they made a
decision about the future of Australia. They made a responsible political 
decision, an informed decision what we would call these days, a visionary
decision. While their political leaders attended conventions to thrash out their
differences and frame a federated Australia, around the continent ordinary
Australians talked about it in their homes and work places, in the pub and at
the races.
And when the referendum was put to them, they voted for the " one
indissoluble Commonwealth" of Australia.
From where we now stand one hundred years later that appears to have been
a most enlightened decision. What is more, on the basis of evidence which
the Civics Expert Group has discovered, we are justified in wondering
whether, with all their educational advantages and opportunities, our own
generation of Australians know as much about the virtues of democracy and
the potential of Australia as those of the 1890s. I suspect they don't.
That is not a reflection on Australians, but on our education systems. It may
also be a comment on the modern condition. There is no doubt that in
Australia, as elsewhere in the developed world, many people, especially
young people, are alienated from their political system and from their past.
We have to correct this. Governments alone cannot put meaning and
purpose into the lives of the young but they can help. They can certainly help
create the conditions in which faith might flourish. If you teach history well
you can help young people believe that they have a part in the nation's story.
If you teach politics well you can help them to feel engaged. You can help
them to feel that they have influence. We can help young people and
migrants discover their attachment to this country and its traditions, and give
them hope about its future and theirs. We can help them see that in the
fulfilment of their hopes lies the hope of the country.
Before the Civics Expert Group attempted to set down what Australians
should know about our system of government, they sought to find out what
Australians already know.
The results of the Group's research are distressing. Of the Australians
interviewed: Only 19% showed any understanding of the effect of federation on
Australia's system of government.
Only 18% displayed any understanding of the content of the Constitution
Only 40% could correctly recall the names of both federal houses of
parliament. Only 24% knew that the Senate represents the States. 
Only 28% perceived judicial independence.
And only 33% felt reasonably informed about the rights and
responsibilities of Australian citizens.
It is clear that the archive of civic knowledge is close to empty.
And it would seem that our education systems are doing very little to re-fill it.
I have been told about a survey in Victoria which reveals that the number of
Year Twelve students studying Australian history has fallen from 42 per cent
in 1972 to 6 per cent in 1993 and it is still falling. The same sort of pattern
reveals itself in the numbers studying politics.
Now, I probably don't have to tell this audience that we are currently engaged
in a much more modest undertaking than that of our predecessors one
hundred years ago. We are not creating a nation and writing a constitution
for it. We want no more than to persuade Australians that their head of state,
and the head of state they bequeath to the Australians of the twenty first
century, should be an Australian.
Remarkably enough, there are some in positions of political leadership who
find themselves unable to share this ambition or support us in our efforts.
This is making a relatively simple step a more complicated one and I
sometimes think we should give thanks that these people were not our
leaders in the 1890s.
By contrast we can give thanks to Stuart Maclntyre, Susan Pascoe, Ken
Boston and all those people gathered here who want to see Australian
democracy advance. Who want to see our young people learn enough about
Australia's history, traditions, values and institutions to feel that they have a
stake in our future and can play a part in shaping it.
The report of the Civics Expert Group, Whereas the People, may yet prove to
be the means by which we find the way to engage them.
As I said when I first received it, this Report is a credit to its authors.
It is also an invitation to Australian governments, and a challenge to the
Australian people.
In responding to Whereas the People I think we should set ourselves a
national goal. Not one that will be easily measured, admittedly; but one
which, if we come close to achieving it, will pay obvious dividends. I think we
should dedicate ourselves to seeing that by the end of the century the
Australian people know as much about their country and are no less engaged
in its political life than their counterparts a century ago. 
A comprehensive civics and citizenship education program is the best start
we can have.
We can give young Australians a knowledge of their past and a sense of
where they belong in the story. We can tell them about the gift of Australian
democracy and how it should be defended. We can imbue them with a faith
in the core values of Australia not a conformist ideology, but an awareness
of the principles of freedom and tolerance which are still emerging in our
community. If we can do this we can help to keep ownership of the Australian political
system with the Australian people. We can keep the democracy alive and
that old value of egalitarianism functioning and with new meaning, with
women and new migrants and Aboriginal Australians included in the ethos
that used to keep them out.
Let me tell you the Government regards Civics Education as one of its major
initiatives. In a tight budget we have provided $ 25 million for a civics and
citizenship education program in line with the expert group's
recommendation. The program spans all formal education sectors and the
broader community.
The centrepiece is $ 20.26 million for a program of Civics Education in
Schools, to be administered in close cooperation with State and Territory
Governments. The Expert Group said that schools are the key to this undertaking. The
Government agrees.
It should be an essential part of each child's education to learn about the
privileges and responsibilities of being Australian.
That does not mean an exercise in ideology, but lessons in democracy and
history. Civics, properly taught, is no more political than Maths or English or
Woodwork. And it is just as fundamental; in a society like ours it is just as
important.
The Government does not pretend that it will be easy to create an effective
schools civics program. As the Expert Group reminded us, other programs
have withered on the vine.
The challenge for the Curriculum Corporation is to develop a program which
is practical, comprehensive and engaging. It will have to look to the new
media for assistance and we welcome that.
But there will never be a substitute for good teaching, and the $ 5.2 million we
are spending on the professional development of teachers of Civics is
essential. It must all be a cooperative effort. School education is primarily 
the responsibility of the States and Territories, and we look forward to
working with them.
The Government will also be providing $ 2.4 million over four years to produce
materials on civics for citizenship applicants and to develop voluntary civics
and citizenship education courses for those who want to become Australian
citizens. There is also $ 2.3 million for community education initiatives, to be
administered by a committee with expertise in Australian culture, heritage and
government. Let me close these brief remarks by thanking all those who have contributed
to the Expert Group's report, this conference and what we might now
reasonably call a civics movement.
I said that I have the feeling we have struck a seam: there is no doubt about
the need for civics education, and equally no doubt that both educators and
parents want to meet that demand.
The Expert Group consulted widely and consultation will be a feature of the
Government's civics program. For more than three months we have taken
submissions on the findings of the Expert Group. Almost all of them have
been supportive.
My colleague, the Minister for Employment Education and Training, has
briefed all State and Territory Education Ministers on the Government's
package. And we now propose a series of consultations, of which this forum
is the first, to bring other key groups into the planning process.
This is a large investment in our children, our democracy and our future.
And I thank you all for contributing to it.
Most of the reward is in the giving. But posterity will bequeath a small one
too. As the Australians of the twenty first century look back on the 1990s they
will see that a democratic spirit was alive and well in Australia as it had been
a century before.
And it is not unreasonable to think that, like us when we look back on the
1890s, they might draw a bit of inspiration from it and be grateful that we
invested in Civics Education. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR ARRIVAL OF ONE NATION TRAIN, ADELAIDE FREIGHT
TERMINAL, ADELAIDE, 6 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, Ted [ Butcher], Premier, my colleague Laurie Brereton,
Leader of the Opposition, Minister for Transport, Mayor, distinguished guests,
and ladies and gentlemen.
One can't but help feel the sense of history in this the poignancy of it
coming down through the hills. It's amazing how gentle those things are you
can pull the dynamic adjuster back, and slightly on the brake, and a little bit
up one, and it just sort of moves along for you as you like. But it gives you an
idea of what it's like to be a railway person railway men and women. And
the great job that railways have done in binding all sorts of nations together,
including this one. And it was, of course, the extension of the rail system
around Australia that brought the country together, and as Ted said, we read
in our schoolbooks about the broken gauge it's really a quite remarkable
thing that the gauge was broken, and we never had this a century or so ago.
But at any rate, under One Nation, we had the chance to do this, and I
wanted to make that point particularly when the nation was really feeling the
pinch of the recession, to know that we could come out of it with a strategy,
and also by doing things that would stand the test of time that we were not
simply throwing money at the problem, but doing things with it that would
stand us in good stead over time. Solid real things changing and binding
the country together, pulling together, and I though the concept of the
national rail highway was the one to adopt at that time.
And this is the first train that will go from Brisbane to Perth, via Melbourne
and Adelaide. And in doing this, it will not only link the continent, but I think
bind South Australia more fully into the Eastern States of Victoria, New South
Wales and Queensland, and I think this will have a tremendous impact upon
South Australia material as well as psychological. Important to know that
those linkages are there. 
Laurie is with me and, of course, he is the one who has principally been
involved in putting together the new construction through the Adelaide Hills,
up the Mount Barker Road, and I travelled through the Devils Elbow this
morning seeing what a dreadful problem it is, particularly those big trucks,
and the extension of the runway, so that by road, by air and by rail, the
linkages for South Australia will be better and stronger. And as a
consequence, I think the whole of this state will feel as though it is much
more part of One Nation than perhaps ever before. But, it does, I think, more
than that it does give South Australia a chance to become one of the freight
hubs of Australia. Because we will see containers brought across the
country, and I think the port of Adelaide will be given the opportunity to
compete with the port of Melbourne, and indeed the port of Sydney. And it
will mean more investment over time by national rail in the track, and to
getting that track into place, and keeping the stock up, getting the time down,
smoothing out the bends, and getting the maintenance into it, particularly in
some of the states where the track has run down. But by and large in the
doing of it, we ought to be able to see some real competition between these
ports, and see a new services and freight industry for this country.
So, I said this morning on a radio station people always ask me about
elections I said well give me the choice between an election and building a
railway around Australia, I'll take the building of a railway around Australia,
because it will be here when the elections are long gone. And it is the solid
things I mean, belief in ourselves, belief in what we can do together, and
filling in the gaps which is what One Nation sought to do, both those gaps
by distance and gaps by psychology it is important to believe that we go
together as a nation inclusively, and that we can do things together. And I
think that in a cooperative sense, national rail is about as good as that gets,
and we are really just on the threshold of seeing a much better rail service.
This means, of course, that a lot of those containers that are on the roads will
be off the roads, and onto rail. And a lot of the accidents, and problems of
safety that we are having with basically too many trucks on roads doing long
distance hauls are better done by railway. This is going to change that, too.
I think the railways are going to come of age as a result of this. I said
yesterday, it is going to be a trains spotters paradise. And, of course, with
our proposal to have Track Australia have one company owning the track
and then any number of railway companies operating it, well if you are really
keen about it, you can get into the railway business yourself you don't even
have to muck around with models any more. So, there we are it can't be
better than that. If you want to go and hire one of these things, you can go
and do it. So, that's the brave new world of the modem railway, and it has
started here with this single track coming through Australia, and through here
to Adelaide.
I'm delighted the Premier could join us this morning, and the Leader of the
Opposition, and the Minister for Transport, the Mayor, for what is a real
occasion, I think. And the fact is that this state has got tremendous
opportunities with the growth of Australia's economy into Asia, but it always 
3
needed those material linkages let's hope that this One Nation railway is
providing them.
Could I conclude my remarks by thanking Ted Butcher and his team at
National Rail for a job well done in taking up the One Nation challenge it is
one thing getting money available, it's another thing to use it. They have
used it, and used it effectively, and I'm sure it will be just another one of the
jewels in the crown of Ted's quite illustrious career in Australian transport,
and I thank him for it. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you one and all.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ANNIVERSARY OF THE RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT
MELBOURNE, 9 JUNE 1995
Thank you very much for inviting me to this celebration of the
Anniversary of the Racial Discrimination Act.
This was a very brave piece of legislation. It came at a time of great change in
Australia at a time when a lot of the old attitudes were beginning to show
signs of crumbling away, and some inevitably were resisting fiercely.
New ways of thinking about Australia and about social and economic issues,
and what sort of country we could establish here were beginning to get a
foothold. Quite a few of those ideas have stood the test of time. In their legislated form
they are now enshrined in our democracy and they go some way to defining
our civilisation here.
They stand as a bulwark against the old prejudices.
It is worth recaling the context in which this Act came into being.
It was less than a decade since the referendum which put Aboriginal
Australians on the census. It was only a few years since the practice of taking
Aboriginal children from their families had ended. The attitudes from which
those things flowed were still very common.
Australia was a multicultural society in 1975, but we had not yet begun to lay
the framework of programs which have made cultural diversity. a considerable
and distinct national strength.
Much of the progress we have made since then has been underpinned by the
Racial Discrimination Act.
That is not to say that anyone was ever under the illusion that we could
legislate to abolish prejudice. And opponents of the Racial Hatred Bill really
should not pretend that we are under such an illusion. 2) 
Legislation like this does not spring from any utopian vision of society or
human nature. It springs from recognition of the less than perfect reality.
And it doesn't spring from a wish to punish the perpetrators of racism, but from
a desire to protect its victims.
I think that this is the essential point: we come to understand the necessity for
this kind of legislation when we put ourselves in the position of the victims of
racial discrimination or vilification or worse.
Perhaps we understand even better when we ask ourselves how we would feel
if our children were made victims.
A Racial Hatred Bill is directed at more than the purveyors of racial hatred. It
aims to limit the hatred generally. If by warning people, or by sending them a
signal that it is not acceptable in Australian society, we reduce the incidence of
racism, we make for a society less divided and more at peace.
Legislation like this serves to remind the victims of racial prejudice that their
country will protect them.
It is a reminder to minorities that a democratically elected parliament has
decided that discrimination or vilification is unacceptable; that it is hostile to
the values of the majority of Australians, outside the boundaries of what
Australia is and what Australia stands for, that they are inside and the racists
are outside, that they are of the great majority and the racists are of an extreme
minority. I think opponents of this kind of legislation miss the mark.
When they say as they did in 1975 and as the same voices are saying about
the Racial Hatred Bill today that such legislation is " draconian" they are
thinking, it seems to me, in a context which is much too narrow and legalistic.
The Racial Discrimination Act followed the wording of the International
Convention for the Elimination of All Racial Discrimination and made it
unlawfuil for anyone to make distinctions or to afford preferences, on the
grounds of race, colour, descent or national ethnic origin.
Inevitably, Voltaire was trotted out. And, on the face of it, it does seem to
contradict the great liberal precept: " I disagree with what you say, but I will
defend to the death your right to say it".
I wouldn't presume to know what Voltaire would have made of this legislation;
but I do know that the notorious history of the 20th century makes very clear
that tolerating racial prejudice is extremely dangerous to all liberal societies. 
And I also know that as a Government we have a responsibility to protect our
citizens against words which are for them blows which inflict pain of a kind
that, if it were physical, would bring charges of assault.
In 1975 we might have been inclined to think, living such a long way from the
rest of the world, that somehow our responsibility in this was diminished.
But of course it was not.
We had among us then, as we have now, many Australians who are here
because of racial persecution in other countries.
And we have Australians among us who have been here for much longer
50,000 years or so longer and whose culture and lives have been all but
destroyed by racial prejudice.
We also have and we had in 1975 a society comprised of people from all the
countries of the world. And we had to make that society a peaceful and
harmonious one.
Remember, in 1975 we were only a few years clear of that policy which
embodied Australian racial prejudice the White Australia Policy.
Twenty years later, we can honestly say that our cultural pluralism is one of our
great national successes. That is not an exaggeration.
Those of us old enough to remember Australia in the fifties and sixties
remember some very pleasant things: it was, at least until the Vietnam War, in
some many respects a quiet, simple, seemingly innocent place.
But it also had the malaise of xenophobia. This was apparent not just in the
White Australia Policy but in much else in our thinking about the world. It was
also apparent in the attitudes which were most offensively manifested in
Aboriginal policy.
For those of us old enough to remember, the distance we have travelled as a
society since then is simply extraordinary.
I don't suggest for a moment either that we have made this progress because of
the Racial Discrimination Act, or that we can now sit back and congratulate
ourselves on creating one of the world's most tolerant multicultural societies.
This society is not free of prejudice, and we cannot not even say that the trend
is ineluctably towards tolerance.
None of us can ever justify complacency on this. All of us have to engage
ourselves in the difficult questions of how we make sure that Australia
continues to be a tolerant society and becomes one which is more tolerant. 
The role of the Racial Discrimination Act and for that matter the Sex
Discrimination Act and the Racial Hatred Bill is not to punish every act of
prejudice, but to make clear that tolerance and justice are things we live by and
goals to which we aspire.
These Acts and Acts and institutions like the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission, the Native Title Act and, say, Medicare in some
ways constitute our Bill of Rights.
It is a more pragmatic, less rhetorical, legislative approach but after 20 years, I
am a bit inclined to think that it works at least as well.
As I said, legislation alone is not enough. Education will take us a lot further.
Probably the best thing we can do to eliminate prejudice is to eliminate the
poverty traps; create opportunity; keep in place a safety net while
encouraging people to maintain their cultural difference, and give them every
reason to have faith in this country.
And seeing the advantages which flow from living without prejudice or envy or
hatred will take us further still. These things are building blocks their success
encourages more success.
That is why we encourage the notion of an inclusive society. It is why we talk
about bringing people in from the margins and not leaving anyone on the edges
or anyone behind.
It is also why, might I say, I think it is so important that before the end of the
century we decide to elect one of our own as Head of State why we should
become a republican Commonwealth of Australia.
It is because by doing this we have a unique chance to symbolically define
contemporary Australia and in doing so enshrine those attitudes and ambitions
and those social realities which now distinguish us.
By making an Australian our Head of State at the turn of the century, we can
say to the world and to our children this is a country which believes in its
contemporary self.
And the reality of that contemporary self is, among many other things, a belief
in the value of tolerance and the evil of prejudice.
Not a belief in our capacity to abolish prejudice or make tolerance the universal
condition of humanity in Australia, but a belief that these are things which must
be fought for.
And which Australia should number among its ambitions. 
Which say that racism is wrong, that racial vilification and incitement to racial
violence is wrong.
And because it harms our fellow citizens and the peace, cohesion and harmony
of our society, it is also illegal.
This is why the Racial Discrimination Act is a landmark Act and one we
should celebrate.
There are many people who deserve to be acknowledged today.
I can name only a handful.
I could begin with Eddie Mabo, or with a large number of Aboriginal leaders I
have come to know and immensely respect in the last few years.
I think it is appropriate, as we are acknowledging an Act which is now 20 years
old, to pay tribute to those who have made contributions along the way.
There are too many to mention, including a great many leaders from the ethnic
communities. I don't think any of us should forget that Malcolm Fraser was a founder of
multicultural Australia and a consistent supporter of the principals which
underlied it.
But the ultimate thanks must go to the people who engineered the Racial
Discrimination Act I mean the late Lionel Murphy and Kep Enderby,
Al Grassby and of course the leader of the epoch, Gough Whitlam.
The Racial Discrimination Act got through agaist great opposition. Almost by
definition, ground-breaking legislation nearly always faces bitter opponents.
But it was good legislation and it has done Australia good.
And I don't think anyone here doubts that it will be here in another 20 years
time and I sincerely hope in another hundred.
Ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE ALP BUSINESS DINNER, WREST POINT CASINO,
HOBART, 15 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am delighted to be in Tasmania again and I am particularly delighted to be
here with Michael Field. We were just saying some nice things about him at
the table. He wasn't hearing them, but we were saying nice things about him.
And what we were saying was that when Tasmania was really facing a great
difficulty just a few years ago with a tremendous problem in terms of its
expenditures and its receipts, in short its Budget, there were very few people
in the system, anywhere in this country, who could have taken that by the
scruff of the neck and made the sort of changes that this State really needed
to make and I think that the Tasmanian community is starting to appreciate
that now.
And I was Treasurer at the time and I certainly did and I can assure you that
when one went over the litany of State indices, by far and away the greatest
change in that period was under the leadership of Michael Field and I am
delighted now that we are seeing the polls changing here and they are for
one reason that is, that the Coalition Government here, the Liberal Party, is
again showing that if you end up with a Government adrift, the State goes
nowhere and I suppose that is best demonstrated by the fact that if you take
the employment in Tasmania that is here as a consequence of the
Commonwealth's programs, you take that out, in terms of, if you like, private
sector employment, employment has actually shrunk in the period of the
Groom Government and that is against that very big increase in employment
nationally.
We have had 630,000 job growth since the election of 1993. So it is an extra
special trick to make it go backwards. You know you haven't just got to be
mediocre to make it go backwards, you have really got to excel yourself. And
that drift, you know, all process and all show but no substance and no
change. 
I mean public life is only about change. I mean Duncan ( Kerr) was very
kindly paying me a compliment about change. But I do believe in change and
I just think we are only here for the changes in public life because the system
runs itself. I mean to be up here as a Minister saying well " here I am, I am a
Minister, I have got the car and I have got the office and the title but I am not
doing anything". You know what a way to live, what a way to live. But that is
how some of these characters live and in the Tasmanian Government that is
how they all live.
So public life is about public policy and about public change and if you are
not in the change business, well get out of the road and let someone more
enterprising, more ambitious, more courageous have a go. That is what
should happen here in Tasmania and that is what I think will happen. So I am
delighted, as I say, to be here tonight with Michael and I do really look
forward, sincerely, to a Tasmanian Government, under his premiership,
working with the Federal Labor Government because this State deserves
better than it is getting. It has got obstacles, but it has got very strengths,
Tasmania, and it deserves much better than it has had.
It wasn't that many years ago, 25 or 30 years ago, this State led the
Commonwealth just about in most things in industry, in labour, in most
things. This is not true today and there is no cause why that should be so.
So I am even more convinced of the need for the Federal Government's
programs to be operating here in Tasmania and we look at things Duncan
mentioned a couple of those statements, Working Nation is one. Getting the
long term unemployed back into work. Case managing people, getting to
understand their personalities, getting their confidence, understanding their
aptitudes, finding a place for them, giving them a subsidy, getting them back
into structured training.
These sorts of things are the things that will deal with problems of
communities that don't have that natural buoyancy and strength in
employment and where we owe this most particularly, of course, is to our
young people and I know in parts of Tasmania here youth unemployment is
very high and any community that is prepared to sacrifice the well being,
prosperity and peace of mind of our young people, isn't one that has a lot of
interest in its future and, therefore, I think again the things we have been able
to do, and I say we the Federal Government have been able to do, are
important. By the way, they are the very things that our opponents want to cut out:
labour market programs, the enormous spending on TAFE, all the things that
really go to the heart of communities in a position of economic disadvantage,
seem to be the things they want to be rid of. But they are the things, in
places such as this, in parts of this State where we need most.
You know I was talking this morning to a couple of officers who were
managing a couple of the Commonwealth programs, when we were looking at
this Landcare project this morning, and they were talking about their 
experiences and how successful they are in getting long term unemployed
people, including young people, back into training and back into work.
But nothing is ever going to take the place of entrepreneurship, of investment
and the raw employment that comes with it and I think all that means turning
around the sort of sense of self importance that Tasmania has, that sense of
prosperity about itself, and not being fed the line by sort of conservative
politicians that the State is in some way a victim of circumstances. It has got
every opportunity to really I mean you look at all the innovative things that
are done here, there is no reason why there can't be more of it and it doesn't
need to be fed patronising lines by politicians without ideas, as though the
State is in some sort of position of being, you know, victimised in the
Federation or not being supported nationally. It has every opportunity and,
in fact, the national Government the more it can sensibly do here, the better.
So, once again as I say, I look forward to having the opportunity to work with
Michael and really seeing it kick along and I thank you for joining us tonight.
I have the opportunity, obviously, with you to go over more generally some of
the directions that we are taking and why I think we are at a most exciting
time in our history. I mean a century ago, in this decade a century ago, was a
period of the greatest depression, the greatest drought and yet the greatest
sense of the nation, the greatest well-spring, the welling up of Australian
nationalism, of Australian endeavour, Australian identity and that went on,
of course, until it was snuffed out by the First World War and I only
reappeared again, briefly, in 1972. I hope it has reappeared more strongly in
this decade, one century later.
Because now, here we are at the foot of the fastest growing markets of the
world, we have never been in that position before. Our markets were
traditionally in Europe, with Britain, or in North America a long way from
here. We are now with them at the foot of these very large markets in a
country which is now so much more economically competitive than it used to
be. Australia today is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 1983, that is by
the exchange rate, wages and inflation 40 per cent. That is a phenomenal
number. Not 4, or 14: 40 per cent more competitive and, essentially, that is
what is driving our exports. A decade ago we exported 13 per cent of our
GDP. This year we are exporting 22 per cent and I was having a little
tete-a-tete on the radio tonight with a commentator at the ABC and he was
asking me about this and I said " well this year GDP is $ 500 billion. We are
exporting 9 per cent of GDP more, than we were before this Government
came to office. And 9 per cent of $ 500 billion is $ 45 billion." Just imagine
where our National Accounts would be if we didn't have that $ 45 billion in
there. We are now running a current account deficit of around $ 25 billion a year.
Just imagine where we would be without that growth. But just imagine the 
innovation that has been put there to make it happen and you can see it
happening right across the country in all sorts of things and the greatest
growth, of course, is in elaborately transformed manufactures. Things which
have innovation about them, have creativity about them, because one of the
country's great strengths, and I think our greatest strength, is our education
system and it is something that this Labor Government has put its back into
since 1983.
In 1983, only three kids in ten completed secondary school. This year that is
over eight in ten, which is a revolution really in education. We are streaming
per cent of those through universities, which means we have added to the
system about 18 or 20 universities of say 10,000 average campus size.
In other words, the capital city universities, we have added the equivalent of
18 to 20 of those to the system since 1985-86. And we have now in the One
Nation program, put about $ 1.2 billion into Technical and Further Education,
or vocational education, since 1992. So we are now seeking to build beside
the universities a competent and mature vocational education system so that
those 60 per cent who didn't go, who have never gone through and won't go
through, into tertiary education can find a place for themselves in the labour
market in vocational education.
And it is that, essentially, which will be driving and is driving our product
innovation. But it is driving it because we have got a country where we have
got a better alignment of profits and wages. Where we have got a
competitive exchange rate system in place. Where we have now introduced
a productivity culture which is naturally producing a naturally low inflation
rate. Just remember this, we had a recession in 1991-92 and we had a recession
in 1981-82. At the end of the 1981 -82 recession, we came out of it with just
on 11 per cent inflation. We came out of the 1991-92 recession, with 2 per
cent inflation. And the reason for that is because we have now got
productivity naturally occurring in the system and we have produced by low
tariffs, a contestable Australian market that actually for the first time probably
in our history, a really toey, competitive, contestable Australian market and
that is producing natural productivity which is holding the inflation rate down.
It is not being held down through a draconian monetary policy. It is not being
held down through high interest rates. It is not being held down now in a
recession because we have got growth running of the order of, you know, 4 to
per cent. We have had it there now for three years and yet we are still
producing low inflation and that is coming because we have made a
breakthrough in the whole competitive structure of the country.
And this is something. When I first went to Parliament, our Tory friends used
to put themselves up as the sort of managers, the money managers. You
know there was the Labor Party over here and there was the pin-striped suit
brigade over there. But, of course, once inflation hit, they were absolutely
dumb-founded and dumb-struck. 
When double digit inflation arrived, they had no grip on wages, they had no
grip on costs. Is there any wonder that the capital stock fell apart in the
middle 70s and we started with a very large current account deficit. We had
a current account deficit of 6 per cent of GDP in 1980, three years before this
Government came to office. The debt, the nation's debt, had moved from
virtually nothing to 30-odd per cent of GDP within three years of the.
Government coming to office as a result of the neglect of the 70s when
J W Howard was asleep at the wheel. You know giving comments, cocky
little comments, on the way into Parliament House up the steps like a radio
jockey every morning, commenting on his own work.
But that is when it all happened. That is when, about the time, that
Malcolm Fraser became Prime Minister was really when the weights were on
in terms of national economic change and he and Howard threw the pass and
as a consequence it was left to a Labor Government to turn Australia into a
market economy.
But we have turned into a market economy and produced this enormous
change, including in the labour market, and let's record this fact that we have
had now 26 per cent employment growth since 1983. In 1983 we had a
labour market of 6 million, we have now got a labour market of just over
8 million. We have had, outside the United States, the fastest rate of growth
in employment of any OECD country and per year we have had five times the
rate of employment growth that the Fraser/ Howard Government had in the
late 70s and early 1980s and we are still keeping it up.
In fact in the last year we had the biggest fall in unemployment we have ever
recorded. And, as I said to you, we had 4 1/ 2 per cent employment growth,
which I think is beyond any other country in the OECD, maybe the
United States is in there with us. That is in employment.
Household disposable income has risen by 40 per cent since 1983 and the
reason for that is there is more people in households in work and that is a
phenomenal change. And, of course, in the social wage if we take another
measure which is probably the most accurate measure of all because,
you know, we have had this debate, we have had in the last year were a
couple of phoney debates. One of them was John Howard told us in his
headland speech, " the Liberal Party have been battling for battlers for a
week". And I said " well that's interesting, we have been battling it for a
hundred years". And I am not misquoting him.
But the best measure of all this is real household disposable income
per head, per capita and it is the best measure. The reason it is the best
measure, of course, is it includes wages, salaries, supplements, pensions
and social security benefits. It includes the lot. It is adjusted for changes in
the size of the population, it is after tax and it is adjusted for changes in
purchasing power. So in Australia in the period 1983-94, real household
disposable income per capita increased by 16 per cent real. That is a real
increase 16 per cent in people's household disposable income and that, 
I think, is the measure of how important social progress and the social wage
is.
And I made reference in the Parliament recently that very telling remark by
the US Labour Secretary Robert Reich at an OECD conference on
employment and the social wage and he said " in the United States we have
had enormous employment growth and now in a period of high prosperity,
high profitability, a very high profit share in the economy and quite strong
economic growth, the median wages of Americans are still falling, still falling,
and they have been falling continuously for 15 years." So he said " you have
got this terrible choice, an American style economy which has got high
employment, but low wages, or a European economy which has got high
wages and low employment. What a choice," said Robert Reich.
Well in this country we have come right up the middle. That is, we have got
high employment growth and we have also had strong income growth and we
have got a social wage underpinning it with such things as Medicare, with of
course access and equity in health, in education. And in terms of payments,
just let me give you an indication, I have just got a couple of interesting little
numbers here. Let's take somebody.. well the social wage gives
considerable assistance to families. We estimate that a family with two
children is worth $ 200 a week. That is when you look at additional family
payments, Medicare, the lot.
Under our Government, spending on the social wage increased by 73% in
real terms, or more than $ 700 per year for every man, woman and child in
Australia. And what our research is showing is that this has narrowed the
gap of the social wage quite considerably. This is including strong increases
in the pension a single pensioner is receiving an additional $ 18 a week
more than if we had kept pensions for them in line with inflation $ 18 a week
more. An unemployed couple with 2 children, renting privately, under Labor
this family is $ 96 better off in real terms than when we came in office. So, it's
an indication I think let's take a single-income family with 2 children, and at
two-thirds of average earnings about $ 25,000 a year under this
Government, the disposable income of the family has increased in real terms
by $ 52 per week. Their income tax has fallen their family payments have
increased by $ 36 a week. Now, that's really helping battlers people who
need assistance, and why I think we have got this magic mix of a strong,
efficient, low inflation, high productivity economy, grafted onto an equitable
social wage, and it could have only come from a Labor Government. And I
think that's why I think when you see that sort of sense of you know, you
can't produce good policies without good motivation, and just talking to
people today about the way in which the labour market programs are helping
the disadvantaged and the long-term unemployed these good things come
from good aspirations, good inclinations, good feelings. And the Labor Party
has traditionally had these. It's always had them, because it is of the
community, and that's why, I think, only a Labor Government could actually
produce this mix and advance the country, but do it fairly. And that is what I
think is happening. 
We have got people trying to misrepresent us. John Howard is running
around all the time trying to talk about all these things but let me just run a
couple of things past you. In the last month look at what, in the last month,
the Government has done:
It has delivered a Budget in surplus, and in surplus for years to come;
It has established a national superannuation policy, which will at least
double the retirements incomes of Australians, and create by the year
2020, a pool of national savings of $ 2 trillion $ 2000 billion;
We have created a new maternity allowance;
We have delivered $ 158 million Justice Statement amongst other things,
with family service programs, extending Legal Aid and legal services, and
establishing a national women's justice strategy;
We have realised a century-old Australian dream to have a single gauge
railway linking the capital cities of the mainland that is, we saw the One
Nation train go from Brisbane to Perth via Melbourne, for the first time in
our history a week ago;
We have launched a $ 25 million national Civics Education Program for
our schools and communities, to tell our young people about the nature of
our constitutional arrangements, and their history;
And we have announced our proposal to make an Australian Australia's
Head of State, and for Australia to become a republic by the year 2001.
In one month. In one month a surplus Budget, a new national retirement
income policy 15% of all Australian workers put away $ 2 trillion in savings
by the year 2020 a maternity allowance, the Justice Statement, the One
Nation railway, the Civics program and the republic in one month.
Now, that's more on a month than the Tories did in the whole of their
Governments. Really. And I'm saying this advisedly. I used to be there
and I remember being there during the McMahon Government, and I was up
playing tennis with a journalist I knew, and I said " how are you going?', and
he said " oh well, it's been pretty boring", he said " you know, the Government
has put out one statement in 2 weeks", I said " is that right? What was that?",
and he said " to appoint someone to Repatriation Tribunal number And
that was the truth. I mean, people forget the Rip Van Winkle years of the
Coalition. You know, the torpor that Menzies left us in, through this period.
You know, old McMahon and people like that. And then, of course, with great
hope and expectation, the Fraser Government which did nothing. And yet,
in one month, this has changed, and we have got, yet, the Leader of the
Opposition running around saying " don't forget me". When it mattered, of
course, as far as he was concerned, he forgot us he left us with double-digit 
inflation, double-digit unemployment, the biggest Budget deficit in our history,
smashed profits. You know, appalling employment forecasts he was sort of
drummed out of public life out of the Treasury in 1983, and now after a
Labor Government has, with energy, foresight and ambition, put this model
together for Australia, and after this Government has done these things in just
a month, he is saying " what about me?".
And there we saw him at his best or shall we say his worst a week ago: we
had the " headland" speech. What was in it? Nothing. One commentator
senior commentator described it as mulch. And it was. you read through it,
and it was just a collection of press statements. You know, incoherent, and it
had no thread to it. The other thing is, they can't even write a decent
sentence. Now I know maybe I'm old-fashioned, but I actually think writing a
nice sentence down has a lot going for it. They can't even write can't even
write. I mean, they are supposed to be the Tories they once had people
from the great doyennes of the Bar, you know, men and women of letters.
And what have we got know? Words incoherence. This is the headland
statement. I mean, it was just all over and done with in a day. Waited, come,
gone finished. Over. Then, a couple of days later came the republic.
Now, the thing is, the thing about the republic I'll just say this about John
Howard: I respect John Howard's right to be an Australian monarchist, but I
do not respect his pretending for several days to be something other than
a monarchist. I don't respect him blowing in the breeze. Whatever else he
might be, he's supposed to be a Leader he's nominally and notionally, the
Leader of the Opposition. And least of all do I respect his attempt in the last
week to confuse and misrepresent the issue to cover his own indecisiveness
and divisions within his own party, and those divisions, of course, are very
evident here in Tasmania. Mr Howard has been talking about a " people's
convention" half of it appointed by him. As if another committee, as Jeff
Kennett called it, could help the process. Then you had him talking about a
plebiscite he began talking about options and choices, and the only choice
he didn't talk about was the one which the debate is really all about whether
an Australian should be our Head of State. But here is what he said the day
before yesterday I'll just read it to you: " Now, we are putting up a
convention a people's convention. If a consensus comes from that, we will
put it to the public for a vote for a referendum. If there is no consensus, we
will also put the issue to a vote, but in those circumstances, we would have to
offer people a range of choices, and we would have to say do you want this
or that?". So, " do you want this, this, or this?". Well, in other words, it is
down to this it's down to pretending this mind-numbing business of process,
rather than the simple issue. He can only try and survive the debate -I
mean, this is what this week showed that John Howard can only try and
survive the debate he can't constructively engage it. He is trying to survive
the debate by pretending that a referendum is a denial of choice, or that the
question is more complex than it really is, or that the Government which has
found support with a lot of people in the Liberal Party is up to some kind of
villainy by creating the conditions in which Australians can debate, and then
decide whether an Australian will be our Head of State in the 21 st Century. 
We have got Bronwyn Bishop of course she's out there saying it's a
communist dictatorship. We have got them saying that Keating wants to be
President. Well, let me tell you the day that Parliament gave me a twothirds
vote would be the day I knew that I had lost my political virtue. I only
want two things when I retire from politics one, I want to live in an Australian
republic, and two, I want a private life.
So, anyway, the Government's proposal is designed to ensure that the
position of President will not be filled by a politician that it is above politics,
and it will be filled by people who are universally esteemed by their fellow
Australians. The conclusion I draw from Mr Howard's behaviour in the last
week does not really concern the republic at all the conclusion that I draw is
this: I think the last week has demonstrated how sad it is that at this stage in
our history, the Liberal Party has resorted to a Leader who will not lead. As
one commentator put it this week " Mr Howard's leadership principle is " I'm
your Leader please show me the way". " I am the Leader I will follow"."
Remember this it's worth remembering that John Howard had two and a
half years to prepare himself for this debate he actually prided himself on
being a monarchist champion within the Coalition. This was one of the
subjects he understood. When he was running around needling and knifing
Downer, he was saying " I am one of the people that can understand these
bigger subjects like the republic". He had two and a half years to prepare
himself, but when it was announced in the Parliament on Wednesday, he was
utterly unable to coherently respond within three days, his first response
had dramatically changed to another response. I must say, even I was
surprised by his incapacity, and it takes a lot to surprise me about John
Howard's incapacity.
Now, in the last week, we have had people on the Conservative side Ray
groom here in Tasmania, Jeff Kennett in Victoria make decisions and say
where they stand. Even poor old Tim Fischer in his own way has been clear
about his position. But Howard's response has been only to erect a wall of
obfuscation and meaningless process. He is throwing out some fly-paper in
the hope that he will get the republic to stick. Which is, by the way, what
every constitutional convention and we have had many over the years has
managed to do they are uniformly expensive and unproductive. Now, Mr
Howard was saying that he doesn't want the republic to be the main issue of
Australia's political debate. Well, it's not the only issue I agree with him.
But, how does he face up to the fact that in a month, the Government has
produced these changes, as I have mentioned to you the surplus Budget,
the big national superannuation scheme? Imagine them, the Liberals, having
the wit or the courage to get every Australian person to put 15% of their
income away as savings? Or to link the country up with a national rail
system, or to launch te Civics Education program, or to indeed, launch the
republic? So, this is the thing the Government has that vitality about it, and it has the
bigger view. And let's just take that view in that month the one thing I didn't 
mention was the visit I had to Japan, and the very successful meetings I had
with the Government of Japan, and the statement I came away with endorsing
the relationship between Australia and Japan, with the government of Japan
saying that Australia was an indispensable regional partner of Japan this is
the second largest economy in the world, and our largest major trading
partner. We developed these bilateral linkages. At the same time, we are
developing the multi-lateral ones, like APEC. And part of that conversation in
Japan was about the value of APEC. I saw the Chinese Vice Premier in
Sydney yesterday, also talking about the value of APEC keeping the United
States strategically engaged in Asia, opening up markets around the Asia-
Pacific rim these and other things have come from the Labor Government.
So, not only developing the structures at home, developing them abroad.
Could you imagine I mean Gareth and I are working on these issues could
you imagine Alexander Downer working on APEC? ( No. No.) He's telling us
to send a gun-boat to Mururoa. I'm sure he still has battleships in the bathtub
with him, to sort of, create his own view of the world, you know. He would
have the Repulse or the Renown floating past his toe, King George V just
going over the ankles.
But, the thing is the truth is they faced up to any of it the big economic
model, with the graft of the big social wage, or any or the big social
outreaches be it participation in education or in health or the big foreign
policy gestures of the Government in APEC, or in chemical weapons, or in
Cambodia or in the big bilateral relationship with Indonesia or Japan they
can't get near the Government. And you can see that in the headland
speech. It came to nothing. It was his big moment, and what was it? A
complete fizzer. two nights later, the republic a bigger fizzer. So, this is
why we believe that the Labor Party it listens, it is of the community, it
understands community sentiment. But it has also got invention, and
creativity, and imagination the Labor Party has got that one ingredient the
Coalition has never had imagining something something better, and going
after it. and the other thing is, we have got also belief in Australia, belief in
Australians, and the notion that we believe that we will never be never truly
represent ourselves, or adequately express that which we have become,
unless one of us is our Head of State. Now, these are all things which are
the mark of a Party with imagination and with a vista about what Australia is.
And including, those big social questions, like reconciliation with our
indigenes, a greater role for women in our society, improving the status and
the participation of our women John Howard said we were falling prey to the
special interest groups the environmentalists, Aborigines and women. Well,
if they are special interest groups, if we don't respond to them, what sort of
Party would we be? That's why we are going to keep this growth sustainable:
you can see it now, 3 3/ 4% GDP growth, with modest inflation we are about
to put another Accord together with the ACTU to guarantee wage restraint
over the next 3 years, and good inflation outcomes. We are going to
continue with our education system adding to that program of innovation to
our exports, we are going to continue to build those relationships outside of 
11
Australia, and we want to do it holding our head up as Australians. All that is
a formula John Howard can't match.
And that's one of the reasons I will be working with Michael Field as Prime
Minister and Premier after the next election ( hear hear) ours and his, to see
the great craft of the Labor Party working again fully here in the state of
Tasmania as a full partner in the federation of this great country. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF FRANJO TUDJMAN, PRESIDENT OF CROATIA
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, TUESDAY 20 JUNE 1995
It is a great pleasure to welcome you here to Australia.
This first visit by a Croatian head of state is obviously a significant event. It is
a cause for celebration among Australians of Croatian descent, who have
contributed so much to Australia in the past, and who are now especially
well-placed to help build a new and more substantial relationship with
Croatia. Croatian-Australians have played an important part in Australia's history.
Since the Ballarat gold rush of 1854, more than 100,000 Croatian-Australians
have contributed their labour, skills and innovation to Australia's economic
and social development.
Croatian immigrants and their families have helped to open up rural Australia
and to develop our resource and agricultural industries. Croatians became
K miners in New South Wales, cane cutters in Queensland, farmers and market
gardeners in Western Australia and other states.
Croatian fishermen from the Croatian Littoral and Dalmatia helped found the
Australia fishing industry.
Today in South Australia, a significant portion of the industry is run and
owned by immigrants from Croatia. The best-known fisherman among them
is Dean Lukin, the weightlifting champion who won a gold medal for Australia
at the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles.
Croatian grape growers and wine makers, who first arrived here late last
century from Dalmatia, helped found the Australian wine industry. Today that
industry is worth over $ 1 billion in exports annually. 
This year a Croatian-Australian, John Kosovich, received an award in the
Order of Australia, for his contribution to the Australian wine industry.
Croatian labourers and tradesmen, who came to Australia from the displaced
persons camps of post-World War Two Europe, battled the isolation and
hardship of the logging camps, mines, rural construction teams and the
Snowy Mountains Electricity Scheme. They helped to build the modern
Australia. Here in Canberra, the work of Croatian-Australian workers and craftsmen is
all around us, including in this Parliament House.
The entire marble work in the National Library of Australia was erected by
Croatian stonemasons from the island of Brac.
And the Embassy which you will be opening tomorrow, Mr President, is a very
tangible sign of this contribution.
Along the way, Croatian-Australians have introduced their love of soccer,
through players such as this year's player of the year, Mark Viduka.
And a number of Croatians are leading players in our own football code,
Australian Rules.
Croatian Australians have also been prominent in the arts.
Earlier this year I visited Berlin, where 1 was very proud to attend a
performance of Wagner's opera, Tristan and Isolde, conducted by a rising
Australian musician of international stature, Simone Young Simone has a
Croatian family background.
So the skill and talents of Croatian Australians have contributed in important
ways to the modern Australia you are visiting, Mr President.
The commitment shown by communities like the Croatian-Australians to
preserve cultural diversity and respect it, helps foster Australia's sense of
nationhood. Croatian-Australians have applied their skills and culture for Australia's
benefit. And they have done this, as Australians must, with their loyalty first
to Australia.
One issue concerns all Australians about the countries emerging from the
former Yugoslavia: the appalling loss of life and suffering taking place there.
Many Australians have been touched by it, not least because this country is
home to several hundred thousand immigrants from the former Yugoslavia,
and to their descendants. 
We understand the pain the conflict causes citizens of the Croatian-
Australian community and other communities with links with parts of the
former Yugoslavia.
Despite the suffering and the horrors which have been deeply felt here, it has
been a tribute to Australians of Croatian, Serb and other former Yugoslav
descent that they have not allowed the pressures and tensions of this
appalling conflict to spill over into their own country.
We share in Croatia's happiness in becoming independent.
That was not achieved easily. And as we ourselves know, making changes to
old practices and habits of mind, introducing economic policy changes and
building a prosperous and just multicultural society is not easy.
Independence carries with it responsibilities as well as rights and powers. It
must deliver security in the broadest sense to all the people of the country:
peace, prosperity, respect for the equality and dignity of all citizens
regardless of their ethnicity, religion or language.
The standing of Croatia and the former republics of Yugoslavia, and the
legacies of their leaders, will ultimately be judged by the success of
democracy within their countries, and the contribution they make to building
peace and stability in their immediate region through cooperation with their
neighbours. lIa m sure all those present here -and all Australians -join mein wishing you
well in contributing to these objectives and in our hope that you can use your
position to build peace in the former Yugoslavia.
You have arrived at a time when Australia is enjoying the results of
fundamental changes in our foreign, trade, economic and social policies. I
y hope you will find much that Croatia and its business people will want to
associate with.
Today, Australia is one of the fastest growing of all the industrialised
economies and forecast to remain so throughout this year.
We are a major trading nation, increasingly looking to take an active role in
the Asia-Pacific region, which now accounts for half of the world GDP.
Already three-quarters of our exports go to this region, over 30 percent of
them manufactured exports.
I believe these developments in Australia and our region are significant for
Croatia as well. Australia is a good place from which to do business in the
Asia-Pacific region. 
As the world's 13th largest economy, with a sophisticated research capacity
and a deep resource base, Australia has much to offer European countries
such as Croatia. And the Croatian-Australian community is well placed to
contribute to the development of trade between us.
I am sure all Australians will join me in wishing you and your country well in
your endeavours to secure a peaceful, cooperative and prosperous place in
the international community.
Finally, let me assure you that we look forward to building on the many
personal connections which exist between our two countries to create a more
vital and substantial relationship with Croatia.
I wish you and Mi s Tudjfrian well for your vlslt.
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to join me in welcoming you to
Australia. Ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
WORLD CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR
SMALL BUSINESS, SYDNEY WEDNESDAY 21 JUNE 1995
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I am grateful for the invitation to speak to you at the closing of this 40th World
Conference of the International Council for Small Business.
I want to use this speech to say some things about Australia's trade policy and what
we are doing to help our business people make the most of the enormous
opportunities which exist in this Asia-Pacific region, the fastest growing in the world.
The Minister for Trade, Senator McMullan, is today issuing a statement called
" Winning Markets: Australia's future in the global economy" and I want to use this
opportunity to formally launch this document.
This international conference about small business is an appropriate place to do this
because one of the things which has been very much on the Government's mind in
drawing the strategy up is the increasingly important role of small and medium
businesses in Australia's trade.
I also want to use the opportunity to speak to those of you who are here from
overseas about the opportunities for business in Australia. Because this country
offers overseas investors a very competitive environment, and is an ideal base for
companies including small companies wishing to tap Asian markets.
It is now a very familiar notion that the globalisation of production is dramatically
reshaping the way national economies work and businesses operate. More than
one third of world trade is now conducted by firms trading within their own structures
across national boundaries.
I am sure this has been a theme of many of the formal and informal discussions you
have had at this conference. 
The driving fact behind globalisation, of course, is the rapid movement of people
and information. Indeed, the movement of people and information rather than goods
is the fastest growing segment of world trade.
The information revolution has generated whole new areas of business many of
them created by small enterprises and it is transforming the way other business is
done. More and more firms, for example, are marketing their products and services,
locating their production, conducting their research and sourcing their materials
wherever in the world it makes the best economic sense to do so.
Your choice of Sydney as the venue for this conference reflects these changes.
The Council's World Conference has convened outside North America only three
times since it first met 40 years ago. And all three of those meetings have been in
the past five years.
The globalisation of production is confronting businesses with unprecedented
challenges. And small and medium-sized enterprises are no more immune from
these changes than are large ones.
Markets in most economies are becoming increasingly contestable. For small and
medium-sized businesses increasingly that means opportunities abroad and
overseas competition at home.
The result is that few businesses, including smaller ones, can afford to look to
domestic markets alone. This is especially so in Australia with our relatively small
population and an economy tightly integrated into world markets.
But despite these challenges, small and medium-sized enterprises may, in fact, be
the best placed to exploit the opportunities of globalisation.
They tend to be less bureaucratic than large firms and more innovative and
responsive. They have probably gained most from those improvements in
communications and transport which have reduced the cost and complexity of
international business.
Globalisation has also been driven and encouraged by the great growth over recent
years in direct foreign investment. In the second half of the 1 980s foreign direct
investment grew at an annual average rate of 30 per cent, more than twice the rate
of world exports.
The trend has been obvious for Australian investment. In 1980 this country's stock
of equity investment overseas was around $ 7 billion. By 1994 it was around
billion.
Australian companies have understood that, in a world of integrated production,
often the best way to secure entry into a market is by establishing operations there. 
And as we have seen here, such investment will often lead not only to increased
sales in the new market, but also to more exports from Australia.
This country's small and medium-sized enterprises have been vital to the success of
our shift towards an international ised economy. Around 4,500 such Australian
businesses are now regularly and actively involved in international trade. They
generate $ 6.5 billion in international turnover. And we expect this to double over
the next five years.
But a great many other small and medium businesses farmers, tourist operators,
hotel and transport providers are also responding to the challenges of international
trade. Their level of involvement is certain to increase.
Success in global markets is vital for Australia's continuing prosperity.
During the past decade this Government has reversed the long-term decline in
Australia's performance as a trading nation. In 1980 the proportion of our GDP
provided by exports of goods and services had fallen below the OECD average. In
1993 it was again above it.
Our exports of manufactures have been doubling every five years.
They now account for almost one-third of our total goods exports.
We have also diversified the composition of our merchandise trade. The most
dramatic shift has been in the value-added area precisely where it was most
required. Five years ago, elaborately transformed manufactures accounted for 16 per cent of
our merchandise exports. Last year it was 22 per cent.
Another major shift has been in the strong growth of our exports of services. These
now form a quarter of total exports. In fact, the services trade deficit is now less
than a third of what it was a decade ago. On current trends, we will soon have a
surplus. Tourism and education make an enormous contribution to services trade, but we are
also seeing rapid growth in telecommunications, financial services and legal
services. Australia now has a trade surplus in computer software, for example.
Earnings from exports of computer software have grown by 60 per cent over the
past five years to nearly $ 400 million.
The Winning Markets trade strategy which Senator McMullan is releasing today is
designed to improve on this performance. It reflects extensive consultation with
business, and is focussed particularly on getting smaller Australian firms exportready
and operating off-shore. 
Australia's natural resource-based exports minerals and agriculture are, of
course, the core of our export trade and they will remain so. Increasingly we are
adding value to these exports and tailoring them to particular markets.
Winning Markets gives greater priority than in the past to value-added exports, and
especially in manufacturing and services. This is in part because these are the
areas where the Government can add its own particular value for our exporters at
present. The Winning Markets study starts by acknowledging that the factors that will
determine Australia's success as a trading nation are our fundamental economic
policy settings, our access to overseas markets, and the extent to which we can
develop a trade and investment culture, especially among our small and mediumsized
companies.
It recognises that our trade performance depends, often crucially, on domestic
factors. In Australia's case, our macro-economic policy settings have provided a solid basis
for our exporters. We have kept inflation low, and growth high.
We have introduced greater competition through lower tariffs and, more recently,
the adoption of the Hilmer reforms on competition policy, thereby reducing the costs
of doing business.
We have a national commitment to invest in innovation and research and
development. Later this year, the Government will bring down a statement on
support for innovation and best practice in Australian business
Over the long-term, one of the things which will matter most for our future is the
investment the Government has put into upgrading education and training for our
workforce. Over the past decade the proportion of students completing year 12, and the
proportion of young Australians going on to university, have more than doubled.
We have opened up tens of thousands of opportunities in vocational training.
The skills base and the technical excellence we have nurtured, our world class
scientific and research base, our telecommunications capacity these are highly
prized assets in a fast growing region where individual countries are in fierce
competition for resources and wealth.
These are all quality reforms with lasting benefits.
But, of course, just as you need to continually meet new challenges to stay ahead in
your businesses, Government must be able to respond to current developments in
its policy settings.
And that is what my Government has been able to do time and again. 
I am pleased to say that you will see further evidence of this tomorrow when we
meet with the major union groups to conclude a further agreement under the Accord.
This will ensure a continuation of low inflation and job creation. It will provide the
means for us to radically lift our national savings performance.
I am also pleased to be able to let you know that it will address a particular concern
of many businesses domestically, namely the treatment of unfair dismissals.
It is crucially important that all employees can feel confident that they will be treated
fairly in their place of employment. After all, Labor Governments have been
traditionally concerned with the rights and protections of workers.
One of the most important areas where employers have considerable responsibility
is to ensure that in the event of dismissal of employees the action is not harsh or
unjust or unfair, and that the right weight is given to following correct procedures.
In the area of unfair dismissals, the Government is committed to shielding
employees from the small minority of unscrupulous or unjust employers who may not
at times be acting ethically in this area. The Government will maintain this principle
in its approach to questions of dismissal.
With this as background it may still be the case that some of the application of the
current unfair dismissal laws have not always been what all business, and small
business in particular, have thought is right. Indeed, there have been expressions
of public concern that the Government is interested in addressing.
The essential challenge in the area of unfair dismissals is to get the balance right
between the right protection for employees and making sure that the process is not
so legalistic as to mean that the system is not working properly.
Laurie Brereton and I have talked through this issue with both the ACTU and a
number of employers and employer groups.
As a result of these discussions it has been decided to take some action in the area
of unfair dismissals, and the Minister will be announcing further details this
afternoon. Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Government's policies have delivered tangible success.
Australia's international competitiveness has increased around 40 per cent since the
early 1980s.
This competitiveness is reflected in the number of companies establishing regional
headquarters in Australia.
I 
Since 1993, when the Government intensified its efforts to attract regional
headquarters here, another 54 companies have located operations and brought jobs
to Australia. These include firms like IBM, Oracle and Data-General.
The reasons are straightforward:
our management pool is 7 to 8 times bigger than Singapore's and 3 to 4 times
bigger than Hong Kong's
office accommodation in Australian capitals is some 6 to 8 per cent less
expensive than comparable space in Singapore and Hong Kong
we offer high quality, low-cost expatriate accommodation, health and
education
our international telephone calls are about the cheapest in the world
we have well qualified and highly competitive support services, such as
lawyers, accountants, management consultants and computer specialists
Australian salaries for qualified and professional executives are 60 per cent
more competitive than Singapore and 50 per cent more than Hong Kong
our rapidly expanding commercial and cultural ties with the Asia-Pacific
region help support business operations across the region
Our diverse multicultural population is another important asset for this country.
Many Australian SMEs are operated by people from non-English speaking
backgrounds. They often have skills, personal links and knowledge of business
networks in their home countries that can help companies win new markets.
One of the real advantages for Australia of our location in the fastest growing region
of the world is that, much earlier than in Europe, we understood the nature of
competition from the dynamic new Asian economies. We realised that we needed to
compare ourselves and compete not just with our own past performances, or with
other mature industrialised economies, but also with the ' Tigers" around us.
The second part of Winning Markets describes how Australia goes about improving
our access to overseas markets and exploiting these more effectively.
Australia has important traditional markets in Europe and the United States and
smaller emerging markets in the Indian Ocean region and Latin America.
But Asia remains our main target for export growth. The reason is that, by the year
2000, the East Asian economies will constitute the largest market in the world,
surpassing Western Europe and North America. 
Last year alone showed how things are changing. Australia's merchandise exports
to South-East Asia grew by 12 per cent. South-East Asia now accounts for about
per cent of those exports compared with 9 per cent a decade ago. Korea overtook
the United States to become our second-largest export market after Japan. And if
you add together the markets of China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, the China region is
now our third largest trading partner.
Because Australia's trade is diverse we need our trade policy to operate on a wide
range of fronts. For example, we need to address the obstacles that face our
exporters of agricultural and mineral commodities, of manufactures, our overseas
investors and our exporters of skills and ideas. They all have different problems
and need different responses
The best way of doing this is undoubtedly through the multilateral trade system of
the World Trade Organisation.
Australia alone cannot prise open markets. Even if we had the disposition to do so,
we don't have the clout that would enable us to operate unilaterally.
An effective and comprehensive multilateral trade system is our best protection
against the worst excesses of the unilateralists, or of inward-looking bilateral or
regional arrangements.
One of the goals set out in Winning Markets is that of rekindling global enthusiasm
for multilateral trade liberalisation. We saw at the recent G7 summit that support for
such liberalisation is pretty thin in Europe and the United States.
We hope that by the time of the first meeting of the World Trade Organisation in
Singapore next year, Australia can build support for an ambitious agenda that will
include the further liberalisation of trade in agriculture ( with the help of the
Australian chaired Cairns Group), the development of fairer global investment rules
and real movement on the liberalisation of trade in services.
This is a sector of great interest to many small and medium businesses. Australia
has already successfully shaped the course of global negotiations on
telecommunications. And we will be just as active in the negotiations on
professional services, where Australian firms, large and small, are increasingly
turning to export markets, only to find a bewildering array of barriers.
I am sure that the successful APEC leaders' meeting, which President Clinton
chaired in Seattle, did a great deal to bring about the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round. I think APEC can also assist in further global trade liberalisation.
Australia has invested a lot in APEC and we will continue to do so. The Asia-Pacific
region has the fastest growth in the world three times that of established
industrialised countries.
APEC encompasses a dynamic region that already accounts for more than 40 per
cent of the world's population, half of the world's GOP and 46 per cent of its exports. 
The enormous achievement of APEC so far has been to reinforce a region-wide
trend towards liberalising trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific.
It provides the framework in which regional governments can take the hard
decisions on economic deregulation and structural change. Recent deregulation in
Indonesia and China, and tariff reductions in Malaysia, indicate the direction Asia is
heading. These developments strengthen the region's dynamism and ensure
continued high growth rates.
And this process will be strengthened as a result of the historic commitment of
APEC leaders at Bogor last year to free trade and investment in the region by 2010
for developed countries and 2020 for developing countries.
APEC may be the most productive manifestation we have yet seen of what used to
be called the North/ South dialogue.
The commitment to free trade and investment in APEC goes well beyond the
liberalisation of tariffs. It will address a host of market access issues that
increasingly matter to Australia's traders and investors in the globalised trade
environment services, investment, transfer of technology and intellectual property.
Different standards alone add an estimated 5 to 10 per cent to the costs faced by
exporters entering a market for the first time. So APEC's work in areas such as
standards, the mutual recognition of testing procedures and the streamlining of
customs procedures can offer real gains to business.
It is vital that small business is in a position to take full advantage of the
opportunities provided by free trade and investment in APEC. This will be the major
theme of the meeting of APEC ministers responsible for small business policy to be
held in Adelaide later this year.
With many US business people here, it may be worth noting a fact that seems to
receive little attention in the United States: that US exports to East Asia are growing
at twice the rate of East Asian exports to the US.
US projections have put Asia, even excluding Japan, as the United States' largest
export market by 2010.
So APEC is important to the United States as well as to Australia.
The access Australia achieves to markets through multilateral activities like APEC,
the World Trade Organisation and other forums such as the development of links
between the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the Australia-New Zealand Closer
Economic Relations Agreement is supported by our bilateral activities with
individual governments.
A model of what we can do in this area is found in the many layers of government
and commercial cooperation Australia has built up with Indonesia. 
It is perfectly true, of course, that only businesses can do business. But sound and
creative govern ment-to-govern ment relationships provide a foundation of confidence
which is often reassuring to business people.
Another theme of this Government's work bilaterally and a direction we want to
continue to move in is encouraging the development of alliances and partnerships
between Australian and overseas companies. Linkages with other firms, particularly
large ones, is a key strategy for SMEs wanting to exploit the opportunities of
globalisation. Examples of what we already have done in this area is the establishment of a fund
to examine ways in which Australian and Korean companies with complementary
capabilities could capture opportunities in the " information superhighway" which
neither can do alone.
Similarly, we have set up a fund to help establish consortia of Australian and
Singaporean companies to bid for large projects to encourage involvement in the
expanding Asian infrastructure market.
The third key element of Winning Markets involves fostering a trade and investment
culture among local business.
Recent studies in Australia have found that a major factor distinguishing those firms
that export from those that do not is the presence, or lack of it, of an export culture
within the companies.
Such a culture has begun to take root in Australia but it still needs nurturing.
Recent studies of Australian manufacturers and service exporters have identified
huge untapped export potential in both areas. A relatively small number of firms in
these sectors is exporting at present.
The research also showed that the major constraints on the ability of SMEs to
operate internationally include difficulties in getting timely information on market
opportunities and managing uncertainty and risk.
The Government is already assisting exporters through our export assistance
agency, Austrade, and another body Ausindustry.
Ausindustry works to help businesses commercialise research and development
technology, and assist their activities such as product design and quality systems,
marketing and networking.
Austrade works to help exporters secure positions in overseas markets.
Following extensive client research by Austrade, Senator McMullan is announcing
today a new client service strategy which will mean more and better services for
Australian exporters. 
Austrade will now provide extensive information and advice free of charge to new
and potential exporters. This is a major commitment to the needs of potential
exporters among Australian small and medium-sized businesses.
A second group of companies seeking practical assistance to enter and build export
markets will receive subsidised services.
A third group, including experienced exporters building on established overseas
business, can receive tailored, intensive assistance from Austrade on a cost
recovery basis.
As a result of the work done on the Winning Markets strategy and the discussions
which have been held with business, Senator McMullan is also announcing a
number of other decisions which will help Australian exporters and strengthen the
trade policy debate in Australia.
Among these initiatives are a parliamentary enquiry into export-related airfreight
issues. Over half Australia's non-primary merchandise exports are transported by
air. The enquiry will examine Australia's airfreight infrastructure and recommend
how services to exporters, particularly of perishable products, can be improved.
To enable the Government to record and follow-up more effectively Australian
business concerns about export barriers, an export barriers reporting scheme will
come into effect from 1 July 1995 as part of a new unit within the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.
To build a stronger export culture in Australia and to link trade research and
education more closely with business interests, a Chair and Centre in the Practice of
International Trade will be established, with business support, at the Melbourne
Business School at the University of Melbourne.
In response to the difficulties experienced by smaller Australian companies in selling
their products to some of the more difficult, unfamiliar markets such as Japan,
Austrade is examining the feasibility of setting up an Australian enterprise to
manage effective distribution for Australian processed and manufactured products in
selected markets. The project would draw heavily on private sector involvement and
would operate on a fully commercial basis.
Finally, consultations with industry have shown that the cost of market information is
an important barrier to the expansion of exports from small and medium-sized
enterprises. So a new integrated, electronic exporter and marketing service on the
Internet called the " Australia TradeBlazer' program will be established by
Austrade. In its first stage, it will provide on-line access to relevant export
information.
The Winning Markets strategy, and the associated announcements which are being
made are a further commitment by the Government to ensuring that Australian
companies and our small and medium-sized enterprises especially will continue
to be able to compete with the best in the world's markets. 
Governments commonly talk about their " commitments", I know. They talk about
them at least as often as small businesses talk about the failure of government to
actually deliver.
I suspect our relationship needs a different language: one which reflects the fact
that we are engaged in the same project, which is the creation of a dynamic export
economy. Perhaps we need to see the relationship as a joint venture and talk more
in terms of shared goals and common efforts to which both must deliver.
From the Government's point of view, small and medium sized businesses are an
arm of national policy and, notwithstanding the fact that we cannot act for you or
give you the ideas and courage you will need to succeed, we will do all we can to
make you stronger.
Thank you for having me with you today.
Ends 



PRIME INISTE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
PRESENTATION OF NATIONAL MULTICULTURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL'S
REPORT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 27 JUNE 1995
I am pleased to be here today to accept this report from the National
Multicultural Advisory Council and its Chairman, Mick Young.
It's particularly good to see Mick around these parts I've always thought he left
them much too early. But the talents he brought to politics his intelligence,
humour, his great love of his fellow Australians and his great rapport with them
suited him for this task, and I'm sure he has performed it superbly.
The 1989 National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia set the scene for the
Government's response to the changing composition of the Australian
population. If we are now able to say that our cultural diversity is one of our great national
successes and one of our great national assets we can also say that the 1989
Agenda is a document of considerable stature in our recent history.
Today's report marks another step along the way.
And it is important that we make progress that we pay more than lip service to
our cultural diversity.
I think sometimes we talk about multiculturalism as a mirror of our achievements
when really it should be seen as a mirror of the realities we have to face.
That is why, if multicultural ism is to continue to work for us, it has to continue to
evolve and adapt and, in communities, government and the bureaucracy, those
in positions of leadership have to keep their minds open and responsive. 
The success of this multicultural society does Australians great credit; and, as
Volume 2 of this Reports makes clear, the achievements since the 1989 Agenda
was handed down have been very substantial ones.
But the future certainly cannot be taken for granted.
Multicultural programs must continue to evolve to meet disparate and changing
needs. We must keep pace with contemporary issues, seek out the benefits and
opportunities as they arise and maintain a watchful eye on prejudice and
intolerance. The architects and administrators of modern multicultural ism must resist the
tendency of ideas to ossify and habits of mind to take on the shape and
characteristics of ideology.
. Every step towards ideology will distort the liberal aims of multicultural ism.
Platitudes and jargon will stunt its growth.
It is not just in the number of programs that multiculturalism must grow it must
grow philosophically.
It must look for new directions and be alive to the way Australia is going.
That is the function of this Report to keep the process moving.
I note, for instance, that the Report is concerned to acknowledge more fully than
before the place of indigenous Australians in the arena of multicultural affairs,
and that it attempts * to deal with areas of common concern and policy overlap.
And I think it goes without saying that this Government entirely approves of this
development. An altogether different recent example of the capacity for new thinking has been
the development of strategies for " productive diversity". This requires us to see
beyond the needs of ethnic communities to the advantages contained in their
linguistic and cultural understanding.
These days the designers of our investment, trade and industry policies, and an
increasing number of business people, are conscious that this unique human
resource offers a competitive edge in dealing with the world. 
At another level, as we approach the centenary of our nationhood and come to
grips with questions of our identity and our place in the world in the 21 st century,
multicultural policies must define themselves against our national interests and
ambitions. At the Global Diversity Conference in Sydney recently I proposed something
resembling a model of multicultural rights and responsibilities. None of these
mark in any way a departure from the fundamental multicultural principles laid
down in the 1989 Agenda.
The Australian Government continues to assert the right of all Australians to
express their individual cultural heritage and their right to equality of treatment
and opportunity.
But it also asserts that the first loyalty of all who make Australia their home must
be to Australia and that the tolerance on which multiculturalism is built must be
recognised as a universal principle of Australian democracy, and practised
universally.
As a practical expression of this ambition, we are keen for migrants to take up
citizenship we think it will build more national cohesion without diminishing at
all the liberal, tolerant multicultural qualities of Australia.
But in asking migrants to take up their democratic responsibilities we reaffirm our
own. We are very much aware that the best thing we can do for ethnic groups in
Australia is create an economy and society in which there is opportunity for
people of energy and ambition to succeed, to create, to build good lives for
themselves and their families.
At the same time, we have to maintain the kind of social safety net which will
give migrants and others the support they need when they are establishing
themselves and when things go wrong.
We are doing this through a social security system which is infinitely more
sophisticated and efficient than it was a decade ago even five years ago.
We are doing it through Medicare, employment education and training, housing
and community services.
These basic policies are not marked " multicultural" but on them, more than
anything else we do, a successful multicultural society depends. 
We can, of course, develop them in accordance with the needs created by our
cultural diversity. And that is what we do. It is what access and equity is all
about. It is why we take those steps to eliminate the barriers which arise from different
languages, cultures and religions.
It is why we insist on such practical steps as translating materials, targeting non-
English speaking communities in information strategies, and the cross cultural
training of government staff.
These things really do help, because they really do address practical realities.
They are part of a government's responsibility in a culturally diverse society.
But cultural diversity is a matter for all Australians.
It falls on communities, schools and businesses on every one of us to practise
tolerance and garner the talents and ambitions of all who live here.
It will help, I think, if we recognise that we have reached a point where it can be
said that in these things we have a proud tradition to uphold.
Among other things this Report makes that clear. It is an update, a report on
progress and a signpost along the way which began with the immigration
program fifty years ago.
Some would say the tradition began long before that.
Whenever it began, the tradition describes the evolution of a uniquely tolerant
and culturally diverse democracy in Australia and the lesson is, we must keep
working at it.
That is why I am very glad to receive this report.
The Government will give serious consideration to all the recommendations.
I thank the Chairman, Mick Young, and the members of the National Multicultural
Advisory Council for their conscientiousness and the work they have done for
Australia. 



TEL: 29. Jun. 95 20: 26 No .023-P-0 1
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS AWARDS
( NEW SOUTH WALES CHAPTER), SYDNEY, 28 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Well Prime Minister's don't receive too many awards. There is only one is
really interested in and that is the one that comes around every three years.
But 1 am very honoured and very flattered to receive this.
I am very interested in architecture. I do have a bit of a fetish with temple
pediments and things like that, but you all know about that probably. But that
doesn't disqualify me from being interested in the environment In which we live
and I have always been interested in beauty. I know it Is a word out of the
lexicon these days but Itsh ouldn't be out of our minds because wherever we
look, wherever our eyes may fall, It should be something which cheers us up,
which gives us improvement in the quality of our existence, which encourages
us to do things.
I am sure you are all run by your eyes and I probably am too. And, I first
started to develop mine, pressing with my nose against Stanley Lipscombe's
Antique Shop in Bathurst Street, Sydney Stella to his friends. And Stella was
very obliging in terms of taking people in and teaching them things. And
Leo Schofield who is known to you all as another one of his students and
there were some other mentors I had.
But it all, in the end, for me got back to architecture and to the history of
architecture and to that I have been particularly interested. As you know my
interest has been in the Greek revival or the neo-classical and we are seeing
a bit of th~ at happen around these days too. There's a bit of revisionism that
has been going on.
One can take an Interest In the development of cities and the way people live
in the built environment. But I have always thought that the greatest challenge
has been with the modern architect who with the disposable society has been
stuck with the disposable building where we have had the mass congregation
of people in cities for work. That is changing a bit now and probably
Information technology will change it more as we go on where people will be 
TEL: 29. Jun. 95 20: 26 No. 023 P. 02
2
able to work other than in congregations, or in large capital city buildings,
which are put up for amenity and for function without any real premium on
their role in the streetscape or the cityscape and where they can be disposed
of after 20 years and something built in their place.
It is a great challenge, I think, for architects to live in that environment
whereas most of the people who have written the text books lived in an age
where great public buildings were built or, if not public buildings, by private
patrons who themselves developed architectural interests. There was a
premium on everything they did as there was in most countries and in most
cities and we have got a reasonable heritage in this country of them.
But as time has borne on, that premium has come back and you have seen it
come back in public buildings. Some of the worst buildings built these days
are public buildings more is the pity and that is changing too, I think.
But we have had our urban design taskforce, which has presented a first class
report to us about design in the cities and urban development and housing
choice and these, I think, ought to be important things for us. I think we are
probably entering a new epoch where a premium is going to come back on to
CBD-type development, or precinct development, and this will give the
interested patron, or developer, a chance to have an influence, a greater
influence, than we have seen with the sarcophagi that have been ordered-up
by provident mutual funds and other distinguished bodies who have not really
been Interested In what they have built, but rather the economics of It.
We have a very great country, a very Il'arge country, but as large as It Is, given
our strong urban configuration and consolidation, even this is not large
enough for us and we are running out of space. The Premies [ Cares]
remarks recently about the sprawl of Sydney are a case In point. And, I think,
another challenge there is for housing choice and style of our suburbs and the
quality of life we offer people.
These are real issues, I think, for Australians because we have such a unique
opportunity. We are the only nation on earth that has a continent to itself and
our stewardship of that continent should be such that whether it be the coasts,
or the native forests, or the river systems, or the cities, we should be now
nurturing it as never before, understanding now as never before what a great
opportunity and a singular opportunity we have been given.
I hope that the Commonwealth can play a greater role. We have never
formally had much of a role in urban planning but through the Better Cities
program we have been able to do some quite interesting things. John
mentioned Pyrmont. Last week I was at the railyards In Launceston and that
is a lovely city with a great architectural heritage. And we are doing things In
certain locations around the country which will spark development Interest
around them just as Darling Harbour, perhaps as a typical example, has done
here in New South Wales. The original public investment [ in Darling Harbour]
has now been multiplied many times over and if we can get good planning
regimes and Interested community participation, I think, we can really do some
interesting things with Commonwealth funding In some of these areas and 
TEL: 29. Jun. 95 20: 26 No .023 P. 03
3
doing it with the States and Local Government and bringing those three tiers
of Government together and bringing private developers to it as well. I think
this does offer us some opportunities.
I think we need to be very hard with developers.* I don't think developers
deserve to have many rights. I don't believe in leaving it to " the market" in the
development of cities, or In urban development. I think there has to be always
the predominant public interest question prevailing and, therefore, we should
encourage developers but we should encourage them within frameworks
which we as a community endorse and not to be held hostage to the things
that they propose to us.
Mr Grollo's proposal for the new hundred storey-odd building in Melbourne is
an example of what we shouldn't be doing or whiat we shouldn't tolerate.
So to the extent that I can say some things about this, or add to the
commonweal, to put a premium on architecture, to put a premium on the
creativity of people whose profession it is to think about the sort of buildings
we build, the way we live in them, those who occupy them, and those who
have to look at them and the environment in which they sit, these are the
things, I think, that Government's perhaps can do perhaps at a distance in
some respects but where we do have an influence ourselves, encourage the
best things to happen if it is at all possible.
At any rate, I suppose In many respects, the Sydney Morning Herald has
described me as a frustrated State planning minister but then the Sydney
Morning Herald has described me in many ways the truth Is there may be a
grain of truth In that.
At any rate, I am not going to while ever the wrath of democracy leaves me
standing I am not going to desist from arguing the case for good urban
design and thoughtful development of our landscape, of our coasts, of keeping
our eyes sharply on that great inheritance-we have been given. If that helps
this profession I would be very pleased indeed. But I am very honoured by
the fact that you have thought it might have already. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AUSINDUSTRY NATIONAL LAUNCH INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL,
SYDNEY 28 JUNE 1995
This is a good thing that we do today.
I am very pleased, and very proud, to come together with representatives of
the States, the Territories and the business community, to launch
Ausindustry. I am proud because Auslndustry is another investment by the Government in
Australia, in a stronger nation and a more productive people.
I am proud because Auslndustry is the product of dialogue and cooperation
between Commonwealth, State and Territory governments. It is a strategic
partnership, between the different tiers of government, and between
government and industry, and it shows just how well the Federation can work
when there is good will all around.
I am proud because Auslndustry shows that there is room for innovation and
enterprise within the public sector, and reflects the Government's desire to
achieve world's best practice in the delivery of programs to the community.
Auslndustry was one of the initiatives announced last year in the
Government's White Paper on Employment, Working Nation.
In the White Paper, we asserted that the strongest and fairest kind of nation
is a working nation. We erected practical measures to increase employment,
because that is the most equitable, and the most efficient, thing to do.
Much of Working Nation was devoted to moving the long-term unemployed
and those at risk of becoming long-term unemployed into jobs: the Youth
Training Initiative, the Job Compact, the National Training Wage.
But we also recognised the long-term imperative: that in order to create more
jobs with higher wages, and hence improve the living standards of
Australians, the country has to be more productive and that requires
Australian industry to be extended and strengthened. 
For the last twelve years, the Government has been building the kind of
competitive environment in which Australian industry can succeed and
Australian firms can flourish.
We have done it by opening up the economy, and facing it for the first time
towards our own region.
We have done it by floating the dollar, and deregulating the financial sector.
We have done it by dismantling the high tariff walls behind which the
Australian manufacturing sector was crumbling away, and by putting in place
measures to help businesses engage the global market place.
And we are doing it through labour market reforms which increase the
flexibility and productivity of Australian work places without tearing at the
rights and living standards of Australian working people.
Today, the Australian economy is far more competitive, alert and dynamic
than at any time in the past.
Australia's communications network is smarter and livelier, our transport
system smoother and more efficient, and our financial sector infinitely more
sophisticated than a decade ago.
Overall, the economy is almost 40 per cent more competitive than it was in
the early 1980s.
We are finding that in this new competitive environment, new species of
successful Australian firms are springing up.
The McKinsey survey on emerging exporters, and all the studies since, have
remarked on these successes.
The studies have shown that the firms achieving the biggest wins all share a
similar character.
They are ambitious and alert, vigorous and adventurous.
They are exploiting the revolutions in transport and communications to get to
new markets, and they are operating very close to those markets.
They are innovative, and able to manage and respond to a wide range of
emerging conditions.
There are a lot of firms like this it's approaching a critical mass. Their
success depends on knowing what they are good at. And this is where
government has a very significant role to play by helping these firms to
develop their human capital. 
Many of the most mobile and energetic Australian businesses are small and
medium enterprises. Unlike their cousins in big business, they cannot afford
to maintain on-line access to the skills, information and resources that are
essential to business development.
By helping Australian firms obtain these services, governments can help them
identify their strengths, isolate their weaknesses, and harness and direct their
energies.
The advice and ideas might deal with skills, education and training, access to
finance, long-term planning, the application of technologies or the
development of trade opportunities.
The aim of industry development of this kind is not to pick winners, but to
keep the winners moving. Experience shows us that gover6nmen and
industry work better when they work in concert.
This kind of advice has always been offered by governments but through a
plurality of sources in a variety of agencies.
Before the Government brought down Working Nation, business people told
us they were confused about the range of services provided by governments
and, in some instances, were not even aware of the existence of key
Commonwealth Government programs.
An independent review of the development and delivery of government
business programs, conducted by Mr Ian Burgess, told us much the same
thing. Auslndustry is the Government's response to these criticisms.
Auslndustry will help our businesses to achieve world's best practices, and to
successfully engage world markets. It will serve as a single entry-point to the
array of government programs already in place to assist firms in developing
their managerial, technological, financial and marketing resources. And it will
help to build better Australian firms by allowing us to deliver an integrated,
cohesive and holistic service to each individual business client.
The most effective enterprise development programs are those which are
informed by the views and driven by the needs of business. To ensure that
Auslndustry maintains a strong client focus, we have appointed a private
sector-led Board, headed up by Dick Warburton.
May I commend the States and Territories for having the wit and vision to
sign on to the Auslndustry partnership. Bringing all our business service
activities under a single umbrella makes good economic and logistic sense,
and will allow us to draw on the resulting synergies. 
So, with the launch of Aus Industry, industry development assistance will be
delivered, for the first time, on an all-governments, whole-of-government
basis. Ausindustry will direct businesses to the government service most suitable for
their needs. These services have already achieved many success stories
stories worth telling.
Like the Victorian-based Moss Products, a manufacturer of technical plastic
and metal components, which called on private sector experts subsidised by
Auslndustry to stream-line its product development, renovate its corporate
identity and establish a strategy for the future.
Or the Adelaide construction firm, Glenn Industries, which deals in leading
edge building technology, and specialises in the manufacture of glass fibre
reinforced cement. Parliament Station in Melbourne and the Capita Finance
Building in Sydney are good examples of the work of this firm. Support from
Government industry assistance programs and Austrade helped Glenn
Industries form a joint venture with a Singapore firm, and eventually win $ 13
million worth of contracts, including the Singapore Merlion Tower.
Or the National Recording Studios, a business which has already gone a long
way down the information highway, developing interactive CD-Rom packages
for both the Government and corporate sectors. NRS accessed a
Commonwealth Government program which assists new and existing
exporters to strategically plan for and manage their exporting activities.
Sales into a range of territories, including the USA, Italy, Taiwan, Israel and
South Africa have followed.
In the final analysis, of course, the credit for their successes, and the onus for
achieving them in the future, lies with the businesses themselves. They must
make their own way in a very competitive environment. But as these
examples show, government can support them in their efforts.
Auslndustry will provide that support. It is a timely and intelligent policy
initiative which will help set up Australian industry for the future.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Earlier this month, with the standardisation of the rail line between Melbourne
and Adelaide, the Government completed the construction of a national
standard gauge rail highway from Brisbane to Perth, via Sydney, Melbourne
and Adelaide.
The establishment of Aus Industry is perhaps not of quite the same order, but
the intent is the same. Each will guarantee a more unified system, and
provide a better service to Australians. And each will, I am sure, come to be
seen as a national asset. 
I congratulate all those involved with the establishment of Auslndustry, and
wish them the best of luck for the future.
I am confident that Auslndustry will make Australia a much more industrious
nation, and I am happy to declare it open for business.
Ends 



TEL 2Jun. 0 16 No . C006 P'. C1~
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER; THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
FAREWELL TO THE AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS PILGRIMAGE TO
PAPUA NEW GUINEA, SYDNEY, THURSDAY, 29 JUNE 1995
It Is my very pleasant duty today to farewell men and women from an heroic
generation of Australians who are embarking on a pilgrimage to some of the
sacred sites of our history.
The names of the places to which they are going Kokoda, Milne Bay, Buna,
Gona, Lao, Shaggy Ridge, Sattef berg, Wau, Bougainville and Wewak have a
meaning for Austraflans which will never fade.
They were the battlefields on which these Australians and others like them fought
to save their country and defend democracy against tyranny and cruelty.
Many had already fought In terrible battles In Europe and the Middle East. Many
were very young and scarcely out of school.
They fought with great courage, They defeated an implacable and ruthless
enemy. They fought and won the battles which saved Australia.
That Is why their place In our history is Immovable and indelible.
They are the names which remind us that they were once a generation of men and
women who were prepared to lay down their lives for Australia.
That Is the most profound thing my generation learned, and it will be as profound
to generations of Australians a hundred years from now.
I am very conscious that at times like this we must choose our words carefully.
We cannot pretend to know what you went through fifty years ago, or what your
thoughts are now as you return to the battlefields. 
TEL: 29 un .95 0 6 No .006P. 2
2
We were never tested as you were. We don't know if we would have come
through as you did.
But we do know from your example what bravery means.
We know from you what it means to love Australia.
Because of you we know better the value of democracy, peace and freedom.
So today we give thanks to you and all the others you are representing on this
journey. We give thanks not only to the fighting men, but the women who served: those of
the Australian Women's Army Service, those who nursed the wounded, allithose
women who gave their energies to the war effort at home.
And we acknowledge those whose husbands did not return. Some of those
women are making this pilgrimage.
Today we recognise the labours of the Australians who provided the supplies, food
and equipment needed to support the 200,000 Australians who served In New
Guinea and the surrounding Islands.
We pay tribute to the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy and the
Merchant Navy who between them transported over 450,000 people to Papua New
Guinea between 1941 and 1945.
We also recognise the support given to Australians by the people of Papua New
Guinea and the Islands.
Their courage and compassion itself forms a legendary part of our history.
Of the many things to be leamed from World War Two, none was more important
than the need to work closely and harmoniously with our neighbours In the region.
To continue to build a secure and prosperous future with them, and to maintain the
peace and protect the environment we all share, Is a duty we owe to the war-time
generation. So Is building a modem, prosperous, self-reliant Australia our duty to them our
greatest duty.
Because that is what they did. Those who returned took up their lives again and
went back to work. And by their efforts their ambitions for themselves, their
families, their communities, and their country they made Australia stronger. 
I EL urnz 0 : 556 N 0. 1) 0 F. 03C.'
3
They made this a place where ambitions could flourish and enterprise be
rewarded. They also made It a place In which the tradition of the fair go lived on,
and the Idea of supporting each other through good times and bad remained a
defining element of the national character.
They made a mighty contribution to Australia, and here today and throughout this
year we pay tribute to them.
We have a lot to thank them for and a lot to live up to.
It is my great privilege, then, on behalf of Australians everywhere, to wish
everyone of you a marvellous and rewarding journey,
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT MORNING TEA, VICTORIA BARRACKS, MELBOURNE,
4 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Kim ( Beazley), members of the Curtin family, very distinguished
guests, members of the Cabinet and Ministry and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very fitting occasion, I think, for us to meet in this the 50th anniversary
of the end of the War and the 50th. anniversary of John Curtin's death.
Althoughi John Curtin's life was a life dedicated'to working-Australians in the
Labor movement, in the trade unions, in the Labor Party and in the Federal
Parliament, he found that his ministerial life, ' his Prime Ministerial life was
dedicated, of course, to the prosecution of the war. On this 50th anniversary
of the cessation of hostilities, of Victory in Europe and Victory in the Pacific
for the democracies over the fascists in Europe, in Japan and in the Pacific,
on this occasion, I think, it is important for all of us to remember those who
prosecuted that war, directed it and fought it and those who died in the
course of it and those who suffered and those who were left behind. Because
to have such a conflagration as the Second World War was and to have this
country under threat of occupation, to rest control of the region from an
enemy at great personal sacrifice has to be remembered. It must mean
something. It has to mean something and it has to keep on meaning
something. We always, be it Anzac Day or other times, remember these times, but this
anniversary has, perhdos, broken away from the stylised remembrance or
commemoration of the people and the events to something far more heartfelt.
It is because we know that we can identify in our lives with what half a
century means. It is not so long ago to know that these events were taking
place and, in a sense, coming here as we are today, we can somewhat
recreate them. If only by the reminiscences of the people who were involved
as we have heard from Jim ( Maher) this morning and the recollections of our
great leader at the time, John Curtin, as we have heard from his grandson.
I think that there is these constant linkages that the country seems to make
and certainly the Labor Party makes. Ki m Beazley is my Deputy and Deputy
Prime Minister. Of course, his father won the seat that John Curtin's death 
caused the vacation and he came here very praisewprthy of John Curtin and
kept that linkage going to pass it on to his son who has kept it going and, of
course, being both natives of Perth they have had that linkage with the Curtin
family over these years.
We have all appreciated those contacts and those linkages so that the
continuity is there. We feel that sense of continuity and it makes us stronger.
Today, when the Cabinet meets in the War Room, in peace 50 years later, I
think, there will be as there is already, a moving quality about it and we
appreciate the peace and we appreciate what we have been given and we
appreciate what Curtin and his Cabinet and his government and the people of
this country were able to do in those desperate times with much less to do it
with than we have today.
So, I think, it is an occasion for reflection on that and also on John Curtin. I
think it might have been John who said that not much is written of him and
that is pretty true. But, again, in this sort of society, what is written doesn't
necessarily matter. It is what is thought and what is felt. There is no doubt
that the great affection for Curtin has remained right through the post-war
generation and because they were the ones who taught it to us, that
generation my parents generations taught it to us, and it has come to us.
And, it may not be in the biographies or autobiographies or the histories, but
it is there. Maybe someone will write more of it down and pick up some of
Jim's Manuka reflections and the rest which are important to gauge the
personality of John Curtin.
I think the thing about him was he did feel for his fellow Australians. You can
see by the references we have and the knowledge we have of him, how much
of a burden the war was on him and how he felt responsible for the Australian
forces which were deployed at his direction. He felt a singular responsibility
for them. I think, that in such a desperate situation with a large continent with
a very small population under an assault from an implacable and
indefatigable enemy there is the singular loneliness of that leadership
position which must have borne very heavily on him. We know that he was
haunted by the knowledge of the suffering in battle and the deprivation and
captivity of Australian forces.
I think what we appreciate about him most was he was not only passionate,
but pragmatic and resolute. Pragmatism came in the 1970s and 1980s to be
a word which has been used in other respects in more derogatory terms, a
derogatory reference, but pragmatism if one denotes from that learning the
lessons of history and doing what is honourable and practical at the time,
John Curtin made the opportunities, took the opportunities to do things in the
best interest of Australia and he made new alliances the one with the United
States is the most famous and he did things which he thought were
calculated to best serve this country and the allied interests.
So, he was practical ( inaudible) is all sweetness and light, it never was. He
had many critics and he had critics when the stress on him was the greatest, 
which was more the pity. But, he was resolute, he was decisive and that is
what the country needed. It needed somebody who believed in Australia and
Australians and who was resolute, decisive, inventive and pragmatic. They
were all things that he was. That is, I think at its core why we appreciate him
most. He was genuinely a leader and he took decisions and he stuck with
them despite the criticism.
For a generation of people he became the embodiment of what it is to be a
good Australian. What it means to be a good Australian. If you say to
anyone ' who do you think was a good Australian?' Many people would say
John Curtin. They would think of him, perhaps, first because of the plainness
of his life, the simplicity, yet the strength of purpose, the passion, the love of
his country, his commitment to it, all of these things, I think, come to make
him perhaps the idealised view of what a good Australian is and that has
been a real guiding light for the rest of us, particularly the post-war
generation, who had to try to take some lessons from the ruins of the Second
World War.
Today, let's remember his courage and his faith and his virtue and the fact
that, I think, as most agree and even those most close to him agree, that the
burden of the war probably led to his untimely death and the great pity was
that we never saw his skills employed in peace time. That he never had the
opportunity to do the things in peace that his life was really prepared for and
that while we had the benefit of his leadership and his skills in war, we never
had them when he would have most liked to employ them. That is, I think,
sad but we were then, again, fortunate that the mantle was passed to another
great leader in Ben Chifley who took up the job of post-war reconstruction.
I hope that by holding this Cabinet meeting here today, will not only dually
honour John Curtin, but rekindle the memory of his leadership and that of his
government and the commitment of all those Australians to the war effort.
Some things have been said here today, Jim mentioned the reference to no
matter whether one was a messenger or Prime Minster, it was a national
effort and, I think, the commitment by people and Mr and Mrs Salisbury
amongst them here today who have served here, that sort of general
commitment to people in the war effort was a national commitment by all
Australians. He led that commitment and he died just as the war was
finishing and where his successful prosecution had been complete.
This is an opportunity to remember John Curtin, perhaps without the written
histories, but to remember and appreciate him and say for those of us in the
Labor family, in this government, that we are very proud to be here as the
Labor government of Australia in the War Rooms where the Labor
government of the 1940s won the peace for this country. To be here with the
members of the family of John Curtin and with those who worked with him
and were close to him. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE VICTORIAN ALP FUNDRAISING DINNER, CARLTON
RADDISON HOTEL, MELBOURNE, 4 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I think that when one looks at the last decade one sees the changes which
have taken place in Australia, it has been a very great challenge in Victoria
and New South Wales. And particularly on Victoria, I think, particularly with
the shift in the industrial base, the great challenge here is on the part of
individual busines õ people to measure up to that and make the change. To
pick up the opportunities and run with them. We are delighted to see so
many of you because people who run businesses have actually got to turn a
buck, they have got to open the doors the next morning, they have got to
make things work and as an objective test about whether you're doing it well
or not and, I think, we always enjoy the opportunity to talk to people such as
yourselves because it does give you a better touch, a better feel about how
the economy is running.
I think that we have been through a pretty great change in Australia, perhaps
not often well understood and that is, that we do and have since the 1980s
run a very consultative approach to government. John ( Brumby) made the
point in his introductory remarks about the opportunity of meeting so many
Ministers and politcy makers. As valuable as this evening and this afternoon
has been, we really do keep in touch most of the time, perhaps not as broadly
as we have today, but we do listen because we have taken the view that
running an economy and a society on a consultative basis lends itself to
running a more cohesive and comprehensive approach and that cohesion
gives you the chance to produce economic outcomes that you wouldn't in a
society where the institutional interests play their roles out, but they don't play
them together.
Now I think we can be very proud of the changes which Australia has made,
in the last ten or twelve years. Very proud indeed. I mean never before have
we been in a position as we are in now. We are sitting now juxtaposed to the
fastest growing markets in the world. Through most of our economic history,
those markets were in Europe, or they were in North America. They were not 
here. But, now, the 1980s opening of country, opening up the financial
markets that John mentioned earlier, knocking the tariff wall down, getting the
whole motion of productivity up, thinking about building our capital stock,
product innovationrunninig the education system to power the research and
development and innovation along. It has all happened just when the Asia-
Pacific markets have really blossomed. Led, of course, by Japan and later by
countries like Korea and Singapore, but now joined by so many Indonesia,
Malaysia, China and here we are sitting at the doorstep. I don't think we
have ever had a better opportunity and we now understand that that
opportunity is there and that we can actually go out and meet that challenge
and succeed in it. But, we can only go out together.
We are not going to really make it work straggling out if economic policy and
industrial policy and business don't see eye to eye. If there -isn't -a p'lan, if
there isn't -&amp; strategy, we won't actually make it. But, we face these changes
and they have been quite profound. I believe that the Australian people have
measured up to these economic changes and challenges in a way, probably
few societies would have and, I think, that if they believe that there is a
strategy and a plan they will follow. And, they will make the effort and they
will make the change. The transformation is quite profound. We published a
budget a month or so ago. It is forecasting growth right out until the end of
1998. If you take the period from 1983 to 1998 15 years in 15 years we
have had only 14 months of negative growth. That is, a modest reduction in
GOP in 1990 and 1991, otherwise 1983 until 1998 we will see a period of
sustained economic growth at about double the rate we were used to seeing.
Just over double the rate on the previous period of government in the
previous 10 years.
In other words, we have met a challenge and we are building up wealth at
quite a profound rate and we are doing it on a basis that we can actually run
the economy faster, but not see the proceeds of growth frittered away in
prices and wages. And, the test of that maturity of Australia is that low
inflation mass that two to three per cent inflation we have in place we have
had inflation under two and a half per cent now for three or four years and we
have just, the other day, signed up to Accord Mark VIII with the Australian
Council of Trade Unions, in probably the mos _ t consultative of the consultative
economic acts. Probably the most consultative.
Now, in the Parliament recently I have been quoting Robert Reich, the US
Labor Secretary, and I think it is worth quoting him to you because he said
recently at an OECD conference here in the United States, we have had
huge employment growth and let me say that outside of Australia the
United States is the only other country that has had the employment growth
we've had or at that sort level on the same base. But, he said we have
had high employment growth, but we have had a fall in real wages for 14
years He' said on-the other hand, in Europe, they have got very high
real wages, but lousy rates of employment. He said, I think that is a fairly
lousy choice.' What I say to you is we agree with that and that Australia has
come right up the middle with very strong rates of employment growth and
good and reasonable and sustainable rates of remuneration. 
3
So, we have had as a consequence, a 40 per cent increase in household
disposable incomes since 1953 which, of course, powered purchasing power,
powered demand through business and at the same time we have had now
over two million jobs since 1983. We have had 630,000 since the last
election. And, we are doing it because we can run the economy faster, we
are doing it by putting weight on three instances of policy fiscal policy,
moTnetary policy and wages policy. Almost in every other comparbie-ountry
you can forget the third one. It is only interest rates, monetary policy and
fiscal policy. But here, we have the third. So, instead of having inordinate
weight on the budget or inordinate weight on interest rates, we can spread
the load onto wages.
I brought with me a copy of last weeks Accord. Most of you wouldn't have
seen the document, you would only have seen reports of it. But, the maturity
of it, the common sense of it that the work force in the representation of it,
through its peak councils can sit down with the government and say ' how can
we run this economy better, how can we agree on faster rates of growth,
better employment growth and yet good profits, strong investment and good
presence in our export markets?' The way, of course, is doing it through a
consultative agreed basis and, of course, at the same time coming to terms
with that other point John mentioned and that is savings.
Now, let me just read this little piece from page two of the Accord, it says
' This Accord is based on and consistent with maintaining an underlying rate of
inflation of 2 to 3 per cent on average over the cycle. This will help to
maintain our competitive position and the real income of workers'. I mean,
you couldn't believe this thing, 12 years ago nobody would have given a
snowballs chance in hell of such a document being produced. This is the
trade union movement walking up to the government and with. thie
government sifting down and saying ' we will run a wage system which is
based on and consistent with maintaining an underlying rate ofi i nflation of 2
to 3 per cent on average. Not wage indexation or an enterprise bdrgaining
system which has got no inflation target underpinning it, but one which it says
will run an enterprise bargaining system, but will run it essentially in such a
way it will produce -2t o 3 per ceninf flation.
Then it talks about the safety net. It says if you can't get something done in
the enterprise bargain, you fall back and you get it under the safety net.
Within the safety net it is talking about $ 10 to $ 12 or $ 11 to $ 14 for people on
award wages. -It says ' The Accord parties will support an approach to ' the
AIRC to deliver three further annual adjustments of $ 9 to $ 12 per week
available at the award level and $ 11 to $ 14 per week for those on award
rates. In other words, there is an enterprise bargaining system where we are
growing that continually and for those who can't get a bargain, they come
back to the safety net.
At the back of the document talking about the social wage, health, family,
maternity leave it talks about superannuation and it has got a table. The
table starts at 1992-93. It has got superannuation guarantee, payroll of up to 
4
$ 1 million 3 per cent and . then iri'the ( total) column it has got 3 to 4.5 per
cent and then under payroll of $ 1 million or more 4 to 5 per cent. In this year,
on 1 July, it went to 6 per cent for payrolls over $ 1 million and 5 per cent of
those up to $ 1 million, next year it is 6 and 6 per cent. But then comes the
budget change, the change that Ralph Willis delivered on Budget night.
When we pay the tax cuts into superannuation accounts 1 per cent, 1 per
cent, 1 per cent. And, for that follows an employee contribution of 1 per cent
in 1997-98 one further per cent in 1998-99 and one further per cent in 1999-
2000 followed by 1, 1, and 1 per cent in the tax cuts. At the end of the table it
says 15 per cent. That means every Australian working person will have, at a
minimum, 15 per cent by the year 2000-2003. It is seven years away. So,
under this Accord, with this government since the middle 1980s we put
together a system which not only is now underpinning a low inflation rate on a
systemic basis in a much more flexible labour market, but at the same time it
is putting together a basis of retirement incomes for savings of up to 15 per
cent for every Australian person by the year 2002 seven years away.
Now, does that beat screwing businesses with high interest rates and
monetary policy to hold down growth and inflation? Does that beat beating
the hell out of working persons so that the Labor Secretary of this country
could get up and say we haven't had a real wage increase in 14 years? Does
this beat having a paucity of national savings? Well, I think it does because
what we are finding under superannuation is that we believe we will have $ 1
trillion in superannuation accounts by the year 2000 and $ 2 trillion by the
year 2020 that is $ 2,000 billion. Now, that is an almighty amount and if you
bring it back from GOP the additions to savings the Treasury believes it will
add 2 per cent of GOP to savings by the year 2000 and 4 per cent of GDP by
the year 2020.
This is a staggering change. Our opponents say ' oh, it's another Accord, it's
number eight'. It has been eight Accords coming from a highly rigid
centralised system needing a big change in real wages to accommodate a
massive depreciation of the exchange rate going to award restructuring,
going to productivity, going out from enterprise based bargaining systems,
focussing on employment in Accord Mark VII and then focussing on or locking
in low inflation in Accord Mark Vill.
It is just the sort of things you don't see from -national governments. It is the
sort of thing you don't see from the workforce. It is a revolution in the way we
run economic policy in Australia compared to most otherQECD countries. Of
course, John Howard says ' I wouldn't have a bar of it'. You say ' well, why
wouldn't you?-We-' v-eot enterprise agreements for 65 per cent of all people
covered by federal awards, why wouldn't you?' Well, of course, you don't
have flexibility downwards, you have a safety net. But, if you can't pay $ 11 to
$ 14 per week for someone on $ 22,000 in an economy with this sort of bounty,
have we got to the point where the profit share where it is in the economy,
with a stock market index of 2003, from memory. When I became Treasurer
in 1983, the all ordinaries index was 451. It is now 2003. It is four to five
times the real wealth in the stock market than it was then. Are we to say to
people ' well, we are so hung up against this, we are going to hop into the 
people under $ 22,000' because that is really what it means. Because there is
no way you are going to stop the people in the strong parts of industry in
metals, in construction but, what the Accord does is say we'll let them make
their productivity bargains, but if the productivity isn't coming through, we'll
hold the system to 2 to 3 per cent, but it is on the basis that the low paid get
treated fairly.
Now, what can be fairer than that? I don't think very much.
In the last two months we have introduced, amongst other things, this Accord.
But we have also introduced a budget surplus, that great change in
superannuation, the Justice Statement, the standard gauge railway linking
Australia for the first time, the government's proposal for an Australian
Republic and, of course, the Accord. The government has done more in two
months than you would have seen out of our opponents in two decades. That
is simply a fact.
As a consequence of this, we are seeing the capacity to run the economy into
the future and deal with some of the longer running problems like the current
account deficit. Now, let me just say something about some of these
subjects.
We are seeing an enormous amount of blatant goal post lifting going on now
in the economic debate. Two and a half years ago it was ' Prime Minister,
what are you doing about growth and employment one million people out of
work when are you going to get the economy growing again?'. Ok, we're
going to get building we put One Nation in we've got One Nation working.
We will try to lift the spending capacity of the economy. We will try to
promote more growth and we have got that growth now moving up and as a
consequence we have created 630,000 jobs in that two and a half year period
and we have the economy growing as fast as 6.5 per cent. Now, coming
back to around three and three quarters a sustainable rate of growth. In the
late 1980s, a couple of years before that ' what are you doing about inflation?'
Here we are, we have still got inflation of 5 and 6 per cent. We have come
out of the recession with inflation under one per cent. It is now in a high
growth economy around two to three per cent.
So, we have essentially broken the back of inflationary expectations and high
inflation in this country. And, we are back onto a growth path and we are now
seeing a hugely strong phase of private investment. And they say but look
we didn't really mean that, what are you doing about the current account
deficit? What we are doing about that is we are putting into place the only
change that will really matter, that is the big underlying change to our national
savings because we don't have the level of private savings to encourage and
hold together the strong capital investment programs we need to rebuild our
capital stocks for exports and our merchandise trade. We need to put those
savings into place.
So Ralph Willis' Budget, takes the Budget deficit from $ 13 billion last year to
a surplus this year of $ 700 million now reduced by John Howard's antics in
.4 
the Senate to about $ 400 million. By the next two years it goes to a surplus
of $ 7 billion. So from a deficit of $ 13 billion to a surplus of $ 7 billion, is a
billion turnaround. $ 20 billion is 4 per cent of GDP.
I have already told you in superannuation during the latter part of the 90s, will
add 2 percentage points to GOP of savings in super. That is 6 per cent. The
current account problem is 2 1/ 2 percentage points. It has been running on
average at 4 1/ 2 to 5 per cent of GDP and it needs to run at 2 1/ 2 to
3 per cent. So we have got a 2 1/ 2 percentage point problem with which we
met it with a 6 percentage point fix. Now that is what will make the difference.
But hysteria and incantations, and voodoo, and snake oil will not fix the
problem. The problem will be fixed by lifting our national savings and the
Government is lifting it in the only way we know how. That is we have taken
the Budget and swung it strongly back into surplus while, at the same time,
building a basis in award superannuation, in national superannuation, that we
never had before.
In other words, if we accept the fact that our discretionary private savings are
down, as it is in most countries like this, how do you get the savings levels
up? How do you deal with the current account?
I notice that terrible man, Peter Costello, saying the other day " I've got cold
anger about the current account deficit". But he didn't have any cold policies
to match it.
But you see, go back to September last year, and this is why I want to talk to
a business audience as distinct from purely financial markets audience,
because go back to last year. The September quarter accounts, for the year
to September, were 6 1/ 2 per cent. The financial markets said " horror, shock,
horror. We are growing at a pace we can't afford." And we said " Well we are
going to adjust monetary policy, put rates up a couple of points and then slow
it down."
They called for a major economic statement in February. They called for
another 2 to 3 percentage points of interest rate rises on top of the
November/ December rises. They did all these things and yet we have got the
economy now back at the last quarter to 3 3/ 4 per cent. So we come from
6 1/ 2 to 3 3/ 4 per cent. In other words, back to a sustainable level.
But they would have had us have a February statement, another
3 percentage points on interest rates. It would have been a smouldering ruin
out there if we had taken their advice. In other words, " you must panic, you
must be in a state of shock, that is the only condition to be in. Now get out
there and shock yourselves and shock everybody else."
Meanwhile, the people back running businesses are saying God, let's get on
with the business. How do we keep this place together." And, of course, the
same thing we're saying now just as we had that irrational reaction in
September which the Government, of course, in its wisdom saw through we 
are saying now with the current, account deficit, we have the policies in place.
We have a 4 percentage point Change of GOP on the Budget and we have
got about 2 percentage points of superannuation.
Now let's say we get into a slower phase around the turn of the century and
some of that cyclical revenue goes. Call a 6 percentage point change
4 per cent. I mean take all, if you like, the argument out. We have got a
4 percentage point fix in there, for a 2 1/ 2 percentage point problem. I mean
that is how we will get it done.
But in that context culled out competitiveness together we are sitting on a 2 to
3 per cent inflation rate for the workforce. We are sitting on a pile of savings
coming through to superannuation and, at the same time, we are still
promoting the structural change in the economy, as enterprise bargaining
goes and productivity bargaining. But we now have, for the first time ever, a
naturally contestable and contested Australian economy.
We pulled the tariff walls down. We started to get real competition in this
economy and that natural state of contest is producing natural productivity
which is holding down, in a much more natural way, the inflation rate. We are
getting these low inflation numbers more naturally to rise, than simply
resorting to high interest rates which would have been our stock standard
response in the 60s, the 70s, or even in the
In other words, it may be an irony that it took a Labor Government to give
Australia a real market economy because that real market economy is now
working for this country and it is giving us low inflation, high growth and high
employment. Now none of that comprehension is on the other side of politics,
none of it.
And here is John Howard out today, you saw them on the weekend trying
their hands. Now, John Howard says " I'll give you the economy of the future
by rebuilding the tariff walls". Then John Moore. The last we heard from
John Moore was the TV affair, back in the 1970s. He brought television.
It was of no real account just as he isn't.
But here is John Mooreand he is back with Bruce Stannard from the
Australian Business Monthly, who is now employed by John Howard. Now
you remember the ABM campaign against the tariff reductions? You
remember the Australian Business Monthly's big campaign, you know the big
push against the reduced tariffs? Well that view now prevails in
John Howard's office.
And so here we have come, 12 years of hard work in opening up the
economy, making it a contestable economy, inducing low inflation, setting up
the savings balance, opening the tariff walls, getting the industrial change to
meet it, taking the opportunity of doubling our manufacturing levels, trebling
our manufacturing exports. Doing all these things and then now in 1995 as
we face Asia as never before, as we face the market opportunities as never
before, what is John Howard saying? " We'll muck around with tariff walls." 
We only tried it for 40 years and produced a closeted, low growth economy,
slow growth in the economy, where entrepreneurship was virtually extinct and
we have finally seen the error of our ways and we are going out and putting
organisations together like APEC arguing the case inside the GATT for a
global and open multilateral trading system trying to string the Pacific Basin
together in a free trade area under APEC and what is the alternative
Prime Minister's view " let's start building the barriers again".
I mean you can't believe it. I mean you can't take them seriously, really.
I mean can you imagine here they are creeping out on some little press
release " oh yes, we might build the tariff barriers again".
Now the thing is I don't know why Labor Governments believe in competition
and the Liberal Governments don't. No I don't because I mean low tariffs
mean more competition.
It was like that at the Council of Australian Governments. The Treasurer and
I are battling through three Premiers' Conferences, three Councils of
Australian Governments, to get a group of Liberal Premiers to sign up to their
principles. But, finally, in the end we shooed all them into it and they signed
up, only to apply the Federal Trade Practices law to the State
instrumentalities. You know it should have been done 20 years ago, but we
got them into it.
But here we are now in the position where we are arguing for these tariff
changes and we are arguing for these competition changes and they are
trying to resist them and, as a consequence in seeking to resist them, they
would deal Australia a really great blow in terms of our industrial structure
and where we are heading.
Now you saw all their fulminations last week on the current account deficit.
The very day the figure came out, John Howard was doing in $ 300 million of
revenue in the Senate. The very same day. And if the Democrats would
support him, he would do in $ 2 1/ 2 billion worth of revenue in the Senate of
the Government's proposed budgetary changes.
In other words, the surplus and the importance of savings in the current
account equation would simply, to put in summary, be a bit of low brow
politics in the Senate. The very day that he is talking about the current
account deficit and his Deputy is coping with a cold sweat, with a bad attack
of cold anger. The very same day, just as the Senate bells are ringing to do
in the measures.
So at the same time he says he doesn't believe in compulsion in saving. He
would essentially, he said on superannuation, he would cap it at where it is
6 per cent and then he would introduce tax concessions for people who take
out private super. 
In other words back to the 70s, when we had 40 per cent coverage of
superannuation. That is $ 40 billion in fund assets $ 40 billion and we are
heading for $ 2,000 billion. No, no, bad luck, he doesn't want that.
He'd prefer $ 40 billion. So he is going to cap the super assets off and
basically crimp that particular one.
In other words, the only thing that matters now in terms of that one remaining
area of economic policy that we must surmount, that is our savings in balance
and current account deficit. He would drop off the revenue measures and at
the same time crimp superannuation.
So I mean I would have thought that the people in business who look at this
country and look at the opportunities and say, you are meeting a Labor
Government and a Labor Cabinet, who have run a pro-growth,
pro-employment, pro-profit economy, where we have now seen very strong
levels of investment and we are seeing into the future.
The current account deficit on Friday was loaded with investment goods and
just as we spiked the growth in September last year, in December with those
monetary adjustments in the Budget, as we brought the growth down from
6 1/ 2 per cent to 3 3/ 4 per cent, as the growth subsided, so shall the current
account deficit. It is a reflection of what the state of the economy was a year
or so ago. But in a lower growth economy, we will see a response.
I noticed Moody's the other day saying they thought the current account
deficit would decline to 4 1/ 2 per cent of GDP next year, where this year it is
6 per cent and in the forecasts in the Budget, we have it at 5 1/ 2 per cent.
So, in other words, as the economy gets back to its sustainable rate of
growth, so too will we see a subside in the current account deficit.
In other words, we have got the position covered. The Government has got
the position covered and we are not going to run around like chooks with their
heads cut off and we are not going to have a cold sweat, or a mock panic
We are actually going to go in there and govern the place like we have been
doing now and we will come out the opposite way, as always, in a pro-growth
phase only this time, in this cycle, with low inflation and higher productivity,
engaging those countries around us, and lifting our exports and lifting the
value of the things we produce, lifting the things we do and trying to do them
better. Now Mr Howard says you'd think I have got a bit of a thing about him, well
I suppose I have, he stands for all the wrong things he said, of course, when
I came out and said how can we go around Asia, taking the opportunities to
sell Australia. Say, " here we are, we are a multicultural country, we have
seen the light, we have opened our economy up, we are engaging you, the
best of Asia We are out there as a people, of independence, of strength of
mind, of clarity of our identity as a sovereign nation. But, by the way, we are
borrowing the Queen of another country. We are borrowing the Monarchy
from another country. 
He doesn't see the importance to Australia of Australia being fully
independent and representing itself. So he says he'll give Australians a
republic he says. But he is actually for the Monarchy himself and you know
how hard it is to get a referendum passed in this country. You know how
hard it is. It will be to get a majority of electors in a majority of States to agree
upon the structure of an Australian republic. Imagine doing it with the
Government of the day saying " look you can have a vote, but we don't
believe it". You know you can have a vote, but the Prime Minister actually
believes in the Monarchy
And I noticed that in the Sydney Sun-Herald, an article just a week ago which
said this it's by Alex Mitchell he said " Two years ago I had a private
discussion with a very senior Liberal and at that time Prime Minister Paul
Keating had nailed his republican ideals to the mast and I asked how are the
Liberal Party intending responding. Now worries he replied, we can kick the
whole thing into touch by calling for a people's convention. The people's
convention is the perfect talking shop. It will keep the issue off the Party
political agenda and the election agenda. With the people's convention up
and running the Liberal Party wouldn't have to say or do anything about the
republic. It would effectively bury the issue as long as we wanted." Later in
the conversation he announced " I am a Monarchist, I was born a Monarchist
and I will die a Monarchist." Of course, the journalist couldn't make the
attribution. But we now know it was John Howard.
In other words, the convention is just another device for him not to make any
decision because the thing you must know about him is that he is utterly
indecisive. He has no policy ambitions whether it is in terms of our identity,
whether in terms of economic policy, whether it is in terms of competition.
You name it, he will basically go for the smother and the smother is the same
on the republic as it is on any of the other subjects which I mentioned tonight
on economic policy, or on tariffs, or any of the rest.
I would like to say to you that when you get down to the policies of the
Opposition, they talk about labour market reform. John Howard says " people
know I stand for pro-family policies, for industrial relations reform, for further
micro-reform, giving people choice in health areas".
Labour market reform means abolishing the Accord and knocking out awards.
It means cutting the heart out of wages.
He says he is pro-family, but he is not pro-income support, he is not
pro-worker, he is not pro-wage increase, he is not pro-the annual leave
loading, he is not pro-super. He is definitely pro-cuts in Government
spending. When he talks about pro-choice in the health system, it means
what you read for that is Medicare gets ripped to pieces, the 85 per cent
rebate goes, bulk-billing goes. And when he talks about micro-reform, that is
code for running backwards on tariffs in what he calls a dose of reform
fatigues. That is it. That is all you know about him. It is just that prejudicial
ideological deficiency he has had for these years. 
But the clarity with which the Government puts its views, its policies, its
Budget, its Accord, its Working Nation programs, its One Nation programs,
the changes to education, the changes to TAFE, to higher education, the
whole training agenda, getting the long term unemployed back to work, all
that nitty gritty in policy is all foreign to them.
So I would like to say this to you tonight, that we appreciate the support of the
business community in this country. We, actually, are interested in you.
We are interested in your life, your life's experience, your business
experience. We want to see you benefit from a country which is governed
decently with good policy and we want to see you participate in it.
It is on you that our hopes depend on getting that investment into place,
on seeing those additions in product, in seeing that addition to employment.
It is on you, in fact, that the whole of now the very pro-market position of the
Government's policies rely. We rely on a youthful, ambitious business
community to go and make those changes work and when I say business
community I mean, in the broad sense, the financial markets and the
productive side of business, the businesses that give us service industries,
the lot.
And it is for that, which we have dedicated ourselves with you. That is in a
decade of consultation, in a decade of listening to what needs to be done, of
making changes that on many occasions has put the Government at risk
politically and particularly in proximity to elections. We have never flinched
from putting the big changes into place and we are still doing it.
But that same consultation we have with you, we have with the trade unions
and we have it to the point where they're prepared to underwrite a 2 to
3 per cent inflation rate and agree that their constituency put 15 per cent of
their income away for savings agreed to put 15 per cent of their income
away as savings and these are the sort of national goals, and national
achievements Australia needs.
And if we can not only make the structures together here in Australia, we can
also make the structures outside of Australia for Australia and that is why
whenever we see Austrade, or we lead a trade mission, or we sit down at the
GAT or we thread together a great institution like APEC putting the
Un-ited States into a compact with East Asia and putting ourselves in there
we do this with you and for you.
Now there can never have been a time in our history, never, when we have
faced such strong markets and such great opportunities to take our place with
the community of nations in this part of the world, with a high growth, high
productivity, low inflation economy. We have never been in this position
before. If we can just keep our gaze on the path and make the remedial policy
changes we need to put Australia in a place where we are going to need
them to maintain that strong investment through the 90s, then the 
opportunities for this country, one people in a continent, a nation sharing no
border with anybody, with the prospect of having an environment that many
other countries will envy, with a cohesive social society, where we don't have
an underclass, where we wield ahead together, where there is care for one
another with access and equity in health and in education, where we have a
commitment as Australians to one another and to society and to group, that
we move ahead strongly, that we have a reconciliation with our Aboriginal
people, we are clear about our identity, we move as a force into this
community in the area in which we live. This is the Australia the Labor Party
dreams of. This is the Australia we are now having and this is the future we
can have.
So in this city, where a great economic challenge has faced you and where
we have tried to ease the adjustment pressures to get you to another plateau
of growth and opportunity, we want you to come good with this and the fact
that you are here tonight, so many of you, supporting us, identifying with us,
gives us great heart great heart to know that out there, there are many
people who share this dream of this great opportunity for this nation, in this
continent of ours, in this region of ours.
That has got to be the way. We can't look backwards. We can't go back to
the past to high tariffs, or the 60s, or a society of two pieces, or lost
opportunities, or not understanding that we have to do it together because
I think if we do that we won't get the opportunities again. This is not an
opportunity where we can lose it and recover it again. It is one where we
have to keep on the front foot and keep on going.
At any rate, thanks for giving us some heart, thank you for supporting us and
supporting us tonight here and supporting us out there where it really
matters, in the spirit of it all, towards that bigger thing I think we all cherish.
Thank you.
ends 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
OPENING OF BUILDING 8 RMIT, MELBOURNE, WEDNESDAY, 5 JULY
1995
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today at RMIT to open Building 8.
It Is an extraordinary building.
It's conceivable that some people might hate It: but I think it suits the
environment and I'm persuaded that It definitely suits its educational and
cultural purposes.
It's slightly mad, but so are the city baths up the road.
It's bright and this part of Melbourne needs It and It kisses goodbye to both
the modem hideous glass towers and Victorian heaviness and hang-ups.
I like It and I congratulate Peter Corrigan and Maggie Edmond.
I hope they will come up to Sydney some time.
Our cities always need a bit of cross-fertilization.
I also must pay tribute to two other people: Ruth Duncan, the Director of
Physical Planning and Construction; and your Vice Chancellor, David
Beaniand who recognised that Edmond and Corulgan's building might be just
the flagship RMIT needed: an Image of optimism and change; an Image of
Australia In the 21 st century.
And I gather that already it Is effectively conveying that message In Asia and
Europe. We have seen an outdated building transformed into a significant contribution
to Australian architecture and education.
Old facilities have been improved and modernised to include state of the art
educational technology. 
2
What we have now is a bold and challenging building which serves as an
outstanding educational resource and statement about the direction of
Australian culture.
And the direction of RMIT It will be the flagship of the Institution, connecting
It with the city, a focus arnd a resource for its activities, an expression of its
perspective on the future.
This building can also be seen as a symbol of the dramatic changes that have
occurred In education and training over the past decade,
RMIT is proof of the potential which exists when the two essential elements of
tertiary education, TAFE and universities, are linked.
Since the education reforms In 1988. Australian post-compulsory education
has undergone extraordinary changes and expansion.
The previous separation of TAFE and higher education, which restricted the
access of the less advantaged to many forms of skills development, is now
being broken down.
It is becoming recognised that the distinctions between vocational and
academic education are essentially arbitrary and accidents of history and
Inertia. We have massively expanded the Australian higher education system it
now enrols more than 30 per cent of all 17 to 22 year olds.
Participation In formal education and training by people aged 15-24 has
increased from around 44 per cent In 1985 to around 53 per cent in 1992.
Commonwealth funding available to higher education has risen from $ 3 billion
in 1983 to $ 4.8 billion In 1995 an increase of almost 61 per cent.
It is of great Importance to reflect on the circumstances which have enabled
the higher education system to expand so rapidly In recent times, and worth
noting how substantial the growth has been.
Since the reforms of 1989, manifested In part in the considerable
developments at RMIT, there has been a 40 per cent Increase in the number
of Austiralian higher education students.
The reason this has been possible is to be found in a four letter word which
appears In no dictionary: HECS.
Revenue from the Higher Education Contribution Scheme over the last
years has been used only to enable the system to grow. 
This has meant that up to one out of every three students today would not
otherwise be here.
The students demonstrating about higher education charging policy might ask
themselves If It is reasonable to protest against such an extraordinary
expansion in higher education?
It does seem fair to hav~ e former students pay around 23 per cent of
taxpayers' subsidy, If and only when they reach average earnings?
And it is worth noting that this Australian approach, a world first, is now being
copied In many other countries the US, New Zealand, the Czech Republic,
Canada and Botswana, for example.
Dare I suggest to the demonstrating students that It was our Opponents in the
last election supported the Introduction of full up-front undergraduate fees.
HECS is only one of many innovations we have embraced.
The Government is in the process of redefining education and training to
reflect new forms of working and learning.
We are not livng In a static environment.
Types of work, the way we work, the way we learn and the ways we teach,
and what we learn and teach, are all changing.
We need to be flexible and adaptive, innovative and much over-used
though the word Is competitive.
Education and training are the bridges which will enable individuals to cross
over from obsolete skills to skills of the future; from poorly paid employment
to well-paid; from unemployment to work.
It will enable people to get Jobs and hold on to them, as training and retraining
become career-long experiences for all workers.
If it is a bridge for Individuals, it is also a bridge for Australia itself from the
to the 21 st century.
Of course, it is not enough to create new buildings what happens inside
those buildings must also be innovative and dynamic.
I know RMIT Is well placed to meet this challenge.
It stands out as an Institution of character. 
4
With higher education and vocational education combined In one institution,
RMIT embodies the great change in modem education that is, the old
divisions between school, vocational education and higher education no
longer apply.
I have been told that RM IT aims for practicality, excellence, relevance and
responsiveness seeking ways to continually Improve its organisational
design in pursuit of its educational objectives and welcome people from a
wide range of cultural, social and educational backgrounds.
The RMIT Mission Statement specifically Identifies the need to be at the
forefront of technical and professional education of the kind which develops
people for employment and focuses on research programs that address real
world Issues.
They tell me that RMIT Is also relentless In its efforts to ensure that it keeps
pace with technological change.
This all sounds very good to me and It will be even better if RMIT never
loses sight of the fact that Its first responsibility its most fundamental
responsibility Is to teach students well.
The issue does not go away with the new technology.
Australians have shown a remarkable capacity to embrace new technology.
More than 40 per cent of Australian households have their own personal
computers, second in the world only to the United States.
Australians also have one of the highest per-capita rates of use of Internet in
the world.
And there Is no doubt that the university and research community has led the
nation In the development of computer networks.
But, as I said when I launched the report of the Broadband Services Expert
Group earlier this year, the Information -society is not just about acquiring the
new technology.
It Is about how we choose to use technology to take us to a more democratic
and equitable society and a more knowledgeable and creative one.
The great challenge is to make sure that the new communications
technologies enrich and strengthen us.
Nowhere Is the impact of informabon technology, particularly multimedia and
networks, going to be greater than in the field of education. 
Education must keep up.
Education must prepare young Australians for life in an Information society.
This will require Imagination from our educators and planners In the
development of curricula and the provision of Infrastructure.
Building 8 houses some fine examples of how educational Institutions can
embrace the technology.
The RMIT Library is linked into world wide electronic Information networks.
Students of fashion and textile design learn with the aid of a computer
laboratory and specialist machine workrooms.
State-of-the-art educational technology is a feature of the teaching methods
used In the Bachelor of Applied Science in Mathematics, and in teaching
Engineering, Applied Science and many other subjects.
The computer laboratories on Level 9 of this building are some of the busiest
teaching areas at RMIT.
And RMmrs Department of VisuaJ Communications Is offering Diploma and
Masters courses in Interactive Multimedia and Animation.
The Government has taken a particular Interest in new communications
technologies. We recognise the challenge: if we let it, the technology can be
dehumanising, alienating, and counterproductive to our educational purposes;
but if we are clever we can use It to strengthen the bonds between us,
deepen the pool of our collective knowledge and raise our level of mutual
understanding. We must pursue policies which ensure that existing injustices are not
Intensified by unequal access to knowledge.
And we must not fall Into the trap of thinking thtat the technology will ever be a
substitute for thinking, writing, knowing, working, deciding and doing.
We have been making great progress.
In April. I announced that the Government would develop and Implement a
national strategy for information services and technologies.
The strategy Is being coordinated through a whole-of-government approach
particularly in the formation of national policy and the Government's own
use of technologies. 
Two weeks ago I announced the membership of the National Information
Services Council a high level discussion group to provide the Government
with a range of views on marketplace developments, technical Issues and
community views on the opportunities and challenges that the evolving
services and technologies will present.
I am delighted that Professor Beanland has agreed to serve as one of the
members of the Council.
Mnother aspect of the strategy is the establishment of a national education
network.
Through agreement between the Commonwealth Government and the States
and Territories, Education Network Australia, or EdNA, has been launched by
the Minister for Employment, Education and Training.
EdNA will:
encompass all sectors of education including schools, vocational
education and training, and higher education;
equip students and their teachers to participate effectively in the
Information society, regardless of location or soclo-economic status;
deliver educational services and products across the nation;
provide an overarching framework for the vast array of cooperative
smaller scale projects throughout Australia; and
ensure that governments work tpgether to achieve the best and most cost
effective outcomes for our education system.
A further component of the National Strategy was unveiled last week by the
Minister for Social Security.
Aimed at bridging the gap between the ' information rich' and " information
poor' In Australia, the Community Information Network has been established
to provide free access to government and community Information and
communication facilities and services.
Initially, this access is being provided through 100 Local Access Points
situated In DSS offices, libraries and community organIsatlons.
The Government aims to rapidly increase the number of access points over
coming months. 
7
Another area where the government has been very active is In the
development of multimedia.
Multimedia's combination of text, pictures, sound and static and moving
Images takes Information technology into another realm, offering unique
Interactive learning arnd cultural experiences.
We believe Australia has a real opportunity to develop a world competitive
multimedia Industry, particularly in the provision of content.
Fortunately, we have in place many of the necessary ingredients In our
creative people, our technical expertise, our well established film and
television industry and educational institutions like RMIT.
The development of an Australian multimedia industry was one of the aims of
the Government's 1994 Cultural Policy Statement, Creatve Nation.
The Australian Multimedia Enterprise has been established and will now
oversee the development of multimedia projects with the assistance of
million provided by the Commonwealth,
I am aware that RMIT Is working on the establishment of an Interactive
Information Institute a research facility dedicated to applied research into
the multimedia and telecommunications Industries.
This proposal is typical of the sort of interaction the government is trying to
encourage where the best creative minds of our universities are combined
with the investment power and market knowledge of the private sector.
And let me say that I am delighted RMIT is playing such a prominent part in
the process.
I am delighted specifically because it is a significant element in RMIT's
Involvement In developing this northern end of Melbourne as an educational
precinct. Historically, of course that Is what It has been a sort of knowledge precinct
and RMI's development will revive the tradition for the 21 st century.
It Is therefore good for Melbourne, and while I am from Sydney and for all Its
warts and what they've done to It, love the place I am also seriously
enamoured of Melbourne.
If my words aren't enough, know me by my deeds.
In Creative Nation we put the International Music Academy here, an arm of
the Australia Council, the Foundation for Australian Cultural Development, the 
8
Special Television Production Fund, and we put half a million into the MVSO
with the message divest from the ABC if you want to.
Not everyone in Melbourne noticed all these things, but everyone in Sydney
did. To me there are unmistakable signs that Melbourne Is on the rise again.
It is going to end -this century and enter the next one very strong culturally and
economically.
This development will play a profound part In the process all the more so If
you can make something elegant out of the old CUB site up there.
Thank you for having me here today.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOOD UNIVERSITIES
GUIDES 1996, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 6 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much Paul ( Kelly]. It is good to see you back in the portals
of Parliament House after all those years here. But still having an influence on
the debate as Editor of The Australian and, of course, a very particular
influence in terms of the coverage by The Australian newspaper of education.
As you say, your Wednesday supplement which is the place where I am sure
most people in Australian education go to read about their industry and what is
happening with it.
But could I acknowledge Dean Ashenden and Sandra Milligan who are with us,
the authors of the Good Universitis Guides; Professor Logan' Vice-Chancellor
of Monash; Professor John Hey, from Deakin; Pfofessor-Seqeantson, the
Acting Vice-Chanicellor of the ANU; and, Professor Wilmoth from the RMIT,
where I was yesterday. It is good to hae you -alo, ll of you-.
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to do these two things launch the
Good Universities Guides and to present the 1995 University of the Year
Award. I am particularly impressed with the Guide, it says at the first line,
" All nformation needed to answer the two big questions. Which course?
Which campus?" and then it goes through to describe the universities, the
courses, how you get in, how difficult it is for entry, what sort of courses on offer
and, if you have completed a course, what sort of standing it has. These sorts
of issues.
And I think what is particularly pleasing to me about it is that a decade or so
ago you wouldn't have needed this Guide because there just wasn't so many
people in the system and the fact that we have recognised that Australia's great
comparative advantage is its education system and that our greatest resource
is the creativity of our young people, of our students. 
Just knowing that fact, just a country coming to terms with that particular fact, is
important in itself. Rather than, perhaps, the sense of the cargo cult with
another paddock full of wheat, or another mountain of iron ore will do the trick.
Rather, we are saying no, no, what will do the trick is to exploit the thing which
is of greatest value to all of us and that is the creativity of our young people and
the growth of our education system and focussing the very great ability of our
educators and putting a premium on their capacity to educate.
I think it is this, the notion that we wish to be a clever country, but more than
that, rather than simply the amenity of technological capacity or wealth.
Just this question about the liberation which education brings, the sense of
democracy, the inter-generational opportunities. It is the great bridge in
Australian society from wherever one is from, in socio-economic terms, to
wherever one wants to go. You can go there by crossing this bridge and that is
why there has been such a singular commitment by the Government over 12
years to education.
As a consequence, we have now got just on 600,000 people in higher
education, compared to 325,000 in the middle 1980s a 60 per cent increase.
It is just a phenomenal number. One of the things which pleases us about it,
and part of the reason we can keep the numbers up is that we have made big
financial commitments and by introducing quite revolutionary schemes like
HECs equitable, democratic schemes like HECs where we are asking
s-tu6dents to refund, when they reach average weekly earnings, 23 per cent of
the cost of the course. When it comes back 100 per cent of it goes to other
students. I noticed yesterday there were a group of students demonstrating against HECs
and other things at RMIT, where I was. But a third of them out the front
wouldn't have been there Without HECs, which is a point lost on them I am
sure. But it is, I think, a very great innovation and many other countries are
now coming to pick it up. And it is equitable, it works through the tax system,
you don't need to pay anything until you get to average weekly earnings and,
yet, all of it goes back into higher participation rates in education.
I think that the option of higher education, something that is within the view of
most students, is a great thing. When I went to school, when I completed the
Intermediate Certificate in New South Wales, there were only very few students
I went to school with who had any expectation of going to universities. In my
day, people didn't know about them and despite the scholarships which were
around and many people in this room would have been advantaged by the
scholarships of the day, the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme, it was in the
end, nevertheless, a fairly elite system covering too few people. And, hence,
you know something like this Guide would have been basically unnecessary
because there wasn't the sense that everybody had the opportunity of going.
I think the other thing that pleases me about the change in participation rates in
schools and higher education, is the opportunities it has brought to women, to
young women, to girls to stay in higher education and then join that throughput,
so that we are now getting about the same throughput out of the higher 
education system that any comparable industrial country, like Australia, would
have. And part of that stream, which is about 40 per cent I think of the people who
complete and graduate from Year 12, about 40 per cent of that stream go
through higher education and, of course now I think a majority of them are
young women, which is ~ a great thing. It means that whatever people think
about the glass ceiling, the reality of it, the prejudice in the system, or the
absence of opportunity, the mere fact that education is going to be spread so
widely amongst women and the higher education opportunities are going to be
there, it means there is no ceiling which will contain them. In other words, they
won't be looking for the favour, they will simply take it and that is what I think is
important giving them the capacity to go and grab it.
So this is a very revolutionary change for us all and one that is now powering
along in the society we have, making it stronger and fairer and more equitable,
and giving us a chance to, in fact, see the universities become not simply
providers of education, but businesses in themselves.
I know there is a debate about this, but I am sure we are well able to keep this
balance between the core responsibilities and core tasks of a university and
their capacity to do things, which at the same time advance the economy and
advance their place in it.
I noticed yesterday at RMIT that being shown through the IT areas of
university, one can see that what was on offer was something that was likely
not to be repeated in too many places, not only in Australia, but around the
world. And you can see the obvious commerciality, or the commercial
opportunities, that the courses have on offer. And we have seen this in so
many other ways and in so many other fields as we have seen universities
change over the period.--
I would like to also just mention that just in terms of through-put in the
Budget of this year, we added another 11,000 places to higher education, and I
think that commitment, again, just underpins the fact that there is no
complacency on the Government's part about the challenge with higher
education, and keeping resources up to it. The other area, I think, that we in
the Government are particularly interested in, and I know higher education
institutions are interested in too, and that is the inter-face with TAFE. And
again, at RMIT yesterday we saw Universities and TAFE vocational education
sitting beside one another. And the capacity for people to stream themselves
through TAFE to University, to undertake Diploma's, to gather for themselves
accreditation for particular courses in Universities is, I think, a very welcome
trend and it means that the traditional ways we thought about higher education
are going to change, and that the career paths of students, or the paths of
students rather, is going to be different than it has been in the past.
The Cinderella of Australian education, of course, has been TAFE, and it is a
great challenge now before us with the training agenda so " much on the
Government's minds through Wyorking Nation and th," 4raineeships etc to be
able to lift the capacity of vocational educational so that the 60% of people who 
don't go to higher education are not cascading into a labour market to which
they are unsuited where job opportunities are curtailed, or constrained, and
where the large majority of them are untrained, which not long ago was the
case still the case, in fact. We're now getting to a point where, we have now
the Commonwealth since One Nation we have put $ 1.2 billion into TAFE, into
vocational education, and through ANTA, we expect to be able to tie the TAFE
systems of the State's together with vocational certificates, which will then have
currency across the country. And where, at the same time, outside the
formality of the state TAFE systems, develop a private training market, where in
particular areas, we can see private trainers being provided, and in particular
localities, where industries need a specific focus for training needs, we can see
them coming together and operating the training market. Getting business
involved in vocational education is, I think, the way for us, so that the labour
market demands have far more influence on the product of vocational
education, than does simply the providers the traditional providers of
education. This is, I think, a very exciting change for us, and I was pleased to
see the take up in vocational education in the last year as well, so that there is
a lot of discernment out there on the part of students about what may be
advantageous to them and the labour market, whether they are, in fact, they
are better off in higher education, or they are better off specialising through
vocational education. I mean, they are getting very canny about those choices,
which means the sophistication of the system is rising.
Now, I think again, this is where the guide will matter, because I am quite sure
that the most interested student just can't know about the courses which are on
offer, the choices, the combinations that are on offer around the country. And
with such a great stock of people now seeking a place in higher education, we
really need to have, I think, this sort of information available so that the whole
panoply of opportunities is made clear, and at the same time, I think though I
haven't read it comprehensively there is also some guide in here to vocational
education as well. I think that's very good...
In looking through the Guide, for instance on a University talking about a
University how they rate and compare status and standing, they have stars.
Quality committee views stars; research track record stars; getting in,
toughness to get in, and there's a guide; flexibility of entry there's a guide;
places for school-leavers; there's a guide; admission for TAFE graduates
there's a guide; the global connection, international students there's a guide.
And then it goes to teaching quality committee view, teaching innovation,
library holding, graduates course ratings, and then what's on offer the breadth
of offering: a vocational orientation, external study. And then the payoff
getting a job, proceed to further studies, starting salary etc. In other words, it's
the sort of guide that a young person needs or not even a young person
coming to look at a university. So I think it's a terrific piece of work, I really do,
and congratulations for it.
I have got two pleasant duties to do one is to launch this, the other is to
announce the University of the Year. Now, we boast now a great number of
Universities. In 1995, the focus of this award has been on the integration of
information and communications technologies into undergraduate education.
Now, I think the information highway which we hear about now every day, 
more than one time a day most days has enormous potential as an
educational tool. And I suppose it is probably in Universities and in educational
institutions where there is a fascination with the information highway because
of the amenity which it can obviously provide for teaching. We can use it to
increase the curriculum choices offered to students, and we can use it to
transport ideas and knowledge around the country to people who live on the
margins of our society, and it is obviously one of the instruments in Open
learning. Some Universities are already exploring it I mentioned RMIT
yesterday with a raft of courses and the ANU has created a sophisticated
network which is fully accessible to undergraduates a virtual campus in itself.
But the University making the best use of the new technologies, and the winner
of the Good Universities Guide 1995 University of the Year Award is Deakin
University. Deakin uses the information highway to provide world-class
distance education when the student can't come to the University, Deakin
takes the University to the student. Deakin students work from mines and
factories and offices, as well as from classrooms and lecture theatres, but
through the use of computers and e-mail and faxes and printed materials, they
engage in the dialogue that is the hallmark of the traditional university
education. Deakin is an unconventional university, but of course, a good one.
And I might say, that it is an illustration of the success of the Government's
higher education reforms that the Australian University of the Year in 1995
doesn't have a single block of sandstone to its name.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to extend my congratulations to Deakin,
the Vice Chancellor is here, of course, to acknowledge that, and also again,
repeat my appreciation and congratulations for the publication of this
document. Let me again repeat those congratulations to Dean Ashenden and
Sandra Milligan, and also to Paul Kelly, the editor of The Australian, because I
think no newspaper has tracked the course of Australian education quite like
The Australian has, and now with these continuing innovations coming through
in higher education, in vocational education as we are seeing such a ferment
and flux in our higher education and vocational institutions having the national
newspaper chart it, record it, talk about it, debate it, is, I think, the sort of thing
that newspapers are there to do. To be papers of record, to put information put
there that people genuinely need and gamner, and where they can understand
better about what they are doing relative to other people. So, perhaps I can
conclude my remarks by saying that in recent times I never seem to be out of
universities and vocational institutions. It is a great pleasure to me that we
continue to just power on in this area, and let me assure you that the
Governiment will be keeping the resources up to the sector, because it is our
great comparative advantage it is our great hope, it is our great liberating
force, it is one of the most democratic tools we have in our society, and I am
delighted to be involved again with some of the key people who are fashioning
this change in Australia. Thank you.
ends. A, 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
1995 NATIONAL SOCIAL POLICY CONFERENCE
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES, SYDNEY, 7 JULY 1995
It's good to be at a policy conference.
Policy is the stuff of government. It's why we are here. It's why we came to
government in the first place, it's why we are still here, it's why we will be here a year
from now.
We are still governing because, from the beginning, we have led a decade of
profound social, economic and cultural change.
And our first policy principle in guiding this reform is inclusion. As Samuel Johnson
said, " In a civilised society, we all depend on each other'.
Strange as it may seem for Sam Johnson to be writing Labors slogans, I have not
found a better broad definition of what this Government is about.
We take social policy seriously. We put social into the democratic equation. We
also put it into the economic equation at a time when other governments were
leaving it out.
Over the last 12 years, we have transformed the economic structure of Australia.
We are well known for this. It has been well advertised. What is sometimes
forgotten is that at the same time we transformed the social infrastructure of the
nation. Let me run through just some of our achievements:
the introduction of Medicare;
payments for low income families increased by at least 80 per cent in real
terms; an age pension set at the benchmark of at least 25 per cent of average
weekly earnings;
reforms to superannuation so that close to 90 per cent of the workforce
receive superannuation compared with less than 40 per cent in 1983; 
the introduction of the Job Compact which means that everyone unemployed
for 18 months or more will be offered a job;
the establishment of the Child Support Scheme;
a more than five-fold increase in child care places, with a commitment to meet
demand for work-related child care by 2001;
the extension of Child Care Assistance and the introduction of the Child Care
Cash Rebate;
the recognition and protection of native title;
more than 7 in 10 young people completing high school compared with only 3
in 10 in 1983;
more than 50 per cent increase in enrolments in tertiary education;
the establishment of a national vocational education system under ANTA;
a comprehensive network of community care services for older people and
people with disabilities through the Home and Community Care Program;
the enactment of the Disability Discrimination Act making discrimination on
the grounds of disability unlawful; and
the Government's landmark Sex Discrimination Act outlawing discrimination
on the basis of sex, marital status or pregnancy.
And in the last three months, the Government has brought the Budget back into
surplus; introduced a Maternity Allowance; reached agreement with the ACTU on
Accord VIII; significantly improved national savings and retirement incomes through
increased superannuation contributions; and delivered the Justice Statement.
I was interested to read in Stuart Macintyre's paper to this conference his
comparison between the reaction of the Scullin Government to the Great
Depression, and this Government's response to the recession of the early nineties.
It is something some of us have long been aware of that, despite much popular
opinion to the contrary, this Government is more " Labor" in most of its essential
responses and initiatives than its fabled Labor predecessors.
To Professor Macintyre's comparison I might add another one the famous post-war
White Paper and the White Paper of last year we called Working Nation. It is
enough to say. here that Working Nation was a document of at least comparable
breadth and imagination. That is not to belittle the achievements of Chifley and
Curtin, or underestimate the forces at work on Scullin. But it is to correct a common
fallacy about modern Labor's commitment to social policy and social improvement. 
It is a measure of our success, and a genuine reward, to think that in today's
Australia no one under the age of thirty has spent a year of adult life without
universal health insurance. It is part of the culture of this place. It is a tangible
expression of our traditional social values. Can you imagine Australia without the
new social infrastructure of the past decade without Medicare; without the Child
Support Agency; without Home and Community Care; without a national vocational
education scheme; without protection for women against discrimination.
The work we have done over the past 12 years establishes our good faith with the
Australian community. We don't think there should be an argument about that, but
it's not the same thing as saying that there are not real problems still to solve.
The policy process is a fascinating and challenging animal.
We often talk about policy-making as being like painting on a broad canvas. We
begin with a vision of what the picture will be: that is the first essential no
imagination, no picture. No faith in your ability to realise it, no picture. And, like a
painter with a vision and faith, you begin to fill the canvas in, step by step, layer by
layer.
And there the analogy ends because policy-making, unlike picture painting, is
never complete.
We can never finish the job of reform. We know that, with good policy, other
problems will come along, often uncovered by the good policy itself. And we know
that, with even the best policy, we won't solve all the problems.
But we also know that we will get better answers if we pay attention to the views of
people in the field.
All of you here today, from your varying perspectives of community workers,
lobbyists, public servants and academics, know this. You know your advice or
action or arguments will be better if they are road tested, as it were.
Forgive me for the political intrusion, but that is one reason why there should be a
very strong objection to political leaders who say they will announce their policies
only in an election campaign. That means the only consultation will be consultation
with the Coalition's research groups. The only listening will be to the polls.
Mr Howard has already said he will not be taking any notice of special interest
groups. He has dismissed the role of consultation between governments and representatives
of ordinary Australians as a legitimate part of the policy process. 
Included in his coverage of special interest groups is the ACTU, which represents
over two and a half million workers. If he dismisses consultation with the organised
labour movement, what about with organised business such as the BCA; or groups
such as ACOSS, the Australian Conservation Foundation, the Aboriginal Land
Councils, the Australian Consumers' Association, Women's Electoral Lobby, the
Farmers' Federation, the National Catholic Education Commission, or the AMA?
The Labor Government deals with interest groups, accords them status, learns from
them, and acts in partnership with them. We know that in combination they
represent almost every sector of the community.
Research and consultation have been the basis of our major social reforms, such as
Working Nation, the Social Security Review, the Child Support Scheme; the National
Housing Strategy; and the National Health Strategy.
Just now, in the research community and in the general community there is a lot
of interest in income distribution issues. A look at the program for this conference
confirms that.
Let me start by saying that a reduction in poverty and inequality is one of the
benchmarks against which the Government judges itself and will be judged.
And the fact is that under Labor, real wages and household incomes have increased
substantially and living standards have improved as a result. And Australia
continues to have one of the fairest wage distributions in the developed world.
We all know that unemployment is one of the greatest causes of inequality. An even
more certain and profound truth is that nothing a government can do in the way of
social services, or social policies of any kind, will so effectively distribute wealth and
opportunity as employment. Nothing comes close. Nothing is as good as a job.
And nothing increases the number of jobs like high, sustainable economic growth.
Since April 1993, over 600,000 jobs have been created. Over the year to May 1995,
the number of people out of work for more than a year dropped by 26 per cent. The
ABS has recently published figures showing that in 1994 Australia out-performed all
the world's major economies in reducing unemployment. That is a major contribution
to equality, a major contribution to social justice.
The most common measure of poverty in Australia is the Henderson Poverty Line,
which is now more than twenty years old and generally accepted to have some
misleading features. The Henderson Poverty Line is updated according to changes
in household disposable income rather than the CPI or average weekly earnings.
Since household disposable income per person has risen by nearly 20 per cent in
real terms since 1983, in real terms the poverty line has been rising.
Yet under Labor most social security recipients have moved from below to above the
poverty line. 
For example, since 1983, the income of an unemployed couple with one child renting
privately has increased from 11 per cent below to 1 per cent above the poverty line.
The income of a sole parent with two children renting privately has increased from 9
per cent below to 2 per cent above the poverty line. The Social Policy Research
Centre has estimated that, if the poverty line had been adjusted in line with prices,
poverty would have fallen by nearly 20 per cent between 1983 and 1990. And this
does not take into account the benefits of the social wage.
The National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling estimates that social wage
benefits from health, housing, child care and education are worth an average of
$ 195 a week for a family with two children. The research also shows that these
benefits are worth far more for the lowest income families than they are for the
highest income families and thus substantially reduce inequality.
This is a very different picture from the one presented by the Opposition of the poor
getting poorer. I'm sure that the social policy ministers would like to know that their
hard fights within Cabinet have been worthwhile, but setting the record straight is not
the main point of my discussion.
It is important for all of us interested in income inequality to get a clearer
understanding of what has happened and how the Government can help to reduce
inequality. To better understand the issues and to tease out the implications for
policy, the Government has commissioned research from the University of
Melbourne on trends in income distribution. The research presented at this
Conference will also add to our picture.
These days, I am constantly getting into trouble for having the temerity to talk about
John Howard's past. It is not something I want to do. There are much richer and
more diverting historical excursions to take. But with Howard, we talk about the past
because that's all there is to talk about. It's all we know about him.
We know this present Opposition only by what they did when they were last in
government and what they said they would do if they regained government at the
last election. We know them only by their record and what we can infer from it and
the record is, by any local or international measure, abysmal.
The record shows that when they were last in government, with John Howard as
Treasurer, the Coalition:
abolished Medibank, after having promised to retain it, and left 2 million
people with no health insurance;
reduced the value of social security payments in real terms, so, for example, a
single unemployed person renting privately lost $ 15 a week, an age
pensioner lost $ 3 a week, and the most needy families lost $ 4 a week;
slashed spending on health, housing and child care in real terms, reducing
expenditure on the social wage by more than $ 5 billion or nearly $ 500 per
person per year. 
And remember if the Coalition had won at the last election, they were committed to:
cutting a total of $ 10 billion from public expenditure, including $ 1 billion from
social security, $ 400 million from public housing and $ 1.3 billion from public
hospitals; introducing youth wages of $ 3 an hour;
establishing a training system under which unemployed people could have
been paid 70 per cent of the award wage with no requirement that their
employer train them;
full fees for university;
the abolition of bulk-billing under Medicare for most people;
a three week waiting period for unemployment benefits; and
removing the sole parent pension when the youngest child turned 12.
We don't know much of what the Coalition plans to do if they get elected next time.
But type generally wins out. And John Howard is a Type A Tory. A Type A
conservative of the eighties. He made friends with the New Right and that weird
specimen of extremism the H R Nichols Society. He has opposed all but two of the
wage rises since 1975.
Over and over again he says he is pro family and over and over again he is anti
wage-earners over and over again anti family support.
We must remember that 16 out of the 19 members of the current Coalition Shadow
Cabinet were members of John Hewson's Ministry.
So nearly 85 per cent of the current Shadow Cabinet put their hands up for slashing
spending on the social wage; for dropping unemployed people off unemployment
benefits after 9 months; for abolishing bulk-billing; for cutting the award wages of low
income workers. They put their hands up for policies which are Thatcherite in
principle and substance and which were most memorably expressed by John
Hewson when he said if we reach back for the weak they will drag us down.
And now we are meant to believe that they care about the " battlers" that group of
Australians they only discovered when their pollsters identified them.
We can see the true colours of the Coalition have not changed when we examine
the social policy areas where they have revealed their basic direction health policy,
family policy and industrial relations. We see the same old signs of regression. And
the policies fly in the face of the best research. 
The Coalition's health policy is to provide tax subsidies for private health insurance.
You would expect a Labor Government to be critical of this, but you don't have to
take our word for it. It flies in the face of the research of health economists and
analysts such as Jeff Richardson, Richard Scotton, Stephen Leeder, and most
recently, Kevin Forde, a health economist at this university, who has published an
analysis of the impact of subsidising private health insurance.
In his Headland speech, Mr Howard says that private health insurance deserves
subsidies because private hospitals are under-utilised and there are waiting lists in
public hospitals.
It is untrue that waiting lists are attributable to a contraction in the private hospital
sector. In fact, over the past five years, there has been an increase in both privately
insured hospital days in private hospitals and admissions to private hospitals as a
total of all admissions.
It is also wrong to suggest that people who take out private health insurance will only
seek treatment in private hospitals, and thus free up public hospitals. In fact, many
sophisticated procedures are only carried out in public hospitals. And most people,
including Kerry Packer, when involved in an accident or an emergency, are treated
in public hospitals.
As the researchers point out, there is ample evidence to suggest that the policy of
subsidising private health insurance to move patients from the public to the private
sector does not reduce health care costs, but merely shifts them from the
government to the patients.
Overall health costs are also likely to increase with higher levels of private health
insurance because of higher administrative costs, fewer controls on over-servicing,
and the reluctance of the private health funds to encourage cost-containment in
private hospitals. We would end up with more, not fewer, resources being spent on
health care.
And who would get the extra money? Private hospitals, specialists working in
private hospitals and the health insurance funds.
What people gain in tax deductions they lose in health insurance premiums and outof
pocket expenses. The simple fact is that the Coalition's policy would mean that
patients would pay more for health care.
In short, what the Opposition proposes would be neither an efficient nor an equitable
means of solving health care problems. The major beneficiaries of the subsidies
would be tax-payers who already have private health insurance people we know
are more likely to be higher income earners.
The underlying danger of the Coalition's support for subsidies for private health
insurance is that it is aimed at developing a two-tier health system: a rich, privately
funded health system alongside a poor, publicly funded system. 
We take the view that the solutions in health lie in improving the public health
system. It is also where our responsibility lies. It is not our responsibility to spend
over $ 1 billion subsidising the private health system and specialists at the expense
of Medicare.
It is a question of weight and priority. Put the weight in the wrong place and the
whole social balance is upset. And that is precisely what the political equation is
about. Family policy is another case in point.
When it comes to family policy we give priority to low income families. Furthermore,
we make sure the assistance is paid directly to the parent with the most daily
responsibility for caring for the children, usually the mother.
John Howard believes in income-splitting. He has believed in it since 1979. You
have to admire his tenacity, but not his judgement or priorities even his own party
won't take it on, and the tax and social policy experts reject it entirely.
Most recently, we have heard from Professor Patricia Apps from the University of
Sydney, who found income-splitting to be inefficient, regressive, anti-saving and
sexist. Her work clearly shows that tax would increase on the second income
earners in families, who are usually women. Conversely, the tax on the male
partners would decrease.
Dr Peter McDonald from the Australian Institute of Family Studies summed it up well:
" If the aim is to provide very large benefits to wealthy families and to make it very
difficult for women to work part-time then income-splitting is the right option."
The evidence against income-splitting is overwhelming and has been for years.
We know that it is regressive. The more you earn the more you benefit from incomesplitting.
A family on $ 100,000 would have their tax reduced by about $ 7,000 a year
while a family on $ 20,000 would actually pay about $ 200 more in tax under incomesplitting.
And the policy would not come cheap income-splitting would cost about $ 3 billion.
Or alternatively, as Professor Apps points out, if you wanted to introduce incomesplitting
without any loss of revenue, you would have to increase all marginal tax
rates by 3 percentage points.
The Leader of the Opposition who uses the " family" as his own personal mantra;
who says he is " pro-family", as if the rest of us were anti; and who now talks
sanctimoniously about " battlers", in fact advocates a $ 3 billion policy which is
regressive, which gives the greatest benefit to high income families, and under which
many low income families would actually be worse off.
When you look at John Howard's policy beliefs over the years it is a story all
fractured and disjointed. And yet there are these unrelated and almost arcane
elements consistently floating through it like odd socks. They are income-splitting,
employment contracts, pulling Medicare apart and the monarchy. 
This is John Howard's policy odd sock bag the ones he keeps in the hope that one
day a matching one will turn up in someone else's drawer and make sense of it all
and renew its purpose in life and, with it, the purpose in life of J. W. Howard.
But as we all know, you only wait a certain time with your odd socks and then you
hang them up at Christmas, or use them as dusters for your shoes, or stuff them with
other odd socks and kick them round the lounge room.
And to think that someone once said that politics is a contest of ideas a contest for
ideas and values. John Howard has been hanging on to these ideas for the course
of his political life, and, try as he might, he can't add to them unless it's to go back
to tariffs, or to resist according the Aboriginal flag the same status as that of Norfolk
Island. I am not opposed to all forms of conservatism. I like tradition Labor thrives
on it but I hate regression. In the 1990s we simply can't afford it.
The Labor Government's guiding philosophy is social democratic, by which I mean a
democracy in which the concept of rights and liberties is extended to encompass
both individual opportunity and social justice.
There is no question that successful economies have been free market economies:
it is scarcely less debatable that the most successful societies have been those
which have combined this with democratic freedoms and sophisticated and
integrated social programs.
In saying this I do not mean that we follow any model European or American.
We've developed our own. We do things a little differently, and I think a little better.
It is a model that balances the need for economic efficiency and innovation, with the
imperative of protecting and enhancing the material and social circumstances of the
disadvantaged. It is a model that is seen most clearly in the unique Australian
partnership with the union movement, the Prices and Incomes Accord, which
recently evolved to its eighth stage.
It is a model, incidentally, that shows some influence of academic research, and
indeed, the Accord itself has become a major subject of social science investigation.
It is now well understood by social scientists that countries face clear choices in
industrial relations, and that the choice made has fundamental implications for
macro-economic outcomes and income distribution.
On the one hand, unions can be left to pursue their agendas and will naturally do so
by bidding up the wages of their members, giving relatively little weight to the
broader economic and social consequences of these actions. Research in this area
has shown with great clarity that the results are high wage inflation and high
unemployment. 
On the other hand, countries without strong union movements typically deliver
relatively high employment growth with low inflation, but such countries are more
likely to offer less protection to the socially disadvantaged; this tends to be
manifested in growing income inequality. The United States is undoubtedly the best
example of such an arrangement.
The US Secretary of Labor, Robert Reich, recently lamented the strong tendency to
earnings inequality in that country and contrasted it with the social protection offered
in many of the countries of Western Europe. Yet in these countries, critics typically
point to poor employment performance and highlight the US as a superior model.
The Accord represents a middle ground. Under the Accord the ACTU has delivered
restraint in labour costs in order to ensure healthy US style employment growth.
And since 1983 the Government has been able to deliver a real and improved social
wage Western European style reflected in part in many of the policy
achievements I have mentioned today.
That term " social wage" is an instructive one. It makes the point that to go on
talking about the " economic" and the " social" as if they were separate and distinct
defies the reality. The social wage is both a social policy and an economic one. It
serves both social and economic ends. It is an expression of the fact admittedly
not recognised in some quarters that good economic policy has a good social
purpose, that social justice and economic efficiency are not only generally
compatible but generally complementary. This is why, I suppose, some of us grow a
little short-tempered with those who tell us that we are concentrating too much on
social matters, or cultural matters as opposed to economic ones or economic
matters as opposed to these others.
The fact is they are inseparable and properly so. In fact I sometimes think it is the
essence of good policy to find the points at which they fuse that the convergence is
very often disguised from us, and good policy means discovering where and how to
make them meet. Consider how long it took us to recognise that inflation not only
damaged our economic competitiveness but corroded social justice? And then
consider that, perhaps alone among countries today, we have a trade union
movement and the central bank working as one to the same low inflation ends.
And I might say this: I think among our social policy people and our economic
people it has generally been on the social policy side that the leap has been taken.
Our social thinkers became economists far more often than the economists became
social thinkers. That, it seems to me, puts a lot of our academic economists, market
analysts and economic commentators, a little way behind the contemporary reality, a
little way off the direction Australia is going.
I think we can look back on the past decade or more and see a whole new story told
in a whole new way. I think we can see the development here of a much more
sophisticated national equation. We have fashioned a modern Australian social
democracy: incomplete and imperfect, but a very good place to live and work, with
traditions, a spirit and a future that will not be denied. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT LAUNCH OF ANZAC FRIGATE TE KAHA, WILLIAMSTOWN,
SATURDAY, 22 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, John White ( Chief Executive, Transfield Defence
Systems), Prime Minister Jim Bolger and Joan, I'm very pleased to see you in
Australia on this occasion, our Defence Ministers Warren Cooper and Robert
Ray, Carlo Salteri ( Transfield Chairman), Rear Admiral Walsh, the Hon Bill
Baxter representing the Premier, parliamentary colleagues, members of the
Defence Force, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Reverend David North
and Bishop Vercoe and ladies and gentlemen.
One of the last things that was just said was that ANZAC was a class, it is the
name of a class and, of course, as we in this country and New Zealand know,
it has always been a class name. It has always stood for the world's best
when it came to a fighting force and I don't believe there could be any greater
manifestation of our co-operation or the kindred nature of our two countries
than to be here for an historic launch of a collaborative project of this kind.
The things we have always believed about our two countries the common
ideals, the common culture, the threatres of war we fought in in defence of
liberty all of these things, I think, are in evidence today in the fact that we
have come together as nations in this collaborative exercise to build this
class of ships bearing that proud name ANZAC. I am delighted to be here on
this occasion for the launching of Te Kaha.
It is, I think, a magnificent ship, state of the art and world class. One of the
things, I am sure, that we do in Australia and New Zealand these days is
build good ships and maybe this will have more fighting power than an
America's Cup yacht, certainly more hitting power although no doubt we
could commission them America's Cup yachts that is with some
armaments. They would be a pretty fearful thing, but this, I think, represents
as good as it is likely to be world wide. 
What is important, I think, about this is a recognition by Australia and New
Zealand that in our own defence we need these capacities and capabilities.
The thing about this ship which will be true of no other, or very few we've had
in the past, is that it will be serviced here in Australasia because it is built
here in Australasia and one of the things about our defence will now be that
we will focus on our regional strengths, our industrial capabilities, our
capacity for research and development, for design not simply of ships but of
combat systems and weapon systems because with the finish of the Cold
War what we are now seeing, where once everything was international ised,
what we are now seeing is the regionalisation of difficulties, where regional
tensions come to the fore and where countries organise themselves
regionally. I think this is something which we are doing. We are building a naval ship
building capacity like this here in Australasia and, of course, in Australia's
case we also have a submarine program, we will soon have the Mine Hunter
Program and the hydrographic ship. There is a real core naval capacity
being built here and one that I think must be comforting to the peoples of
Australia and New Zealand, that this capacity exists within our countries. Of
course, we have built this and we have innovated the design and developed
further the weapon systems, but I think it also reminds us of our important
linkages to Europe. John White and Carlo Salteri have already mentioned
Blohm and Voss the Naval architects and let me also mention Celsius
Tech the Swedish Company that designed the combat systems in which we
have been able to augment.
But, beyond all that what I would like to do is to congratulate Transfield on
putting together this capacity to develop these ships, to be able to produce
them at this quality and on time. This is a great compliment to them as a
company and to the workforce of these yards that they could harness these
skills and give such commitment and such pride to the building of such a
vessel. Without them, of course, this ship wouldn't be here and we need to
think about them and to thank them.
I would like to, just again, dwell on the major point that having an Australian
and New Zealand Prime Minister together at the launch of a ship in which we
are involved collaboratively, I think, says again much about our relationship,
says how seriously we regard the first duty of any government and that is to
make certain of the security of its people and to have a competent Defence
Force. With this Defence Force here today, the Defence Force of our
countries in Australia and New Zealand, will see this augmentation coming
here today and I am very proud to be involved. I'd like to again, congratulate
everybody concerned and most particularly wish Te Kaha well and, of course,
naturally and especially all who will sail in her. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS WOMEN IN DEFENCE FORCES CEREMONY
CANBERRA, 25 JULY 1995
I am honoured to be delivering this address in another splendid ' Australia
Remembers' commemorative event
But this ceremony is different.
At the launching of ' Australia Remembers' almost 12 months ago, I said that
the Government wanted women to be involved in the commemorations to an
extent that women have never been involved in our major national
commemorations before.
We have not been disappointed.
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to Parliament House. Thank you
for coming.
Today we remember what Australian women gave to their country and the
cause of freedom in World War 11.
They gave their labour and their love of this country. Many of them gave their
lives.
They gave themselves totally to the defence of Australia and the things
Australia stood for the principles of freedom, democracy and human
decency, the way of life Australians had constructed here, their communities
and families.
They worked at tasks Australian women had never taken on before. They
served in places where Australians had never been. They served as one,
regardless of where or what circumstances they came from.
They played an essential role in the defence of Australia. 
2
As Mr Sciacca said, the response to calls for enlistment in the women's
services was overwhelming some 67,000 enlisted in our armed forces.
Within a year of the declaration of war in Europe, almost a third of all
Australia's trained nurses had volunteered to serve overseas. The first of
them embarked within four months of the beginning of the war. They served
in Palestine, Libya, Egypt, Greece, Eritrea, Syria, the South-West Pacific and
in England.
Their experience is part of the Australian experience; it is inseparable from
our military history, our national legends and traditions, and the inspiration
and values we draw from these things.
Women served during the blitz on London. They saw war in the deserts of
North Africa. In Greece they served through frequent air raids and narrowly
missed the arrival of invading German troops.
In Malaya, Ceylon, Singapore, Papua, New Guinea, the Solomon Islands
New Britain and Borneo many became internees and suffered terrible
deprivations. Some were brutally murdered.
Forty-one Australian Army nurses died in the fall of Singapore or as internees
of the Japanese.
From these terrible experiences emerged many stories of heroism.
I think we are all familiar with the story of Sister Vivien Bullwinkel, who was
the sole female survivor when nurses who endured the sinking of the Viner
Brooke were put to death by the Japanese.
Less well-known is the experience of the-nurses who were captured on
Rabaul and, along with a number of civilians, sent to Japan. Here they were
lodged in the Yokohama Rowing Club and provided with a few items of
clothing and an inadequate diet.
One member of the group, Sister Anderson, described their imprisonment:
they worked at knitting small silk bags, making and gluing envelopes and at
heavier tasks such as constructing air raid shelters, carrying bundles of
firewood and clearing paths in the snow for guards to walk through in knee
boots the women were barefooted. Sometimes the women became so
hungry they cooked and ate the glue on the envelopes.
There are other stories we should record today. In the bombing of Darwin on
18 February 1942, Sister Margaret de Mestre and 11 other staff of the
hospital ship Manunda were killed.
Only one nurse was among the sixty-four survivors of the torpedoing of the
Hospital Ship Centaur. 
She was Sister Nell Savage who was awarded the George Cross for helping
others while they floated on debris and rafts waiting for rescue.
Fifty-five Australian Army Nursing Service members received decorations for
their Second World War Service, including two George Medals. Eighty-two
were mentioned in despatches.
Many other Australian women served in medical units.
Members of the Australian Army Medical Women's Service ( previously known
as the Voluntary Aid Detachments) served with our Army nurses throughout
Australia and in New Guinea and Borneo.
Their dedication was personified by Miss May Douglas, the senior
representative of the women's wartime services present here today.
Originally a nursing orderly for the AIF, Miss Douglas was commissioned in
1941 with the prospect that she might accompany the Army overseas.
But her talents were employed in Australia where, in 1943, she was promoted
to Lieutenant Colonel and appointed controller of the Australian Army Medical
Women's Service.
And in this capacity she travelled in Australia and New Guinea, visiting
hospitals where her troops were serving.
Today, I would also like to acknowledge the women of other medical units:
The members of the Australian Army Physiotherapy service who
served in the Middle East and the Pacific, on hospital ships and in
base and forward areas.
The women members of the Australian Army Medical Corps who
served in military hospitals both in Australia and overseas as doctors,
physiotherapists and masseuses.
The women of the Royal Australian Naval Nursing Service who cared
for Australian and Allied servicemen on bases throughout Australia, as
well as at Milne Bay and on the Hospital Ship Manunda.
And the women of the Royal Australian Air Force Nursing and Medical
Service members who served not only in Australia, but also in New
Guinea and in air evacuation units in Canada and the United States.
Not all the women who served Australia served as nurses, of course.
27,000 members of the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, fondly known
as ' the WAAAFs', worked in 72 of 120 Air Force trades.
I 
And we might note today that they received just two-thirds or less of the male
rates of pay.
The WAAAF changed the role of women in wartime.
The women were subject to rules which now seem at best curious.
For instance, they were not supposed to serve further north than Cairns and
Geraldton. Nevertheless some did serve in Darwin and the north-west of
Western Australia, and in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.
They were also not supposed to fly aircraft though I am told that two women,
Nell Palfreyman and Margaret Piddington were given some experience in this
traditional part of air force life.
In acknowledging the WAAAFs today I think it is true to say that we recognise
not only the great service they rendered to the country in wartime, but the
example they set for the peace the example of women's capacity and right
to play a part in realms of our national life from which they had always been
excluded. The same might be said of the Australian Women's Army Service, which was
formed in 1941 with the same objective of releasing men for fighting units.
Thousands of women rushed to enlist in what became known as the ' AWAS'
by 1944 the number totalled over 24,000.
Again, they were paid just two-thirds of the male rate.
They were grudgingly allowed the same rank as men and provided with the
same basic equipment: with one difference apparently they were allowed to
have " a vase of flowers on the cupboards by their beds".
In November 1944, the War Cabinet approved the posting of 500 members of
AWAS to New Guinea. I do not know if the same conditions applied.
When women were first admitted into the Royal Australian Navy in 1941, they
were admitted under the proviso ' that there be no publicity about this break in
tradition'. Over 3,000 women enlisted in the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service
during the Second World War. None went to sea because it was thought
inappropriate to have women on ships, but they played an extremely
important role not least in the Allied Intelligence Bureau and the Coast
Watching Service.
Then there were the 7,000 members of the Australian Women's Land Army
who, while not one of the Services, wore uniforms, were subject to discipline
and learned to take orders. 77-
They covered the loss of 100, 000 farm workers to the defence forces.
As John Curtin said, their work was hard, demanding, constant and vital to
the war effort.
Of course, ' Australia Remembers' honours all our veterans, including those
who stayed at home and kept the country running.
During the war, Australia turned to women as a vast untapped labour
resource. By 1944, 250,000 women were working in Australia's factories. Over 40 per
cent of munitions workers were women.
Much of the work was hideously monotonous and harmful to their health.
They suffered hardship and illness. But they made a huge contribution to
winning the war and therefore to our freedom and the preservation of our
democracy. They made a massive contribution to the story of Australia and I
hope that, after today, Australians will always acknowledge this.
Our own generation and generations to come should know that when liberty
was threatened, Australian women rallied to defend it. No less than
Australia's men, they were prepared to give their labour and their lives.
We all should know what we owe them to no small extent, our freedom and
our way of life, including that part of it which today makes it possible for
women to share much more fully in the work and the rewards.
This generation of Australian women were both pioneers and defenders of
the Australian faith.
And today all Australia salutes them. 



TEL: I . HUi3. 1 u
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCH IN HONOUR OF SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THlE CENTRAL
COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF VIETNAM
HIS EXCELLENCY MR DO MUOl
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBEiRRA, MONDAY 31 JULY 1995
General -Secretary, it is a great personal as well as an official pleasure to welcome you
and your party to Australia.
I remember very well our first meeting in Ho Chi Mimli City last year. I greatly
appreciated your courtesy to mc that day in travelling a long distance from a provincial
visit you were making to meet me. But this time you have come even further in
support of friendly relations between Australia and Vietnam.
Our meeting in Ho Chi Minh City went well over the time our officials had scheduled,
because we found in our discussion as we have found again today how much
Australia and Vietnam have to learn from each other and how much we can do
together. You have brought with you to Australia a number of senior colleagues and business
people from Vietnam.
Their presence at this lunch and the presence of so many senior Australian
businesspeople reflects thc growing recognition in both our countries of the
importance of this relationship and its potential. They are also very welcome guests.
You have arrived here at an important time for Vietnam and the region.
Last Friday Vietnam became the seventh member of ASEAN. Australia welcomed this
historic development.
We now have a new range of opportunities to build our relationship regionally as well
as bilaterally.
Eventually, we hope Vietnam will participate in the discussions we have been holding
on links between the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the Australia-New Zealand
Closer Economic Relations arrangement. 
I ELL: 2
We also welcome the normalisation of relations between Vietnam and the United
States, which was announced early this month. As you know, Gencral-Sccretary, this
is a development Australia has consistently encouraged over manly years.
In fact, Australia's policy in the region has been guided by the conviction that the
region will be stronger, its institutions more resilient and its chanices for prosperity and
peaceful development greater if Vietnam is ffilly engaged in its development.
That is also why we think that in due course Vietnam is a natural member of APEC.
Both Australia and Vietnam have been through a period of deep economic and social
change in recent years.
In Australia, we have committed ourselves to an open economy. deeply integrated with
Asia. Our firture lies ftilly and unambiguously in the Asia-Pacific. For us, there can be
no U-turns.
We havc dismantled the tariff barrier which ring-fenced our country, opened up our
financial markets and embarked on a pro-growth, low-inflation policy with the
cooperation of the trade union movement.
These policies have given us rates of growth among thc highest in the industrialised
world. Vietnam's program of economic reform Doi Moi has also involved economic
restructuring on a large scale. Your successes are evident already, with growth rates
of more than 8 per cent a year, and a real increase in per capita GDP of 26 per cent
between 1990 and 1994.
In other words, the Vietnamese people are already experiencing the tangible benlefits of
this policy.
Your reform program reflects some of the qualities Australians admire most in the
Vietnamese people resilience, determination, an underlying pragmatism and
willingness to change. These are qualities that Australians share.
Australia's relationship with Vietnam is not new.
The war, with all its suffering. left scars which remain in both countries, but which I
believe are healing.
Australia was one of the first western countries to recognise the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam more than 20 years ago.
And we were the first to resume aid after the Cambodia settlement.
We have built a relationship of substance. In 1982 our trade was $ 2 million; ill 1994 it
was $ 402 million.
Australia is the sixth largest foreign investor in Vietnam, with over $ 920 million
invested last year. 
TEL: 3
The companies involved are some of Australia's largest and most experienced like
BlI-P, Teistra and the ANZ Bank as well as smaller innovative businesses.
Our aid program has grown too from $ 10 million in 1990/ 91 to $ 72 million in
1995/ 96. We arc working with Vietnam in health, education and major infrastructure
projects. We witnessed just a short time ago the signing of agreements covering our cooperation
in building the huge My Thuan bridge project and Australia's commitment to draw up
an integrated master plan for the economic development of the Southern Economic
Focal Zone, based on Ho Chi Minh City and Vung Tau.
But the major component of our aid program is education. Currently 450 Vietnamese
are training in Australia and I would like our education links to grow. Because I
strongly share your view that education is the key to both our countrics' fuiture.
Our dialogue has grown and deepened with Vietnam across a wide range of issues.
Ministerial and other official exchanges are miultiplying rapidly.
We were very pleased that the Australian Parliamntary Consultative Delegation was
ablc to visit Vietnam in April this year and to hold very constructive discussions
throughout the country, including opening up a dialoguc on human rights. This was an
important visit and we were grateflu for your cooperation.
I am sure that one great long-term asset in our relationship is the skilled and
resourceful commnunity of around 140,000 Vietnamese Australians. This community
has enriched our country, with people like Professor Ngo Van Long of the Economics
Department at the Australian National University and Thu Nguyen Hoan, the deputy
head of our Office of Multicultural Affairs.
And the community will, I am sure, also enrich our bilateral relationship.
The air services agreement which was signed this morning will help this process. More
than 32,000 Australians many of them Vietnaniese-Australians travelled to Vietnam
in 1994 for business or tourism or to see their families. These personal links will
expand and broaden our relationship.
Australia wants more than a relationship with Vietnam: we want a partnership. One
that reaches across a wide range of official business and people-to-people activities.
One which grows out of a deeper understanding of each other's culture and society.
Your visit is an important milestone to this goal.
We welcome you to Australia. 1 HUq . J zu " 4u vu 1 1 % J_ 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
47TH ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE QUEENSLAND GRAINGROWERS
ASSOCIATION, ROMA, 2 AUGUST 1995
I am very pleased to be here, and thank you for inviting me.
Some people thought it was a rather eccentric thing for a Labor Prime Minister
to do to come up to Roma and open the 47th annual conference of the
Queensland Graingrowers Association.
" Not a vote among them", they said. People who mostly feel removed from the
centre of things.
By which I think they meant people who feel their voices are not being heard,
who feel alienated from the political system, who feel the Government is out of
touch. But then, that is an argument for coming not staying away.
It's nothing new for people to feel that governments are remote I daresay it
forms part of the popular definition, and it has done, I suspect, since
governments were invented.
Democratic governments included I reckon within a week of the first popularly
elected person being sent off to represent his electorate, there were people
saying " he's out of touch". Before he got there.
So I don't think that this is a new phenomenon. But nor do I think it is one to
be ignored. It is essential that governments understand what is happening in
communities. Essential that they listen to the people. Essential, above all,
that having listened and having understood, they make policies in the national
interest.
As I've said before: good governments listen, but so do many bad
governments. The difference is in what they do. 
In fact there is only one judgement to be made about all governments and
that is whether the government of the nation has acted in the interests of the
nation. And, by definition, in the interests of the people.
The judgement is when these people were in strife and when their industry
was in strife, did the Government do what a national government should do?
Did it do what was necessary?
Now, I think that in the case of Queensland's farmers, generally speaking, we
have.
And I'm pleased to see that lan MacFarlane said as much yesterday.
Speaking of listening, I was pleased to listen to lan when I first came up here
to look at the drought areas and in fact if you're within 50 metres of lan you're
listening to him. And I'm delighted to be up here listening to him again. He's a
passionate Australian and a formidable advocate for the farming community.
I know there is much more to do. There is always more to do. Whether it is a
farm, an industry, or an entire economy there is always more to do.
I think farmers like yourselves have that at least in common with Prime
Ministers and Treasurers we are both familiar with the sensation that the job
never ends, that we never get to the last chapter, the one where we are
entirely out of the woods.
But if we are diligent and adaptable and hardworking we do get to better times
we do get to comfort zones, we do work our way into a position where we can
begin to make the hopes realities, and a position where we can survive the
hard times.
Let me tell you that is what we have been working towards these last twelve
years. It is what the whole effort has been for: to get Australia onto a pattern of
sustainable growth, to make us more productive and competitive, to make our
economy more diverse and durable, to get more of us working in modern jobs,
more of us trained in modern skills all of us, farmers included, able to share
in the wealth of this country, and the future of this country. And all of us,
farmers included farmers especially able to survive the hard times.
Now I think we've made a lot of progress in this regard. I think we've made
remarkable progress.
But I am not in any doubt and never have been that a lot of Australians do not
share this view.
I am very much aware that the broad data on which governments are obliged
to make their assessments of the nation's economic health do not always tally
with the problems households and communities are having. 
I also know that a healthy stock market does not mean that the same
confidence abounds in Australian communities.
And I know that this applies to rural and urban communities around the
country. I have to say that the broad data have a lot to recommend them and I never
heard a good reason why a government or a Prime Minister should not
advertise national progress and say that in real and comparative terms
Australia is making remarkable progress.
Sure as hell, the Opposition won't say it.
I think Australians should know that Australia has grown in every one of the
last 16 quarters; and that with this economic growth we have had
unprecedented employmet grpwth; and that we have had this with low
* jnfi-atiorn-and we can confidently expect this low inflation growth to-Tcdhtinue.
As the editorial in The Australian said at the weekend " This may be the
healthiest recovery the nation has had certainly in modern times."
It is unprecedented in our modern history we have growth which shows every
sign of being sustainable.
At this point my more experienced listeners will no doubt be preparing
themselves for a recitation of government achievements.
I will spare you the unabridged edition it takes a long time: but allow me to
mention a couple of important recent developments.
Among the good news the Government feels bound to advertise is the level of
Australian productivity it has grown in the last three years at least twice the
rate of New Zealand's. Let me say beware the new cultural cringe to New
Zealand, and beware those who tell you that their labour market is more
efficient than ours.
The second bit of news we find irresistible is savings. For a generation we
have tended to substitute inflation for savings.
The double digit inflation we experienced in the 1970s and early 1980s did
lasting damage to the culture of saving for the future, and it has proved very
hard to re-establish.
But we are now doing that. We've got low inflation that's fundamental. And
with the reforms to superannuation we introduced in the Budget, personal
savings will rise, national savings will increase substantially and I think we
will see a savings ethic emerge in the Australian community. 
These savings directly address our current account problem.
The current account deficit won't go away immediately.
Whose mortgage ever did? Some people win the lottery, but nations don't.
The current account will turn not by a miracle or any stroke of luck or by
wishful thinking. It will turn by saving and investing wisely, by continuing to
work hard, by making the most of our resources by insisting, even if we make
a fetish of it, that we stick to the path of sustainable, low inflation long-term
growth. I will stop this good news bulletin there. I want to get back to farmers and, in
particular, grain growers.
And I'd like to get there by this means: I said that national governments ought
to be judged by what they do for the national interest and the nation's people.
I said, beware of those who only talk about listening. Beware of those who
pretend they can satisfy everyone's need, who pretend they can be all things
to all people.
Now I know that many Australians are not feeling the full effects of the good
news I have just broadcast.
And I know that there are people preying on their disillusionment, feeding their
frustration with messages of gloom and despair and by implication suggesting
that, if only the government would do a couple of simple things, there would be
bounties for everyone.
The fact is that just now we are all coming to terms with a new kind of
Australia. An Australia in which we have prolonged economic growth without
inflation not a boom, not another sequence of wage-price spirals, but
sustainable growth.
It is the sort of growth which will enable us to plan and invest as a nation;
realise more and more of our national ambitions and survive the downturns
much better.
And in the end that means personal returns more and better jobs, more
security, more prosperity, better services, better communities.
It is the sort of growth I might also say which has been made possible by
Australians' own hard work, sacrifice and adaptability over the last decade.
Low inflation, higher productivity, saving through superannuation these
require government decisions, and often difficult decisions; but above all they
have required a real effort from Australians.
The sort of effort for which Australian farmers have long been admired. 
Farmers surely know better than anyone the value of things I have been
talking about.
And I sincerely hope that they also know the Government knows the value of
farmers. There are two ways to measure their value.
You can do it with figures.
Rural exports contribute about $ 20 billion annually to Australia's export
earnings. That's about 35 per cent of the total.
Of that we estimate that the 1995 harvest of wheat and coarse grains will be
worth about $ 4 billion.
It means that for all the changes to the structure of the economy, and all the
essential diversification, rural Australia remains a very big player. And it
always will.
The other way of measuring the value of farmers is by their contribution to the
spirit of the country. By the example they set.
Some of these people who are growing the $ 4 billion harvest have been in the
drought for as long as five years.
They have endured extreme hardship and real despair.
But they have stuck in there and, with the rain, they have planted nearly
million hectares and, all being well, they will harvest about 25 million tonnes.
The toughness and spirit of Australia's farming families should be an
inspiration to the rest of Australia.
And I think it is.
And that is one very good reason as good as their productivity and efficiency,
as good as the value of their harvests why Australia's farming families must
survive. They are essential to the national psyche.
Some, I know, will not be able to stay on the land. But this Government is
determined to see that the vast majority do.
It is one of the great challenges of the next decade or so: to see that the
100,000 or so farming families of Australia are not replaced by a thousand or
so companies. 
I read somewhere that agriculture and grazing in Australia has caused the
extinction of 78 species of plants.
When you think about for it for a while, that becomes a very sad fact. Because
extinction is irreversible. These are bits of our universe, pieces of the great
design, gone forever.
And if you think about it a bit longer you think we have to make sure that what
has happened to these plants does not happen to our farmers.
It's a challenge for all of us and I'm sure we won't fail it.
I think the last year or so has demonstrated that the farmers of Australia and
the Government have the capacity to work effectively together.
In fact, looked at objectively, I think the last twelve years have demonstrated
that. But what is so encouraging is the expansion of our collaborative effort.
And I hope that the thinking on both sides has caught up with the
contemporary reality.
Canberra is indeed a long way from here. And here is not Labor's heartland.
But, whatever, rural Australia thinks of the Government, the Government thinks
well of rural Australia and when rural Australia needed help we did our very
best to provide it. We still are.
That is not a plea for thanks. What we are doing is no more than a
government should do. We should not just listen we should work in
partnership.
Among other reasons, I say it to make the point that the next time we hear the
fashionable anti-government refrain which has swept America and is getting
louder here, I hope we can agree to at least say hang on, where else but from
government will we get the help we need? I hope we can agree to eliminate
the irrational and misinformed and prejudiced from our political debate.
The fact is that while governments can't do everything, there is no substitute
for them when it comes to a lot of the essentials.
Here in Queensland, 5,500 farm families are receiving Government assistance
at the rate of nearly $ 2 million a week. Across eastern Australia we have
committed nearly $ 600 million.
Large areas of eastern Australia, including many parts of Queensland, have
received good autumn rains. 
But we recognise that some parts of central Queensland are again in
desperate need. We recognise that even those farmers who have got the rain
they needed, now need help to rebuild.
We are under no illusion that there is no more to be done.
There is always more to be done!
Nor do we think that helping farmers through the drought is the only job we
have to do in rural Australia.
I said earlier that Australia's rural industries continue to be of primary
importance to the national economy, and Australian farming families of equal
significance to the national fabric.
We want to see Australian farms and Australian farming communities flourish
and grow in the 21 st century.
Farming families are a great national resource. It follows that the land they
farm must be able to sustain their use of it.
There can scarcely be a more important issue for Australian farmers than this
and it is no less important for the Government.
I don't believe there is anyone in this room who does not believe that our
agriculture should be sustainable agriculture. And if by a simple snap of their
fingers they could make if sustainable,_ Fiar sure that is what everyone would
do.
We need a collective national snap of the fingers. Not to do it, but to resolve
to do it.
We should recognise at once that this will be a difficult process. It will be a bit
like farming; there will be ups and downs, set-backs, disappointments.
But if any Australians know how to live with difficulty and endure a protracted
struggle it is Australian farmers.
I think we should take to the effort for sustainable development this sort of
spirit. Whenever we talk about the degradation of our land we tend to sit in
judgement on earlier generations of farmers and often the judgements are
harsh. I am inclined to think that we should take a more positive view. They had the
courage, ambition and energy to take on the land, and their efforts were
substantially responsible for the nation's prosperity. 
Their efforts made them legendary Australians. We now need the efforts of
this generation of Australian farmers to make the country not only prosperous,
but sustainable which means that there will still be farmers on the land
and 100 years from now.
Do this, and to those farmers of the future you will be legendary.
The partnership between Australian farmers and the Australian Government in
the National Landcare Program has been one of the great phenomena of the
recent times.
And it has been phenomenal. Not only because it has drawn so many farmers
into the movement; and not only because this has had the effect of improving
our land management practices.
The remarkable thing about Landcare is that it has tapped the passion of
farming Australians for the land itself. We have seen an incredibly swift
change in the culture of Australian farming and that has created an infinitely
more fertile environment for further change.
A more scientific approach to the land has implications for productivity, for the
quality of our products and therefore their success in export markets, for the
viability of farms and therefore of farming communities.
Of course it has also had the effect of bringing farmers into the centre of the
debate about the environment and that is wher* e they should be, where they
must be if we are to reach the right decisions about the land we live in.
In recent times, Australian farmers and the Australian Government have also
worked together very effectively to put Australia's case against the market
distorting subsidies of the United States.
No doubt many of you here are aware of the work being done by the Farm Bill
Working Group to encourage change in US agricultural policies that
significantly affect our interests. We have had considerable successes. While
we should not over-estimate our influence, nor should we under-estimate our
successes. And we certainly must continue. In particular we have to press for the EEP
and the Dairy Export Incentive Program to be dismantled.
Again, what matters is the collaborative environment we have established
between the Government and the industry. It provides us with the necessary
condition for doing so much more.
In that context, I have to say that nothing has improved the environment in
which we work so much as those major early reforms of a Labor Government. I
mean those perennial structural problems which faced Australian agriculture. 
Progressively dismantling the tariff wall has reduced the burden that is borne
by our internationally competitive industries including agriculture.
Floating the dollar delivered the biggest increase in competitiveness ever
achieved in this country with labour changes, a 40 per cent increase since
1983.
And our greater competitiveness is not simply due to the nominal depreciation
of the exchange rate.
The Accord has meant that the depreciation did not simply translate into higher
wages. The Accord has meant permanent increases in our international
competitiveness. It has meant much more as well in productivity, flexibility
and creativity, and industrial harmony. The last year has not only been a year
of growth it has also been a year which recorded the lowest rate of industrial
disputes since World War II.
The benefits to Australia, including rural Australia, are immeasurable.
I wouldn't be doing the Government justice if I did not remind you as well of the
benefits that will flow from the Uruguay Round and APEC.
For example, the Uruguay Round provides for a total reduction of 36 per cent
in the quantity of subsidised grain exports and for a reduction of 21 per cent in
expenditure on export subsidies.
At the same time Australia has been leading the way in the formation and
development of APEC. With the Bogor Declaration we have a framework
within which free trade can be developed in the most dynamic economic area
in the world. The benefits to Australia, not least to Australia's grain growers,
will be enormous.
Let me conclude by addressing a couple of the issues which specifically
concern the grains industry. Our objectives might be summarised as growth,
competitiveness and self-reliance.
We want to see increased production and access to markets; institutional and
market arrangements which maximise the competitiveness of the Australian
industry; and an industry willing and able to take responsibility for its own
affairs. To these ends we have deregulated the domestic wheat market and reoriented
the Australian Wheat Board away from being solely a bulk supplier and
towards differentiated product. The Board now has the ability to engage in
value-adding of wheat and wheat products.
Without going into details, grain growers can also expect major benefits to flow
from the recent competition policy agreement between the Commonwealth and
the States. 
I know Bob Collins wants to hear the industry's views about new marketing
arrangements before he puts considered options before the Government; and
we are expecting to hear these views soon after a series of grower meetings in
September.
The ultimate objective is to allow growers every chance to seek out production
and market opportunities, and the point of competitiveness is to help farmers
reach this objective without hindrance or unwarranted costs.
A self-reliant industry means one in which government participation is limited
to ensuring that any clear public interest requirements are met.
It also means an industry which is sustainable in an agronomic, economic and
environmental sense.
The drought has dramatically reduced grain production and this has led us to
undertake the biggest peacetime importation of grain in Australia's history.
Some 390,000 tonnes of whole grain has arrived in Australian ports since last
December and there is potential for another 100,000 tonnes under existing
import permits.
I know that is not a fact calculated to please people in this room.
I know that some of you have argued that the Government should divert some
of our export grains to domestic use.
But we took the view that the costs of this would be too high. It would damage
our relations with established customers. It would also be a bad business
decision because we can import the necessary grain for a lower price than we
are receiving on the export market.
We do not believe imports constitute a long-term threat to traditional suppliers
to the domestic market, if for no other reason than the much higher cost of
shipping and handling imported grain.
We understand that the issue of imported grain creates imperatives for our
quarantine and inspection services, we have therefore developed protocols to
prevent the introduction of exotic pests, diseases and weeds.
We have also developed appropriate cartage arrangements such as secure
transport systems and dust suppression measures and these will be trialed in
November. 
While we are vigorously protecting our national interest in quarantine matters,
we must also be mindful of our broader interests where Australia is currently
challenging the legitimacy of import standards in a number of countries and
our success will rely heavily on demonstrating that similar decisions affecting
our own industry have an objective scientific basis.
I will finish with these few remarks. Like other sectors of Australian industry,
Australian agriculture has made extraordinary adjustments in recent years.
Australian farmers have responded to the challenges of a rapidly changing
Australian and international economy.
They have proved their adaptability and at the same time confirmed what we
have always known about them that they are not only highly efficient, but
highly resilient and durable.
It has been one of the very beneficial by-products of the great economic
changes of recent years, that the relationships between the national
Government and Australian industry and the Australian workforce have been
substantially redefined.
This is true of our relationship with rural industry and nothing is more
important than that we continue to develop this relationship.
The fact is that we can't succeed without each other. We do have a common
interest and it is in the national interest that we recognise this.
In recent times the drought has dominated at least the public side of our
partnership; but it won't end with drought; and I look forward to developing with
you new strategies for the prosperity of rural Australia in the better times that
surely lie ahead.
Even allowing for future droughts and all the other problems which regularly
beset Australia's farmers, the potential is virtually unlimited.
The farmers in this room and their families are overdue for some rewards and I
can assure you we will do every practicable thing to see that they come your
way. Thank you. 



vA.
I I A'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR THE NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION EDUCATION
CAMPAIGN LAUNCH, BERLEI FACTORY, RYDALMERE, SYDNEY
8 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed Paul ( Elliott), Lord Mayor, Jennie George, Richard Glass,
the Managing Director of Berlei, and Berlei executives, and members of the
work force, workers here at the Berlei factory, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a great pleasure to be here today, to be party to the launching of this
campaign to provide information to Australians about superannuation. Award
superannuation is one of the great undertakings of th6 isfdecade, and it is
now starting to blossom as a result of the Budget measures we announced
just a few months ago. It will be such that by 2002 which is not far away
every Australian working person will have 15% of their income going on their
account into a superannuation fund into a superannuation account for them.
What this will mean is when they retire, someone joining the work force will
retire on what is now twice the age pension, someone who is in the work
force already in their 30s perhaps will retire on about three-quarters of the
age pension, plus the age pension. So, it's going to mean a dramatic lift in
the standard of living of Australians in retirement, and, of course, put together
a huge pool of national savings, which can make a country stronger, which
means we will rely less ' dhV6Yverseas savings and overseas debt, and which
means we can power along investment and employmnent and exports. So,
this is a scheme that came from firstly, a lot of iriiagination, and belief in the
fact that Australian working people would put some of their income away as
savings for their long run retirement. And because they would be prepared to
do that, the Government would also be prepared to put income away, by way
of the tax concessions and direct payment, paying the tax cuts into
superannuation accounts. So as a consequence, we are going to see as
they say a very large pool of savings develop on behalf of each and every
person. To give an example, someone on average weekly earnings now that's
someone on about $ 32-33,000 when they retire, they will retire on a lump 
sum just under half a million dollars. And someone on one and a half times
weekly earnings, will retire on a lump sum of over $ 600,000. And this will
produce an income stream in retirement which will guarantee them a much
higher standard of living than they have today.
You don't need to be a demographer to know that the Australian community is
aging. When my generation moves through to retirement, there will twice as
many retired aged people as there are today. And we will be relying upon the
people-the-n in ihelvork force to provide the standard of living in retirement
most of us have come to expect but there will be twice as many of us. So,
this Government, back in the 1980s with the ACTU saw the opportunity to
start to move towards some sort of national contributory scheme for all
workers, not just people in the public se~ f&amp; o0-r somfe p-rivate cdTpanies, but
for all workers where something was put away by employers on their behalf in
lieu of wages. Some of the Accords we did in the 1 980s with the ACTU were
built on claiming less in cash at the time to allow something to go away in
savings for the future. And that's now up to around it will be 9% in 3 or 4
years from now, and then to that we add the Budqet contributions of this year,
3% tax cuts paid as super, and 3% from employees themselves, so the 9%
becomes 15% 9 plus 3 plus 3. And what it will mean is that we will see a
huge lift in national savings. A decade ago we had about $ 40 billion in super
funds. This year we have got $ 180 billion, and in the year 2020 when this
scheme is fully mature and up and running, we think we will have $ 2 trillion
that is 2 thousand billion dollars in superannuation fund assets. And people
talk about our national debt, and ttiat is an issue. But our national debt is
$ 160 billion we have already got $ 180 billion in super fund ass-ets thit year.
And we are going to have something like 2 thousand billion dollars, as I say,
in about 2020, or one thousand billion by the year 2000 not so many years
away. So, this is a mighty change. This is something most countries would like to
see their Governments do with their work forces. And this has been done by
a Labor Government with the work force, through the Accord. And it's not
been done bytax concessions to high income tax payers it's been done by
the fair and equitable way of this being allowed to go, these tax concessions
being widely available to all working Australians.
One of the things that I am most particularly pleased about, and that is the
support which super has given to women. Jennie already made reference to
that, and she has been herself a great stickler and supporter of this
advantage coming through to Australian women. You know that the pattern
of Australian female employment has been in respect of super that wherever
a person was actually lucky enough to have a superannuation fund, a woman
would have that tallying up for her. But if she left work to have a family, it
would then be either paid out as a lump sum and finished and terminated,
and mostly what she would get would be her contributions back and that
was the end of it. And if she happened to come into the work force later, she
could try and pick something up afresh from a cold start, but there was no
continuity. Now, there's preservation to age 55. Now, every one every
working woman will have a benefit in superannuation. And in the case, say, 
of somebody going off to have a family, those earnings will continue to accrue
and will be there if and when that woman comes back into the work force.
And that will then grow and compound to age 55 under the tax concessions.
So, what we call preservation investing will be there for Australian women to
give them that support in their own name in their own right at a later stage
in their life. And this is, I think, an important social milestone, and a good
thing we have been able to do together.
So, there is a lot in this for the country, there's a lot in this for our future. We
need investment to get employment. But this is a big continent. The projects
that are growing all the time in this country as such that it is more than our
current national savings can afford, so therefore we put the call on overseas
savings or overseas debt. And this is where the current account and the debt
comes from. To deal with it, we need to do some things, like adding to our
national savings, like superannuation. We also need to do some things like
putting the Budget into surplus, which the Government has done. So you
have got public saving on the one hand, and you have got private saving with
superannuation on the other. These are the ways in the long term how we
will deal with our debt. Not some imagined productivity commission, or some
bit of economic fairy floss that wouldn't travel a yard under real scrutiny, but a
real national scheme, where the huge force the economic force of that
wealth going in 15% for everybody, every week, into the future. It will mean
a much greater pool of savings, higher levels on investment, therefore higher
levels of growth and employment, higher* levels of exports giving Australia
that sort of savings advantage it's never really had in the past. And, as we
say, that standard of living in retirement.
One of the issues in the United States at the moment as they say, one of the
concerns of Middle America is that many Americans believe that they won't
be provided for in old age. They won't be provided for because they know
there will be many more retired aged people when the baby boom generation
retires than is the case today, and they don't think the tax system, or the
public system, will keep income support up to them. Well, in this country, a
Labor Government thought about all that a decade ago, so that when we get
to that position, you will have people basically on twice the aged pension. So
someone on average weekly earn2injgs just before they retire will actually
retire on an income the same as'average weekly earnings. They will go out
on average weekly earnings, and their pension plus super will add up to
about the same amount. And then that will improve to a point, and then it
drops away, because it is there to support the great bulk of the work force.
So, it's a great change this is a great national scheme. It certainty is, in
financial terms, the greatest private savings arrangement that Australia has
ever had, and by launching this pr6gram today, we are trying to tell people
about it to involve them with it, to give them some confidence that the system
is going to be managed well for them, and that it is going to do good things.
I was particularly pleased to be at Berlei here today, and glad of the
information which Richard and his colleagues were able to give me about the
clothing and textile industry. Because when we started on the big reforms in
clothing and textile 10 years ago, people were talking doom and gloom " that 
will be the end of TCF, it will be finished, there is no way we will be able to
compete with people abroad, we won't be able to make high quality
sophisticated things, we will simply be deluged with imports". Now, by again
taking the initiative and having that imagination and belief in Australians and
this industry that it could do better, we are seeing today a modern clothing
industry in Australia, which is not only providing products for this market, but
it is also providing for exports as well.
But the other thing that I thought was interesting about Berlei, was that the
building and the land was owned by the State Superan -nuation Board, and it
makes the point that here is this wonderful fe-iiniic1 -capacity her-t6 produce
a high quality garment, coming out of one of Australia's most committed firms
in this industry, in facilities which are owned by a superannuation fund. And
we are going to see more and more of this all around the country as your
savings will be placed in Australian industry and we will continue to see a
growth in the nature of the stock market, and a maturation where we start
seeing the stock and the investment industry actually supporting the
innovative companies, and we will be seeing a pool of savings needed to be
placed, to actually help all that along. I think this is a very encouraging and
exciting prospect.
So, I would like to, today, thank many people for their commitment to this
great national initiative to our colleague partners in the ACTU, represented
by Jennie George, to all those people in the work force who believed in
something better, in putting something away for tomorrow, to the industry we
have now got to build, to the investment industry who have to now meet the
challenge of what the Government has created, and to all those Australians
who know there can be something better out there in the future. We hope
that this campaign will answer some of those questions what is super? what
are my entitlements? how can I take my money? what is the Government
going to contribute? is the money going to be safe etc? what am I likely to
retire on? These are the questions that we know Australians want answers
to, this campaign is about opening up some of those opportunities to provide
them with those answers. I thank Paul Elliott for being involved with
the having the stewardship of this campaign, iifor those involved with it, I
am very happy today to be here today to officially launch it. Thank you.
ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING, ' 1945: WAR PEACE', AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL,
11 AUGUST 1995
I am delighted to be here today to open the ' 1945: War and Peace' exhibition,
and to launch the Australian War Memorial's Public Appeal.
I regularly make the pilgrimage down Anzac Parade and I happily do so
because the War Memorial is one of our great public institutions.
It documents the experiences of Australians at war. It preserves and protects
our national memory.
And it educates our young people in what J S Manifold called " the old heroic
virtues" of Australia.
It inducts them into the Australian faith.
Last year I launched the Memorial's first ever Capital Appeal. The Appeal
aims to raise $ 20 million to renew the Memorial to redevelop the major
galleries and to enliven the stories which they tell.
The Federal Government gave the lead gift of $ 2.5 million to the Capital
Appeal and since then the State and Territory governments have together
pledged $ 2 million.
And corporate Australia has also been part of the effort.
Today we are launching the next stage of the Capital Appeal, the public
phase. Over the coming months, millions of Australians will be asked to
donate to the Memorial and I'm sure they will rally to the cause.
Money alone, of course, can not rebuild a great museum.
I'm convinced that the public appeal will also engage the community in the
affairs of the Memorial and encourage a sense of its community ownership. 
Let me say that I think it is entirely appropriate that the first exhibition arising
out of the Capital Appeal looks at the Australia of 1945.
1945 was the last year of the most destructive war in history.
It was the year in which an alliance of free nations finally answered the
challenge to the values which sustain our civilisation.
1945 was the year of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
But it was also the year in which Australia welcomed home hundreds of
thousands of our uniformed men and women.
' 1945: War and Peace' illustrates to new generations how the lives of
Australians were affected by the war and the dreams that were held for the
peace. It is a profoundly human exhibition and it displays some wonderful relics.
A sweetheart brooch sent by a soldier to his mother.
A handkerchief signed by her dad's comrades which was a seven year old
girl's seventh birthday present.
A baton belonging to Blamey, and the fuselage of a Beaufort bomber.
This exhibition tells us some wonderful stories. It tells us, for example, about
Moira Atkins, who served as a nurse on the island of Labuan. In 1945, she
won a beauty contest and with it a kiss from Mountbatten. I'm delighted to
learn that Moira is here today, and I look forward to meeting her.
It's also a very democratic exhibition. I'm told that those visitors who recall
VP Day can contribute their memories to the display and in doing so
strengthen and deepen the story.
In this way, ' 1945: War and Peace' is a conversation part of the great
national conversation of the Australia Remembers year.
The curator of this exhibition, Peter Stanley, and the rest of the War Memorial
staff, have done a marvellous job of presenting this story. But of course they
cannot claim authorship because that honour belongs to the whole World
War II generation.
It belongs to Australia's fighting men. And it belongs to those Australians who
stayed at home and performed miracles of production so that the war could
be fought and won. 
If a single message can be derived from ' 1945: War and Peace' and a single
lesson learnt it is that we are strongest when we work together.
The people that we see and read about in these galleries were united in
pursuit of a common cause and a just cause.
The Australians of 1945 believed in themselves, trusted each other, and
loved Australia.
Today, as much as ever, we need their belief.
We also need their energy, and their sense of purpose. Because while the
achievements of the World War II generation were great, their task remains
unfinished.
That task is to build and protect a strong, fair, prosperous and self-reliant
nation. We owe the same duty as the Australians of World War II: a duty to
the next generation, to the future Australia.
And the best way to honour the lives of the Australians of 1945 is to continue
their work.
It is important that as the war recedes in our history, it does not also recede in
our memory.
This generation of Australians and the generations to come must never forget
that 40,000 names appear on the Memorial's Roll of Honour.
Let me congratulate all those people who are working so hard to reinvigorate
the Australian War Memorial the people's museum. In particular, the Chair
of the National Appeal, Dame Beryl Beaurepaire, former Director Brendan
Kelson and Deputy Director Michael McKernan, and the Head of
Development Ros Casey.
Together, these people are leaving a marvellous legacy to the Memorial and
no less to the nation.
I am very happy to officially open the ' 1945: War Peace' exhibition and
launch the Public Appeal and may I commend both the exhibition and the
Appeal to all Australians.
Thank you. 



78Y~
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS GALA TRIBUTE, PALAIS THEATRE, ST KILDA,
13 AUGUST 1995
Tonight, and throughout this year of Australia Remembers, we have celebrated
the spirit of a generation of Australians.
It has been a bit like a giant birthday party for our parents and grandparents a
kind of national golden wedding in which we celebrate the bonds between us
all. And it has been at least as good for those giving the party as for the guests of
honour. It has been a chance for all of us to reflect on the gifts this generation gave us.
And to remember the price they paid in doing it.
What great parents and grandparents they have been.
They gave us the greatest gifts anyone can have. They gave us peace and
freedom. They gave us this country and a way of life we can call our own.
To do it, they gave up their own freedom. They gave up their lives. They gave
all their labour. And all their love.
They gave us an example to live by.
If we want to know what courage or duty or mateship mean, we can turn to
them. If we want to know what it means to be Australian, we can turn to them.
If we want to know what we can achieve as Australians, we can turn to them.
Many things have changed including the music but the essential things
remain. The fundamental things apply. 
2
Even half of their courage, half of their love of Australia, half of their spirit will
take us a very long way in life.
This concert has been a celebration of their spirit.
Tonight we will all take some of it away with us.
I thank everyone who made this event possible: and I know I speak for all
Australians when I say, above all, thank you to those who, at home and
abroad, fought the war and saved Australia. 



AIi;
PRIME MINISTER 1
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPR
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS PACIFIC TRIBUTE LUNCHEON TOWNS VILLE
14 AUGUST 1995 ** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY m
Ambassador, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a pleasure and a privilege to be in Townsville to pay tribute to this brave city
on the 50th anniversary of the end of the war in the Pacific.
I have always had a feeling Townsvilles story is probably not as well known as it
should be.
Not all Australians are aware that the city was bombed on four occasions in July
1942; and not everyone appreciates the stress and hardship it endured during the
War.
The Japanese airmen were not as accurate as they might have been with their
bombs, but the incidents do give us some idea of the pressure the people of
Townsville were under and the strategic importance of Townsville to the conduct
of the war.
In the darkest days when a Japanese invasion of the Australian mainland seemed
imminent a report by Sir John Lavarak recommended that 10,000 civilians be
evacuated south. The evacuation never happened, but between 1939 and 1942
about twenty five percent of Townsville's population left
This place was an entry point for refugees from South -east Asia after the fall of
Singapore, and a refuge for soldiers, sailors and airmen returning from battle in
New Guinea and the Pacific.
Townsville was also, of course, a major embarkation point for troops and
supplies, and it was the most important Allied airbase in Australia 
This was the home of the " Kennedy' Regiment, 31 st Battalion which served in the
Middle East and at Kokoda, Buna and Gona; and, when linked with the 51 st
Battalion. at Lae and Ramu Valley, and at Balikpapan in Borneo.
Then, as now, Townsville was recognised as a vital link in the chain of Australia's
northern defence.
As Allied forces led by the United States first resisted and then began to drive
back the Japanese, Townsville's role became pivotal.
It was the home to the 5th American Air Force and I believe it still is, in the
sense that they have Freedom of Entry to the city.
Its presence involved thousands of civilians and military men and women, both
American and Australian, in the service of the US Army Air Force.
During the War Townsville was host, all told, to 90,000 troops the highest
soldierlcivilian ratio of any Australian city.
There were two RAAF squadrons No 7 Beaufort Bomber and No 80 Kittyhawk.
The No 1 Wireless Unit of the RAAF was located here at a top secret Central
Bureau of Intelligence base intercepting and decoding Japanese signals.
Among those engaged in Intelligence were members of the Women's Auxiliary
Australian Airforce and the Australian Women's Army Service.
The RAN worked out of Townsville of course, shipping Australian and American
troops to New Guinea and the Pacific Islands and providing escorts and patrols.
As the most important Allied Military and Air base in the north of Australia and the
Headquarters, for Naval Intelligence, no city in Australia no community in
Australia made a greater contribution to victory in the Pacific.
You can't turn a civilian town into a military base without putting strain on the
community. But Townsville clearly wthstood the strain. The civilian population
returned, the city grew and developed.
Today the city combines thetwin sads of tshstory as afrofer ownanda
grrison town. It has an important place In Australia's economic future and a
continuing strategic role In our defence.
Two thousand nine hundred soldiers of the Australian Army's Third Brigade are
here as part of the Ready Deployment Force. Among their many essential tasks
are conventional mil" tr operaitions; protected evacuations of Australian nationals,
and the provision of personnel and equipment for UN or multinational operations. 
3
The Brigade has recently distinguished itself in operations in Somalia, Cambodia
and Bougainville and provided support to Australia's medical contingent In
Rwanda which arrives back in Townsville in about ten days.
The R. AAF took over Townsville Aerodromne in 1939 and it maintains a significant
presence, with 1,250 personnel providing support for air operations.
The Army's 5th Aviation Regiment, which is also based at RMAF Townsville, was
deployed to Cambodia to support UN sponsored elections, and more rcntly to
Buka in Bougainville as part of Operation Lagoon.
So the Townsville tradition continues. As I've said on other occasions, this is one.
of the outstanding cities of Australia.
It has the strength which comes from its place on the northern frontier. It has
withstood the ups and downs of droughts and depressions which afflict rural life.
And carried more than its share of the weight of the war and emerged stronger
than it began.
In 1995 there are signs in Townsville to remind us of the past in particular those
memorials to the great alliance with the United States the Coral Sea Memorial
and the memorial to the 5th American Air Force.
With Ed Perkins here today I want to py tribute to the American men and women
who fought and died so bravely in the war against Japan they fought for our
freedom as weli as America's, and you may be sure that this country will never
forget that
But, above all, today I want to pay tribute on behalf of the nation to the people of
Townsville, for all they did for Australia during the war and all they continue to do.
I mentioned the visible signs of Townsville's contribution to the war but I think
the real indication lies in all that has been done since, all that is being done now.
It lies in the spirit of the place and the people. I think that is what counted and
today It has been my privilege to join you here in tribute. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF HEROES WALK, TOWNSVILLE, 14 AUGUST 1995
*' CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Con Sciacca, Councillor Tony M~ iooney and Mrs Mooney, Keith Payne VC and Don
Starcevich, son of Private Leslie Starcevich VC, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. I'm delighted to be in Anzac Park this morning to open this Heroes Walk.
During the Australia Remembers year, we have remembered the efforts of the
World War Two generation of Australians. We have remembered those who
worked on the homefront as well as those who served on the battlefield.
But this memorial honours the bravest of the brave.
It honours the twenty Australians who received the nation's highest honour for
valour during the WWII the Victoria Cross and especially the twelve recipients
who fought in the Pacific War.
They gave their all in defence of this country and many of them gave their lives.
Today we pay tribute to people of rare quality men of great courage and
resourcefulness and sustained by their belief in Australia.
Men like Corporal Jack French from Crows Nest, near Toowoomba, who overcame
three Japanese machine gun nests at Milne Bay before succumbing.
Or Private Richard Kelliher, who enlisted in the 2nd AIF in Brisbane, who silenced
a machine gun post at Lae and saved his wounded section commander.
It is to these men and all their comrades that we pay tribute today.
I know that Keith Payne VC from the Vietnam War is here and we acknowledge
his great service to Australia.
The winners of the Victoria Cross are surely all heroes. But all of Australia's
fighting men and women of World War Two and the millions of Australians who
stood behind them deserve the title too.
We remember them all as heroes.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
-SPEECH TO THE AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS NATIONAL YOUTH FORUM,
BRISBANE GIRLS' GRAMMAR SCHOOL, BRISBANE, 15 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Can I say I am delighted to be at Brisbane Girls' Grammar School and to say
how pleased I am that so many young Australians have taken up the theme of
Australia Remembers and have engaged themselves with it.
I think it is apparent to you, if it wasn't earlier, that most of the things we
celebrate and the people we remember were young Australians in the main,
young Australians as you are today young Australians and that they had all
the hopes and aspirations that you have. They were very much at the point
in their own lives, as many of you are at today, and yet at this level of the
emotional development they carried the brute force of an assault upon
themselves, upon their life, upon Australia and it was belief in this country, a
belief in what we have created here, of what have we represented and faith in
themselves and those around them that let them fight the fight against
tyranny and oppression to a hard won victory which has given us all liberty
and peace. I mean that is what we remember. Remember that faith and
remember that belief.
Perhaps it came home to me most when I was in Kokoda in 1992 on that
same little green square that exists today, that existed then, where the first
shots by Australian combatants against the Japanese marines in defence of
Australia were fired. And that morning at 6.00 am, with the mist low over the
village as it started to clear, young Australian men in shorts and singlets
some 18 years of age, fought the best the Japanese Imperial Army could
throw at them.
Now that is people at Year 12 age, or approaching Year 12, to be sitting there
in that tropical environment facing the strongest and the best combat troops
the Japanese could throw at our country. So you had to believe in something
and you had to have faith in something to carry on and they did and they
fought a valiant fight for Australia and the rest is the history we know. 
2
That is who we are remembering and we see the diggers, now in their
late 60s or their 70s or even the First World War diggers older than that, and
you are prone to think about them, but you must think about them as young
people because it was their young lives which were disrupted and it was the
younger lives, the lives of even younger people, who were lost.
I remember walking through the cemetery at Kanchanaburi in Thailand, not
far from the Burma railway, looking at the number of young men, young
Australians who died, the day that I was born 18 January 1944. And you
know that it makes the point poignantly to you, they died so that your life
could be complete and I said in the speech for the Unknown Soldier, when we
buried the Unknown Soldier, that he was all of them, one of them, but one of
us. And they all of them were one of us.
I know we think today that we being the people of democracy and liberty, that
of course we would have won the war. We will back it up that the right side
won, the good people won, the good guys won. But it didn't necessarily have
to go that way and in the war in Europe which is so inextricably linked to the
war in the Pacific, that had Hitler made an assault on Britain in 1940, had he
not attacked the Soviet Union in 1941, had the Russian people not held out
Leningrad from 1941-1944, then we might have faced a completely different
world. With a successful Nazi Germany, with the Russians not in the war, where we
faced the Japanese with the United States, and the toe-hold in Normandy
might just simply have been that a toe-hold and been simply as we
remember Gallipoli from the First World War.
The fact that we succeeded and had we not it would have been a race
between Hitler and the United States to develop the nuclear weapon and it
might not have been Hiroshima and Nagasaki, but it could have also been
British cities and American cities. So it was close and I have no doubt that
the United States once that great machine finally wound itself up, under the
leadership of Franklin Roosevelt, that we would have defeated the Japanese
in the Pacific. But it might have been a different war. The whole environment
may have been different. But notwithstanding our sense of democracy and
liberty in our righteousness we may not have been at least the early victors.
So Australia was a more innocent country then and a small country.
A smaller much more innocent place than today, where we are perhaps less
naive and more worldly and so the assault and the affront was greater and
one had to have that deep sense of democracy and that clear installation of
the values to actually run a fight like this and to win. And so when we see our
relatives, our dead relatives, laying around the battlefields of East Asia and
Europe, we know that they were there confronting with some substantial
uncertainty that period in their lives which may have seen a different world for
them and for us.
So it had to mean something. 50 years on, we can't say oh well that was just
something in the past. This sort of stoicism, this sort of bravery, heroism, 
belief in Australia, belief in what we created here, belief in our values, had to
mean something. And so I am exceptionally pleased that so many
Australians remember and so many young Australians remember and have
learned about the period.
Now today the Prime Minister of Japan made a statement and one that I think
will bring substantial pleasure to many of us in this country and many of you
I think all of you. And I will read some of it because I think it is a testimony to
the battle that we fought. And he said, and I am reading part of it, " our task is
to convey to younger generations the horrors of war so that we never repeat
the errors in our history." This is what we have always asked of the
Japanese. That they teach their children what happened. And he is saying
that " our task is to convey to younger generations the horrors of war so that
we never repeat the errors in our history. Furthermore I will continue in all
sincerity to do my utmost in efforts being made on the issues arisen from the
war, in order to further strengthen the relations of trust between Japan and
those other countries. Now upon this historic occasion, the 50th anniversary
of the war's end, we should bear in mind that we must look into the past to
learn from the lessons of history and ensure that we do not stray from the
path to peace and prosperity of human society in the future. We do not
stray," he says. " During a certain period, in the not too distant past, Japan
followed a mistaken national policy. Advanced on the road to war only to
ensnare the Japanese people in a fateful crisis and through it colonial rule
and aggression caused tremendous damage and suffering to the people of
many countries, particularly those of Asian nations. In the hope that no such
mistake be made in the future, I regard in the spirit of humility, these
irrefutable facts of history and express here, once again, my feelings of deep
remorse and state my heartfelt apology. Allow me also to express my
feelings of profound mourning to all victims, both at home and abroad, of that
history. Building from our deep remorse on this occasion of the
anniversary of the end of the war, Japan must eliminate self-righteous
nationalism, promote international coordination as a responsible member of
the international community, and thereby advance these principles of peace
and democracy." He finishes, amongst other things, by saying " it is my
conviction that in this way alone can Japan atone for its past and lay to rest
the spirits of those who perished. It is said that one can rely on good faith
and so, in this time of remembrance, I declare to the people of Japan and
abroad my intention to make good faith the foundations of our Government
policy and this is my vow.'
Now that is a powerful statement and one that acknowledges for many
Australians the hurt that happened, the wrong that was done, the nationalism
which was invested wrongly, mistakenly and the sorrow that it expressed.
( tape break)
We should never be at any stage sanguine about liberty and democracy.
Those of you who are studying modem history will know that probably one of
the shots that started the First World War was in Sarajevo in 1914 where a
member of the then ruling royal family was assassinated and yet now, in 
Sarajevo 80 years later we saw the force last week of 2700 people machine
gunned and buried in mass graves, the sort of numbers that we as a country
lost on the death march in Sandakan, which we now remember the detail. I
think all that means to us is that we must be eternally vigilant about
democracy and liberty and about the value of each human person and about
human rights and it underlies again why we should remember, if not simply to
remember the fight for liberty and democracy by those young Australians
years ago. But, to remember how we need to be vigilant to preserve those
liberties today. Thank you for being interested in this remembrance program.
ends k 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME INISTER THE HON P J KEATING. N2
NATIONAL COMMEMORA17ON SERVICE V P DAY, BRISBANE. 15 AUGUST 1995
'' CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY'
I have been privileged in the past three years to visit some of the cemeteries in Asia and
the Pacific and in Europe where Australian servicemen and women lie buried. It has
been my duty to utter some words of tribute on behalf of the Australian people and
participate in services to commemorate their deeds and sacrifice.
It has been one of the great privileges of my life. But it is a humbling experience. No
Australian can fail to be affected by these places.
This year, as part of the Australia Remembers program, many veterans of our World War
HI campaigns have made pilgrimages to the battlefields and these cemeteries. I think it is
beyond the capacities of my generation to appreciate just how deep their feelings must
have run.
It is not, however, beyond us to understand and it is our duty to try. It is our duty to
convey to our children what the deaths of those Australians mean to all of us and will
always mean.
Most Australians will never stand among the graves in Bomana and Lae, or Singapore or
Kanchanabuni or Yokohama or in any of the cemeteries in Europe, Sritain or the Middle
East. But all of us should know that Australians are buried there.
We should know why, and the meaning it contains for us.
We cannot know what their last days were like; what suffering they went through, what
pain and longing and despair they endured so far from home. We can only imagine.
And fifty years later we can feel the loss of their lives as our loss.
To stand among those graves is to recognise the profound truth of the ties that bind us as
Australians. These are Australians like ourselves. But these Australians gave their
young lives: gave them so we might live in peace and freedom, gave them so we might
enjoy the blessings of life and enjoy them in the country they loved-
Contemplate those graves, or the 40,000 names on the World War II Honour Roll at the
Australian War MemoriaL and the story of this country, and the story of every one who
calls it home, takes on an irresistible meaning.
It instils in our national life a sense of duty.
The story tells us that there was a generation of men and women who so loved this
country, and the freedoms and way of life we now enjoy, they were prepared to lay down
their lives. There were Australians who so loved what is just, they defended it to the
death. We cannot think about this without understanding the debt we owe them, and the duty we
have to honour their memory.
To truly honour them is much more than a ritual task. It is to take the knowledge of their
sacrifice into our daily lives and the life of Australia-It it is to love this country and give
to it as they did which is to say with that same faith from which their inspiration, effort
and endurance flowed.
It is to believe in freedom as they did, defend freedom as they did. To work together as
they did.
It is to make this country as strong and secure as they made it.
Time has changed our perspective on the world and on ourselves. We have had to adjust
our thinking to accommodate necessities. In many ways I think we are better for it. It
may be that we are less naive and more worldly than the Australians of fifty years ago. I
believe we are more tolerant and more open.
But if we are to succeed as we should we will always need their strength, their collective
spirit, their sense of duty, their faith. We will need their inspiration
I hope that this Australia Remembers year has reminded us all of these things.
Never did a generation of Australians have more reason to celebrate than those of
years ago. In pure and simple terms they were celebrating a victory. They had fought for
what they believed in and won. They had truted in their values and in each other and
they had been vindicated. Now they had every reason to expect the rewards of peace and.
prosperity. What we have done this year is to join them in this celebration, in this same confident
belief in the futue. 
3
Today we should recognise that we have the same unbreakable link to those people who
danced in the streets 50 years ago as we do with those who lie in those gaves in New
Guinea and Borneo and Thailand and Japan.
We are part of the one story.
I think this Australia Remembers year will have been a triumph if it has reminded us of
that I hope our commemorations this year have remided the Australians of today that
they have as much reason to celebrate as those of 50 years ago.
And the reason is the same-We are a free and independent people, we live in peace and
we have a great future.
And we have these things in common and we have a duty to Australia. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MIMiSTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP'
FREEDOM FLAME CEREMONY, BRISBANE, 15 AUGUST 1995
*" CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*"
This has been a very good year in the lifes of Australia. It was a great year when
the war was won. and I think this fftieth anniversary year will go down as a very
good one.
We could not live upto the deeds, but Ithink wecan say that in the year of
" Australia Remembers" the people of Australia lived up to the memory.
And we have remembered. We do remember. We have felt the bonds between
us and those Australians who, with our alies, fought and won the greatest of all
victorles fifty year ego
VP means Victory in the Pacific. It has also been called VJ Day Victory over
Japan and some people thought that is what we should call it In Australia.
I think most of us f OWtfirstt uterIst reafly important one -the " V for
victory.. The victory over tyrny and aggression. The victory for freedom
decency and justice. The victory for peace.
That is what we are celebrating.
And I think there Is reason to bellev that we have a little more cause to celebrate
aftr today's statement by the Prime Minister of Japan.
Today Mr Murayama acknowledged the " Irretf~ tl % Wta of Japanese
aggression in World War 11 and the " tremendous damrage and suffeing" it
caused. Mr Murayarna said: " I regard, in aspiit of humility, these irrefuitable facts of
history, and express here once again my feelings of deep remorse, and state my
heartfelt apoloy. 
I am sure all Australians welcome Mr Murayarna's statement. We all feel that it is
essential for the Japanese people to know and acknowledge the truth about the
past.
Australians have learned a lot about the past this year. We have learned a lot
about the war and what victory meant.
And we have learned how fortunate we are that we still have the things for which
Australians fought
We are free few people were ever so free, few countries were ever. so
democratic. Few have ever enjoyed for so long the peace we have enjoyed in the past fifty
years. We have our liberty, we have our rights, and we are at peace few nations were
ever so fortunate.
" Australia Remembers" has been a way of saying that we do not take this for
granted a way of reminding ourselves that we never can.
To remember has been to recognise that these great gifts were delivered to us at
immeasurable human cost.
It has been to remind us all that peace and freedom are hard won and we must
be prepared to defend them.
To remember has been to be reminded that when democracy needed defending
in Europe, Australia sent help.
And when we neee help, it was sent to us.
When Australia remembered this year we remembered the help we received from
the United States.
We remembered all those from Britain and the countries of the Commonwealth
who fought alongside Australians, suiffiered in prison camps with Australians, died
and lie buried with Australians.
To remember the Second World War Is to be reminded that free people have a
duty to freedom everywhere.
That might be the greatest lesson of all.
This year has been a great one for another reason. 
It has reminded us that while our world has changed dramatically, and while the
young Australians of today are very different to those who fought the war fifty
years ago, the bonds between our generations are unbreakable.
It has reminded us that the passage of time and. changes in perspective and
fashion cannot after the fact that we are the same people that we are part of the
same Australian story.
We have all drawn inspiration from remembering the deeds of the war generation.
I sincerely hope that that great generation has drawn some comfort from seeing
us inspired.
We are all a little stronger for this year. And Australia is a little stronger.
We not only know more about the war and what we won from it; I venture to say
we know more about how to win.
We know more about each other, more about the value of men and women from
all parts of the continent, all backgrounds and all parts of the world, working
together and sticking together.
We certainly know more about what it is to be Australian and we know more
about the duty that implies.
Celebrating the generation of 1945 has taught us that it is our duty to live up to
their love for this country and the sacrifice they made for it.
It has taught us to believe in ourselves, defend freedom and cherish peace.
Above all, it has taught us to be like those at Kokoda, or in the camps of Thailand
and Burma to keep up the faith and keep going.
I thank everyone who has made Australia Remembers such a wonderful event
every organiser, every worker and every participant
And most of all, I thank every member of that magnificent generation of
Australians who won that victory for all of us fifty years ago.
I v-
A d. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY T13E PRIME NMqNSTER THE HON P J KEATING, MY
FOR THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THlE SOUTH PACIFIC ENVIRONMENT
uMIN S S mMEEIG, HERITAGE HOTEL BRISBANE,
16 AUGUST
I am very pleased to be able to speak to you today both as Prime Minister of Australia
and as Chair of the South Pacific Forum.
This is an important meeting the first time Environment Ministers from the South
Pacific Forumn have ever met together.
So it is very disappointing that the event which has brought it about is such an unhappy
one France's decision on I' 3; Juxne to resume the testing of nuclear weapons in the
Pacific. The response to that decision both within this regon and outside it was swift and strong.
Much swifter and stronger, I am sure, than the Government of France expected.
The reactions reflected, I think, a sense of betrayal. Betrayal by one of the current
nuclear powers, which had only recently pledged to exercise the ' utmost restraint! in
testing. Betrayal by a democracy. A betrayal of the hopes all of us felt with the end of
the Cold War that the world might finally free itself from the awful threat of nuclear
destruction. The French decision was a bad decision, because it put at risk our efforts to secure two of
the basic pillars of a non-nuclear world the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and
universal membership of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
And within this region the region, far-from France, where the test are to be conducted
it raised particular concerns, of course, about the environmental damage the testing
program rmght cause.
In response to Frances decision many countries around the world have raised their voices
in protest Action has been taken by countries individually, in regional forums and
globally in the United Nations and other international organisations. 
For its part, the South Pacific region contains some of the worlds smallest and most
ecologically vulnerable states. But all of them are in a profound material and spiritual
relationship with the Pacific Ocean. And through the South Pacific Forum especially,
their voice has been heard in this international outcry.
Immediately after the French Government's announcement, a Ministerial Mission from
the Forum visited Paris to express our concerns directly to the French-The delegation
was led by the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Evans. President Dowiyogo of
Nauru, who is with us at this meeting, was present, too, together with representatives of
Papua New Guinea, New Zealand and Western Samoa.
Since then, a Regional Action Committee has been set up with the assistance of the
Forum Secretariat to coordinate our responses to the testing program. It will meet again
tomorrow here in Brisbane.
We are taking actions in other parts of the world, too. For example, Forum diplomatic
representatives i Washington from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Western Samoa, New Zealand and Australia have made joint
representations on nuclear issues to members of Congress and the Administration.
I want to take this opportunity to thank Secretary General Tabai, in particular, for the
enormous effort he has put into developing and coordinating the Forum response.
The campaign against French nuclear testing by Forum members has been strong and
consistent And I believe it has already been useful for example, in encouraging the
welcome French decision on 9 August to pursue a zero threshold in the negotiations for a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. But there is much further to go.
We wI have a further opportunity to review where matters stand at the Forum meeting
in Madang next month.
An important point to underline is that none of the responses to the testing decision by
forum members has been motivated by hostility to France or to its role in the Pacific.
Still less have our actions been the result of any antipathy towards the French people or
French culture. It has concerned me whenever that line has been breached in public
protests. We are opposed, simply, to this single bad decision. And we want to see it changed.
Over recent years, with the Maftignon Accords in New Caledonia and the 1992 French
moratorium on nuclear testing, our region's relations with France had probably never
been better.
That is the situation we want to sec again a productive and creative French engagement
with this region. 
But the testing decision has apin raised questions about how well the French
Government understands the attitudes and concerns of the people of this region.
Because the region's response should not have come as a surprise to President Chirac or
his advisers.
Our history of opposition to the testing of nuclear weapons and the dumping of nuclear
waste in this region has been long and consistent
It has been expressed in a number of ways over many years: in communiques and
declarations of successive South Pacific Forum meetings; in the 1985 Treaty of
Raratonga and in the 1993 South Pacific Regional Environment Protection Convention.
This meeting is a further practical expression of our concern about the nuclear issue. I
want to thank my colleague, John Faulkner, for the arrangements he has made to bring it
about. You will be focusing on the environmental consequences of the French Governments
decision. Australia's Chief Scientist Professor Michael Pitman has brought together a
scientific advisory group of scientists with nuclear, geological, seismic, meteorological
and marine expertise to provide you with scientific advice.
You will have an opportunity to review this evidence and to consider a possible
monitoring regime for the region. Your recommendations will provide a very important
input into the discussions when Forum leaders meet next month in Maclang.
Soon after President Chirac announced his decision about testing I wrote an article for
the French newspaper LeMonde as Chairman of the South Pacific Forums in which I
tried to convey to ordinary French people why it is that we in the Pacific oppose the
testing program SO stron gly.
I wrote that " There is a world of difference between studying a map of the Pacific in
Europe and living on the shores of the ocean in Sydney or Brisbane or Auckland or Suva.
" The map puts these places a long way from Mururoa. But when you live in these places
you know that, vast thought it is, the South Pacific is one environment and it binds all
those who share it."
That knowledge which we all share is why this meeting is being held. It is why the issues
you are considering are so important.
It is why people in all the Forum countries will join me in wishing you well in your
discussions. 



TEL: 22. Rug. 95 18: 2U No . U22 t'. LJ.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MIMiSTER, TilE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER FOR PRESIDENT RAMOS OF THE P11ILIPPINES
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, TUESDAY 22 AUGUST 1995
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
On behalf of the Government of Australia and all Australians, I warmly welcome
President Ramnos, his wife and his party to Australia.
Before you left Manila, Mr President, you said that you were embarking on a journey
of friendship and opportunity.
That is exactly how we see your visit, too.
And although you are making your first visit here as President of the Philippines, you
and your service to your country are widely known in Australia.
People here along with much of the rest of the world were deeply moved in early
1986 by the images we saw of the tense struggle taking place in Manila where the
People's Power movement and Mrs AquinQ. stood their ground in support of
democracy. You played a courageous and vital role in that struggle.
In the following years, when the restoration of democracy was threatened time after
time, we observed and deeply admired your loyalty in defending the rebirth of your
country's democratic political institutions.
And in your first three years as President, you have displayed the same tenacity and
courage in implementing reform, in opening up the Philippines economy and allowing
it to regenerate.
The Philippines return to growth well over 5 per cent expected this year and the
large amounts of foreign investment now flowing into your country, are reflections of
your personal conumitment to responsible economic management and deregulation.
In your efforts, you have been able to draw on a private sector with business and
managerial skills that are highly regarded throughout the region. We particul1arly
welcome the members of the business delegation you have brought with you.
22. Rug. 95 18: 20 No. U22 
TEL: 22. Rug. 95 18: 20 No. 022 P. 02
2
Mr President, you made an important point in a speech last year, and you have since
demonstrated its truth: the truth that political democracy, social discipline and
sustained economic development are not incompatible.
By your succcss at home in consolidating democracy and reforming the economy you
have also given the Philippines a new standing in the regional and international
community. It is very fitting that you and the Philippines will have the honour of
hosting the summit meeting of APEC leaders in 1996.
Mr President, you will find Australia much changed since your last visit in the late
1970s.
We, too, have opened up our economy. With the assistance of eight successive
accords with the union movement we have ensured that the Australian business
environment has become more competitive. Last year Australia had one of the fastest
growing economies in the OECD and corporate profits were at historic highs.
Moreover, that growth has come with low inflation and high job growth.
Our utilities, telecommu ni cations industry, waterfront, civil aviation, and rail transport
have undcrgone dramatic reform. We have introduced a national superannuation
scheme to help lift our savings. Our education and training systems have received
massive investments.
But beyond these changes, Australia has been coming to terms with its history, with its
region and with its own society.
With native title legislation, a new epoch has begun for our indigenous peoples an
historic wrong-has been righted, at least in legal terms, and we are determined to see
that social justice follows.
Our place in the Asia-Pacific region is no longer disputed. Geography and economic
integration have driven this trend. But there is more to it than geography and
commerce. Important changes are taking place in the way Australians think about themselves not
leug because more than half the immidgrants joining Australia's multicultural society
each year come from Asia.
And Australians are now debating our future constitutional arrangements.
The changes have been fundamental. But they have been achieved without rejecting
our history.
In all this, it seems to me, there are important parallels with the recent experience of
the Philippines. Both of us have had to come to terms with our history and the
necessities which global change is imposing on us. We understand that we have to
make our own way in the world. We have thought hard about the sort of societies we
wish to be, and what our role will be in the world of the 2 1st century. 
TEL: 22. Rug.-95 18: 20 NO. 022 P. O'
3
And, not least, we have had to work hard to rework the images others hold of us.
I amn sure that your visit will contribute to this process for both our countries, Mr
President:* Australia and the Philippines have a good foundation on which to build.
Mr President, you said you come here as a friend and the commemorations this year
for the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the war remind us what close and longstanding
friends we arc. The Philippine government'-in-exile of President Quezon was
headquartered in Australia during the war. Earlier today we launched at the War
Memorial a book on the Battle of Leyte Gulf. This was the largest engagement by
Australian vessels during the war, and that victory began the liberation of the
Philippines. Australia hits provided economic assistance to the Philippines for many years. We are
a significant source of training for your defence force.
Our trade is growing well. But there is no doubt that our economic ties ought to be
more substantial than they are at present.
I am confident that this will happen. The opportunities have never been greater as our
two economies have opened up. A sign of what lies ahead can be seen in the MOUs
and agreements we witnessed being signed this morning and in the number of very
senior Australian businesspeople who are present at this dinner tonight.
I amn very pleased to join you, Mr President, in urging our business leaders and
investors to look at the new opportunities which are opening up for Australia and the
Philippines to do business together.
In all we do together bilaterally, we have the invaluable resource of the Filipino
community in Australia, now numbering around 120,000. It has doubled in size at
every census since 196 1.
Let me assure you, Mr President, that Australia and its government value our citizens
of Philippine origin, and we will care for them.
Our bilateral links wil also be strengthened by regional developments, like APEC and
the discussions we are having about closer links between the ASEAN Free Trade Area
and the Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Agreement.
Australia and the Philippines and you and 1, Mr President have been working very
hard to set up in APEC a structure which will strengthen the region economically and
increase its stability as it enters a period of historic economic and strategic change.
This visit has a particular significace. Not only are you the first President of the
Philippines to visit Australia, but you ame the first foreign Head of State I have ever
welcomed here who has an Australian grandchid. 
TEL: 22. Rug. 95 18: 20 No. 022 P. 04.,
4
That makes you doubly welcome as the leader of a great regional country with which
we want to develop close relations.
And evin more deeply as family. 



PMRIIMISEE~-/
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE BOOK THE BATTLE OF LEYTE GULF
THE AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
CANBERRA, TUESDAY 22 AUGUST 1995
It is a great privilege to be able to co-launch this book with President Ramos here in
Canberra.
Last week, hundreds of thousands of Australians participated in very moving
ceremonies throughout the country to commemorate the end of the war in the Pacific
fifty years ago. For many young people who took part or watched, these events gave
them a chance to thank the generation of Australians who achieved the victory and to
reflect on its meaning for our country now.
The battle of Leyte Gulf was one of the critical events leading to the victory we
celebrated last week, and Australia was proud to have played its part in it.
The battle saw the largest Royal Australian Navy involvement in a single campaign
during the war. RAAF Wireless Units also played an important part.
Before the battle, thirteen Australian ships operating as part of the US seventh fleet,
had been involved in a number of fierce battles for control of the sea lanes around the
Philippines. Then, on 20 October 1944, seven of them participated in the allied operations to
recapture Leyte Gulf and Panoan. The greatest amphibious force ever assembled in
the Pacific and second only to the D Day landings in Europe landed four divisions
of the US 6th army and began the liberation of the Philippines.
On the day after the landings, which were accomplished without loss of life, Japanese
kamikaze bombers attacked the allied fleet, including HM4AS Australia on which
thirty crew members, including the ship's captain, were killed.
Australia has remembered the Australian Task Force Commnander at Leyte,
Cormnodore Collins, in the name given to our country's new class of submarines. 
The Battle of Leyte Gulf reunited the allies with the courageous Philippines resistance
forces, who had fought so bravely for three years against the occupying Japanese.
Those many thousands of Filipinos who fought and died for our common cause
deserve the thanks of all Australians.
I hope this book will be more than a fine commemoration for those who were involved
in the campaign, or who have family who were.
I hope it will remind a new generation of Australians and Filipinos that our countries
have common security interests, that these interests have been tested in the past and
that we can best preserve them today by working together to build a strong defence
partnership ourselves, and a regional environment which preserves the security of all
the countries in it.
For this reason, I was very pleased that we were able to witness today the signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding on defence co-operation which will provide a
forward-looking framework for developing the defence ties between us.
I congratulate the Department of Defence and the staff of the Australian Defence
Force Journal on this excellent publication. 



TEL: 23. Rug. 95 2: 47 No. 005 ~. U1
I I
I
" 11
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR THE LAUNCH OF " COMING CLEAN, A BIOGRAPHY OF IAN
KIERNAN" 9, THE BATHERS PAVILION, BALMORAL, SYDNEY
23 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I was at a function about a year ago it was the presentation of the Australian
Artists Creative Fellowships, and John Olsen the great Australian artist I was
giving him a gift, or a prize, or a fellowship, I can't remember, and he said " well,
there are only two kinds", he said, " of Australians". He said " there are lovers,
and others". I mean, we often think of the others, don't we? And Manning Clark
he put It another way talked about the enlargers and the straiteners the
people who could always see something bigger, and those who said get your
head down, be serious, grind away, conform stay in the groove. And this has
always been the great divider in Australian life and also, may I say, in
Australian politics. And the reason that I am here today is to say something nice
about an enlarger, a lover, a person who has belief and imagination who
believes in things, and imagines better things, and goes out and does them.
And I am very pleased to have the opportunity, and as I read through the book
it is a very blokey book, there Is no doubt about that, but what an interesting
bloke. A quintessential Sydney larrikin crazy-brave, self-contained anyone
who does an around the world solo voyage has enormous inner confidence and
self-esteem. And this is a very complete person he may represent himself as a
fellow who rode around on motorbikes, and lost a $ 20 million property empire,
who sailed around the world and did all these sort of things, but he is a very
complete individual, and I think that's why we are all here.
And the thing we celebrate is the fact not simply his personality and his verve,
and his courage but the fact that a lot of Australians have seen in him some of
themselves. And Clean Up Australia Is the classic piece of community action -I
mean, just last week we were talking about the celebration of a victory a great
community victory in the Second World War. A commemoration of those who
have lost. And you can think through all the events, and the ones that strike 
TEL: 2
your heart are the ones that mean something are the community ones the ones
that have got real weight in them, where we have come together to do things.
And I think Ian pricking the consciousness of Australians about the environment,
and alsoL showing some of his own personality in the doing of it, many
Australians have recognised in him some of the good things they see about
themselves. And the aspirations they have to do things together. I think that is
why he has become important to us, and why what he has done with the
environment has been Important. It is the same with Fred Hollows It wasn't that
long ago that nobody knew of Fred Hollows but when people got a view of him,
to see how selflessly he had given of his time, of the larrikin spirit, but the
commitment to people there was again that point of identification. And I think
that's what we are really celebrating today. It's not the writing, or the outrageous
story and it is a sort of outrageous story.
I mean, of course, it is a quintessential Sydney-siders book. This couldn't have
been written by somebody from Victoria. Because it's partly, you know, you ran
read the bits through it I mean for instance, he loves the sea. I mean, if you
stand here and look out, how could you not love the sea? How could you not
love those headlands, which are I mean, they are bit pock-marked by
development but by and large they are really as it would have been before we
all turned up in 1788. And, you know, I remember as a boy myself a mate of
mine used to ring me whenever there was a really big storm on the Harbour, we
would catch the Manly ferry we would be the only two on it. And you would get
in the dip over here, and the waves would slosh right through out to the other
side, you know you would be going for the ride, just to enjoy it. And out there
on the city harbour, sailing on weekends, one of my stunts was that I used to get
the train from Bankstown to Circular Quay, get in my gear, and then I would jump
off the back of the ferry, and the boat would pick me up. And of course they
would yell out " man overboard", and they would say " oh, it's all right he has
been rescued". Sailing up to Pittwater what a beautiful place that is, the
Hawkesbury River. And there is all this sense of Sydney, and the water, and we
are sort of drawn to it. You know, you get this impression I know Ian has all his
life, you can tell by the book everything about him is completely salty, you
know.
Arnd also his interest in the built environment very interesting when the worst of
the packing-case architecture was being built, every good was being smashed,
he was out there trying to preserve the terraces In Woolloomoolco. I used to do
the Max Dupain pilgrimage when I was a boy, around all of Max's sites you
know, Lyndhurst at Glebe, or Tusculum up at Kings Cross, or the great Elizabeth
Bay house, or all of the not so remarkable terraces, all the bits and pieces. You
know, you saw the greater view of people you had a sense that we might not
have the architectural heritage of the United States, but what we have, we ought
to try and lift it. And if not lift it, keep it keep those parts that we did have. And
so, you know, we see him in here being interested in this, and this is a very
23. Aug 95TEL: N3o. Ru. 0.9055 2P: 4.072 
NO. uu:) r. J.;
3
interesting minds-eye picture of someone who was interested in Sydney at that
time, when really, nobody cared about these things a lot of the stuff was
smashed up during this period. So he is building those, and in the sense of this
very successful restaurant which is here, I mean it could have failed of course,
and no doubt the restaurateur has made a success of it, but it is hard not to with
the view, and the place, and everything else. But he saw the opportunity.
And I think all of this has been about.. the concern about the environment has
been in him, somewhat perhaps latently before his experience in the Sargasso
Sea, or in Hawaii in the Clean Ups, but he has seen the great marvellous
opportunity that we have been given as Australians to have bequeathed to us
this ancient continent. I mean, how could we have been so lucky? That just 200
years ago I mean, we are now in our 5S, 4 times our lifetime there were no
Europeans here. The Aboriginal community in this country has preserved for
the rest of us a continent. And we have a great duty to it, to understand what
we have been given, and to understand that we have to protect it, and that we
may hold here something unique in the world. Because I think our
consciousness about it Is now such that we will take the steps to hang onto it,
and to make sure that the style of life we have, and our respect for the land, is
that which may have the equal in the world, but none better. Now, Ian has
brought that consciousness up in the Clean Up campaigns of Sydney Harbour,
and then of course, Clean Up Australia the hundreds of cities and provincial
towns, the thousands of people that have been involved, lifting their
environmental consciousness. And that is really lifting the sub-conscious on the
greater environmental issues he is right when he said earlier that the
environment will win out. It is the political issue that won't be put asunder. No
amount of smarmy political talk is going to put it down, because if for no other
reason, our children know better than perhaps we have ever known about it.
They know what a great and valuable thing it is.
So, this I think this coalescence of the community view which [ an has brought
there, through his own essential goodness and view about the country is why
we celebrate his book today. I mean, some of the other things in the book are
terrific reading when he went around Cape Horn and he said that he could
barely see the light, but he got up and had a drink. And he mentioned that he
thought about a few people, but he said something about being a bit shaky it
was all a bit Shaky. Well, I would be a bit shaky going around Cape Horn. I
mean, to even make a commentary on the light. I mean, the book Is really a bit
of a thriller in its own way, but there are some funny lines he said " oh, I thought
I should have cleaned up the boat because people would think that I was such a
grubby bastard". You know, that sort of self-deprecation gives us again another
Indication of his personalty, and his essentially humility. People who do
things are it doesn't necessarily mean that they are not humble, but I have
always thought about Ian that there is a humility about him. But there is a
crucible in there too there is a reactor in there, throwing up ideas you can see 
TEL: 23. Rug. 95 2: 47 No. 005 P. 04
4
in his own commitment to move into another phase of his life after, lIf you like,
this book, to go on to the next phase. -I mean, I like to think maybe it is just a
case of boating your own drum about the baby-boom generation, but by God, we
had a lot of go in us, I have got to say. We had a lot of I'm not too sure how to
say it "' chutzpah". I'm not too sure how It comes out, but there was a lot of go.
And I think he is a classic baby-boomer I mean, he is out there maybe a bit
earlier than that, maybe you just crept into that category tan, I don't know. But
one thing is for sure as a generation, they have made a huge impact on
Australia. And the other thing is, they have a great belief in Australia, and the
Australian nation as an Independent country, as an independent culture, as a
force of our own that deserves the support.
So I am here with the very pleasant duty of launching the book, to pay a
compliment to Phil ( Jarratt) for joining Ian In writing it he has this pattern of
( Phil, I am saying) of finding people worth bothering with, and writing about them
or helping them to write their story, and these are important parts of the
Australian story, and we will always be in his debt for that. To the publishers
James ( Fraser) for taking a chance on a blokey book, but most particularly, we
are here to celebrate in a sense the recording of an interesting Australian life.
To say how much it has meant to the rest of us, that this life has brought
together a sense of community around this question of the continent, and the
landscape, but somebody who is a quintessential Australian who believes In
this country, and who loves It, and who wants to dream the big dreams, and do
the big things. As I say, it's the belief and the imagination which has brought us
to his restaurant of 20 years ago. Congratulations Ian it is a pleasure to launch
the book, and I am very happy to be associated with it, and with you. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
*** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB CANBERRA
THURSDAY 24 AUGUST 1995
It's nice to be back.
You may have picked up a comment the other day to the effect that Australian
politics was becoming risk-averse even gutless.
You will understand my outrage at this slur upon my profession.
Keen to defend its reputation, a couple of lively issues notwithstanding, I
decided to come down to the National Press Club and deliver a speech.
Not one of these headland speeches you've been hearing being decidedly
non risk-averse, I am more inclined to the headlong speech.
Or to put it another way, I would like to share with you some thoughts on
where our country is going. What is good and what needs to be improved.
How we might retain the good and make the improvements.
There are several places I could start: with those economic data in the back
pages of The Economist, for instance, where Australia continues to outshine
many of our OECD counterparts in economic fundamentals and is placed
among the top brigade in forecasts for growth.
It is easy to take comfort from the data, notwithstanding the current account
deficit which we must and will correct. The data shows that Australia is doing
very well.
And we should draw satisfaction from that.
Our initiatives have generally been effective. We have got the economic
settings pretty well right. And our approach to the economic and social
equation has been, I think, largely vindicated. 
But to draw a sense of satisfaction is not the same as drawing a sense of
complacency. If I have learned one big thing in the past decade, it is that reform never stops
you never entirely get out of the woods, there is always one thing more or
two, or three or even four things.
You never really get to the last chapter. You might sometimes imagine that
you are approaching it and that when you get over the next hill you'll see the
words, " The End", emblazoned in a clear blue sky.
But it doesn't happen. I said up in Roma the other day It's a bit like farming.
You fix the tractor and the generator goes on the blink. You get through a
drought and you have to deal with a flood.
Sometimes it does boil down to simple endurance.
The modern economic contest is a long distance race a very long distance
race. It is like the modern marathon, it gets faster and faster. But unlike the
marathon, it has no finish line.
I agree with what John Prescott had to say on Tuesday. I wish I didn't. I wish
I could say all the reform was over and that we don't need to change any
more. But we do. We need the culture of " continuous initiative" which
John Prescott talks about.
We need it in government, our education system, our public service and in
our businesses.
It is a condition of success in the modern world.
But we should remember that it is also a measure of our success.
The reason we have to go on is that we have come so far already. Far
enough to be a player. Far enough to enjoy some of the rewards and get
within view of greater ones. Far enough to know our potential and our
strengths and weaknesses.
I mentioned marathons: I think there's a lesson to be learned from watching
marathons, and listening to former marathon runners.
They all talk about not losing rhythm up hills and down, over cobblestones,
round corners, through the pain, through the drinks station you have to keep
the same steady stride and your eyes fixed.
You have to keep mind and body and soul together. 
When they are together, keeping up is almost mechanical. When they begin
to fall apart, the consequences are rapid and dramatic.
In no tir~ ne you drop out of the leading pack. And very few ever make up the
ground again.
I think this is something like the position we are in. On our own initiative,
talents and hard work, we have joined the leaders.
And we have to stay there. If they go faster we have to go faster.
We have to keep our stride.
If we are to keep up, we need to continuously improve.
If we are to continuously improve, we have to keep everything together.
The basics which have got us this far have to stay in tune.
And by this rather circuitous route I come back to the last time I spoke at the
Press Club. You will remember it was in connection with Working Nation
the Government's White Paper on Employment, Industry and Regional
Development. I remember copping a bit of criticism for comparing it with the White Paper of
the 1940s it was a shameful boast in the eyes of some people.
But it was a more than fair comparison. In fact, if only because contemporary
Australia is a more complex place, Working Nation had to be a statement of
broader dimensions and far greater detail than its counterpart of fifty years
ago.
And it was as much a defining document. It was as much a statement of this
Government's philosophy as the White Paper of 1944 was to the
Governments of reconstruction which Curtin and Chifley led. I hope it will be
as much a stamp of our ambition and achievement.
Working Nation was about keeping mind, body and soul together. I think I
said at the time that it addressed the great issue of unemployment with a cool
head and a warm heart.
It addressed problems which were both specific to Australia and endemic in
contemporary western economies and societies. It addressed them with a
view to maintaining the balance in this country between economic efficiency
and social justice indeed we sought the means to make those two goals
complementary. 
As Australian policy had been right through the eighties, Working Nation was
different to the orthodox model of economic liberalisation the model adopted
in a number of other countries and by our opponents.
It took the view that we could be competitive and still look after those on the
margins. We could compete with the best in the region and the world, and
yet maintain our egalitarian values and preserve our social cohesion.
Working Nation was a document for its time, and it was a very good one, I
believe. It has made life easier and opportunity greater for countless
Australians. It will make Australia both more productive and fairer. It will help
preserve the fabric of our communities and families. It is serving hundreds of
thousands of Australians now, and it will still be serving them for a long time.
Working Nation did not suddenly drop from the clouds. Its provenance was
the whole period of reform from 1983. It addressed the imperatives facing us
in the 1 990s, yet it was part of a policy story which includes financial
deregulation and tariff reform, reforms in training and education, the
progressive introduction of a sophisticated social wage, the Accords in
summary, a policy record which reflects Australia's dual commitment to
economic liberalisation and social fairness.
Working Nation built on this story and the philosophy underlying it.
It took a position on long term unemployment which not everyone shared, but
which was logical, moral and consistent with Australia's traditional values.
For all these reasons it will make Australia stronger.
With Working Nation we were not ahead of our time, but we were ahead of
most other countries; among them the United States, where Robert Reich and
many commentators these days complain of a destructive imbalance between
economic and social goals.
Working Nation now seems like a long time ago. You might ask why I'm
reviving it today.
Particularly as one of the weekend columnists wrote that there is no value in
these big policy statements any more? No political value at least.
But of course Working Nation is still operating. It's out there in Australian
communities now.
And there is profound value in major policy statements, including political
value. Policy is the means by which the lives of individuals, families and
communities are shaped. It is the means by which we shape the character
and the future of the nation. 
It is the purpose of political life, the only worthwhile measure of political
success, and by far the most significant measure of the worth of politicians
and parties.
It is also the best way to get elected.
I remain in no doubt that, however long they might suspend their judgement,
Australians always make policy their principal measure.
When they judge the Government sometime next year, they will judge it on
the basis of policy. Whatever you the media or we the politicians might think
about our ability to read or influence their views, one way or another the
ultimate test Australians apply will be a policy test.
It is essential to good democratic government that we explain our actions,
that we listen to what people are thinking, that we understand what they are
going through.
And that we are prepared to adjust our strategies when the interests of the
people demand it.
But it's equally essential that we don't confuse the product with the marketing
of it.
Of course we can be criticised for failing to " sell" policies as well as we might
I've no doubt that the criticism is often justified. But don't tell me that what
Australians want most in their lives is another salesman. Don't tell me that's
what they want in their Prime Ministers.
We can also be criticised for not hearing the complaints of large numbers of
Australians and I think very often that criticism is justified too. But don't tell
me that all Australians want from their Government is a good listener.
I've said it a few times good governments listen, but so do bad
governments. In our modern political culture I think we should resist what might well be a
real temptation to confuse good government with good radio and television.
They are not the same.
The essence of good government is not in the listening or in the talking but
in the thinking and the doing.
It was not public relations or spin doctoring which caused total employment to
rise by 380,000 in the year to June, by 680,000 since April 1993. Primarily it
was policy. It was thinking and doing. 
It was not PR which provided nearly 400,000 Australians with case managed
assistance to get employment or training, or a 20 per cent fall in the number
of long term unemployed: or a fall of more than 25 per cent among young
long tern unemployed. It was policy. It was thinking and doing.
When Working Nation was delivered, all of us here were in no doubt about
what was the most important issue facing the country it was unemployment.
No one needed reminding about the devastating effects of unemployment on
individuals, families and communities.
None of our imaginations needed prompting when we thought about the
difference between having a job and not having a job.
We all knew that jobs are far and away the best means of distributing wealth
and opportunity; that they are the best defence against alienation and
delinquency; the best measure and the best source of family and community
prosperity and cohesion; the best form of crime prevention; the best
investment a government can make.
I don't think we've forgotten. Even though we've had unprecedented job
growth and a fall in the unemployment rate among the highest in the OECD, I
don't think we have decided that the problem has gone away. I think we still
know that nothing counts as much as jobs.
Yet there has been a shift. Not in those communities where unemployment is
still very high, or in the families where breadwinners or children are still
unemployed. Not among those administering programs or dealing with the
consequences of unemployment.
But in the places where opinion is made, jobs have dropped down a rung or
two on the ladder of what matters. They should stay on top.
As long as jobs stay at the peak of our national ambitions we will know that
we are keeping body and soul together.
We will know that as a community we have kept faith with the spirit of change
in the past decade, and indeed with what we think of as our national
character and traditions.
And that is the best way to succeed.
The effort to marry economic efficiency to social justice and cohesion has
been the means by which we have reached the leading group of nations.
You have to ask -why change it? 
If a consensual incomes policy, a partnership between the union movement
and the Government is delivering progressive economic, social and industrial
relations reform if it is a vehicle of our progress why would you ditch it in
favour of a conflict model?
Why change stride?
If the Accords have helped substantially deliver sustained productivity
increases since 1983; a 60 per cent decrease in working days lost in strikes
compared to the previous period and, in the last 12 months, the lowest
number of strikes since records were first collected in 1942; employment
growth of 4.8 per cent in the past year and 2.3 per cent on average since
1983; economic growth which, at 3.7 per cent, one of the highest in the
OECD; and an inflation rate currently less than 3 per cent why would you be
ditching the Accord?
Why, when the Accord has helped create the culture in which change can
take place, in which the imperatives of competitiveness have been
recognised, in which enterprise-based agreements are becoming the norm
and worker superannuation is laying the foundations of a national savings
program why would you ditch it?
The essential contribution of the Accord has been as an inflation mechanism
in which the union movement has delivered wage restraint to help ensure
buoyant employment outcomes and, through this, sustained increased in
household incomes. The effect has been an increase in per capita real
disposable household income of 19.7 per cent since 1983.
Each employment target has been met, underlying inflation has been
reduced, and at the same time Australia has been opened up to international
trade and regional growth.
All of this without industrial disputes and with protection for the most
economically and socially vulnerable.
Why, when you have an effective inflation mechanism in the form of the
Accord, would you ditch it and leave yourself with only monetary policy to
control prices?
You keep the monarchy and you ditch the Accord! It is an amazing
perspective on contemporary Australia.
If we accept that social cohesion and social justice are desirable ends in
themselves, traditional national ambitions and essential aids in the economic
progress we have been making why would you be threatening cuts of
between 5 and 10 billion dollars in government outlays? 
It is also reasonable to ask why you would expect anyone to believe that cuts
of this magnitude will not include cuts in government programs in income
support, health, education, and transport for instance.
And why, when the evidence is plain that globalisation and new technology is
tending to increase earnings inequality everywhere, would you compound the
problem in Australia by cutting into the social wage we have built over the
past decade?
In the United States over the 1980s, 70 per cent of the rise in average family
incomes has gone to the top 1 per cent of families; and in the same period
the average real income of the bottom 20 per cent of income distribution has
fallen by 10 per cent.
In Australia very substantial increases in income support broadening the tax
base, introducing fringe benefits and capital gains taxes, reducing the lowest
marginal tax rate to 20 per cent and increasing the tax-free threshold have all
mitigated the tendency towards unequal income distribution. As a result, the
gap is nowhere near as wide in Australia as it is in the United States.
At the same time, the introduction of Medicare, large increases in funded
educational participation, the expansion of child care, targeted public sector
housing and, now, improved income in retirement through superannuation
none of which are taken into account by the usual studies or international
comparisons all narrow the gap in income distribution.
If a sophisticated social safety net is keeping Australian society together
through a period of profound and pervasive change why would you tear
holes in it?
Why would you make the US labour market model Australia's model, even as
the US Labour Secretary is lamenting its inadequacy?
To fix the Current Account? To make an impact on our external debt?
Because they are doing it in New Zealand?
But in New Zealand since they introduced individual contracts in 1991,
productivity has increased by only 1 per cent per annum. In Australia, it has
increased by over two and a half per cent per annum in the same period.
No one in the Government believes that every step we have taken has been
the right step, any more than we believe that all our problems as a nation are
behind us.
We know that the figures indicating that Australia has moved beyond the
realms of recovery into a sustained period of growth do not translate into
ease and comfort for every household and community. 
We know that the confidence in Australian sharemarkets, and among
commentators like Chris Caton and Don Stammer, is not felt generally around
the country at the moment.
Don Stammer has been reported as saying that he expected " a long lasting
upswing" that " will take us through to at least... .2000".
The Australian said recently that we may be experiencing " the healthiest
recovery the nation has had". But we know that it does not feel that healthy
in a lot of Australian homes.
We know that there is a lot of uncertainty around. And that there are a lot of
people preying on this uncertainty.
Perhaps this is where we need that capacity for endurance I mentioned.
The Government could do with it to deal with the modicum of frustration
anyone feels when hard won and long sought after success is interpreted as
something much less.
Much more importantly, Australians need it as we all come to terms with an
essentially new kind of Australian economy: an economy in which we have
sustained growth without inflation not a boom, not an environment in which
we substitute inflation for savings, but low inflation sustainable growth.
The uncertainties which people feel are not unique to Australia. In the US
and elsewhere, there appears to be wide concern about the income
distribution gap; about frustrated personal aspirations and inadequate
personal security.
I have talked about the income gap in Australia and I might add the
observation that in Australia the rich are not yet building private roads for
themselves, or employing private police forces and establishing, for all intents
and purposes, a new species of feudalism.
They have not had a government in the past 10 years willing to encourage
the growth of an exclusive and exclusivist oligarchy and an underclass
condemned to permanent and increasing impoverishment.
We have liberalised the economy to encourage opportunity and create
wealth. But we have also pursued a fair social equation and kept alive the
sense of commonwealth.
International comparisions create a context in which our problems can be
better understood, but I know they are small comfort for real insecurities.
Nevertheless, I think that with each successive quarter of growth confidence
will slowly return. We can also reasonably expect a steady improvement in
confidence as the current account begins to improve. 
It will take a while for the real and lasting benefits of the reforms to
superannuation to be appreciated, but they will be. And there is genuine
reassurance for all Australians in them they mean greater comfort and
security in retirement and they mean a savings base, and in due course a
savings culture, for the nation.
That sense that the recovery will be short lived can only be laid to rest by
time. The fears about the current account and our external debt will start to
fade as the deficit declines and Australians become aware that solving the
problem is within our reach.
And of course it is.
It is within our reach because of the action we have taken on both the public
and private savings.
We have taken the decisions to restore the Budget to surplus.
As Treasury has shown, the changes to superannuation will lift private
savings by around 4 per cent of GDP over time.
Together, these initiatives mean less reliance on foreign borrowing in fact,
considerably less.
I would very much like to see develop a new phase in the economic
consciousness of Australians. I know it has undergone a remarkable
transformation in the past decade, but I would like to see another one. And I
think it will happen.
Over the next two or three years I believe Australians will not only recognise
that we have entered a period of prolonged growth, but rapidly come to insist
that we stay on this sustainable low inflation path.
I believe we will see a savings culture quickly emerge. And among the
elements of that culture will be a recognition that we will only succeed by
saving and investing wisely, making maximum sustainable use of our
resources, continuing to work hard and committing ourselves to the path of
continuous improvement.
I think John Prescott can feel confident about Australia's capacity to reach
what he calls " champion" status.
The fact is, Australia has already embarked on a process of continuous
improvement at a national level. 
There are a multitude of new, well-managed quality firms in Australia which
were born and have thrived because of the internationalisation of the
Australian economy. They were raised in the knowledge that no matter how
good tley are today in their product and their process, they must be better
tomorrow. And the Government is keeping pace. We know we have to both encourage
innovation in the private sector and practice it ourselves. We also know that
the public is understandably cynical when governments talk about their
achievements and their work practices.
But we have kept up the pace of reform and we will maintain it.
This year we negotiated the eighth Accord. Each Accord has built on the
preceeding one. Each one has been designed to meet contemporary needs.
We have maintained the progress in opening Australia to international and
regional economies and improving those environments for trade. From
those first financial reforms of long ago, through the tariff reductions, APEC
and the vision of free trade in the Asia-Pacific we have kept up the pace.
We have progressed from protectionism and industry assistance, through the
adjustment plans for particular industry sectors we have today; to the notions
of innovation, investment facilitation and seeding growth through assistance
to small and medium-sized enterprises which govern our modern industry
policy.
Above all, we are developing the skills of our people which is the foundation
of all successful industry.
One Nation was a great leap forward. Working Nation, and to no small
extent, the cultural policy, Creative Nation, consolidated the gains. The
statement on innovation in industry that we will deliver later this year will
maintain the pace.
We will continue to back our judgment. We will continue to follow an
Australian path to international success.
We take the view that government needs to put a marker out beyond current
best practice, so we are not playing catch-up.
It is a rare government that meets with total private sector approval and we
don't go seeking it.
But we do seek partnerships, common goals, a cooperative spirit. We talk to
business a great deal. We exchange ideas. 
But governments have independent roles and capacities. If they do their job
diligently and with a passion, and have no hang-ups about their role, they can
help industry build its competitiveness, they can help it enter international
market places, they can help it win.
Our worst critics will concede that this Government has done a great deal to
translate regional free trade from economic fantasy into a real political
prospect. I think industries therefore, have reason to feel confident that we
count their interests as our own which is to say as part of the national
interest. I began by talking about policy and I will end by it.
I don't mean I will give you the full checklist since 1983. I won't even give you
a resume since 1992.
But I want to say this much.
The big policy statements those big, non risk-averse statements from
One Nation through to this year's Budget, have at their heart something more
than meeting the interests of the sectors of the economy and population
which they specifically address.
I think there is more to them than the effect they have in, say, kick-starting the
economy and creating new national infrastructure as One Nation did; or
creating a stimulus for regional development, as Working Nation did; or a
new deal for Australia's creative artists and industries as the cultural
statement did.
I think, beyond the practical effects we seek from them, good policy
developments pick up on forces at work within the country: I mean things as
intangible as collective needs and ambitions, emerging ideas and
perspectives and they give them concrete force. They give them expression
in the life of the nation.
And the life of the nation should be healthier for it.
I see policy as a process of national reinvigoration and reinvention. I see it
as a process of national character building.
Among the many things One Nation did, I hope, was give expression to the
sentiment that is always there in hard times the fellow feeling, the sense that
we are stronger when we stick together. And in so far as it succeeded in
doing this, I hope the feeling will last us right through the decade.
Working Nation, I believe, gave expression to an Australian sensibility as old
as the nation itself that employment is a birthright and the unemployed
should not be left behind. That this is a fair country and properly a pioneer of
social democracy. 
13
I hope Creative Nation will prove to have tapped a vein of creativity and
national pride; that the Native Title Act will be seen in time as an expression,
not of dur collective guilt, but our collective sense of justice and
responsibility; and that before the end of the century the initiative that we
have taken with the Republic will give voice to an Australian spirit and
identity. John Prescott said on Tuesday night " A country must be able to constantly
renew itself if it is to offer its people rising standards of living and larger
opportunities." He said he wanted " A culture of continuous initiative".
I have never welcomed a speech by an Australian business leader more than
this one.
Especially after all the talk about risk-averseness. 



PRIME MINISTER *** Check Against Delivery***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENrs COMMITMENTS FOR THE UNITED
NATIONS FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN
TUESDAY 29 AUGUST 1995
I am pleased to be here today to mark Australia's involvement in the United
Nations' Fourth World Conference on Women.
Many people are cynical about international conferences. Some media
reports over the last week have referred to the United Nation's Conference as
a " talkfest", meaning all talk and no action.
We all know the syndrome. You don't have to be a cynic to recognise it
very often, just a casual observer.
It is true that, in many countries, implementation of the Strategies document
for the Advancement of Women from the Third World Conference has been
slow or non-existent.
The desire for faster progress towards true equality for women and men is
behind the idea that all nations should commit themselves to tackling the
most pressing needs of women in their own countries, before the UN
Conference.
And not just commit themselves. " Talkfests" commit themselves. We should
be suspicious of the word " commit" unless there is evidence of the will to
actually do.
The Australian Government welcomes this Conference of Commitments. We
are very proud to have initiated it. But we stress the meaning from the start
by commitment we mean doing.
Having had some experience of international conferences and the way the
UN works, I know this could not have been an easy task and I congratulate
the head of 05W, Kathy Townsend, and her team. 
For many years, Australia has been an international pacesetter on status of
women issues. The recently released United Nations Development Program
report on women points to Australia as having one of the best records,
ranking number six out of 130 countries on a range of criteria including
women's share of income and participation in education.
As I said in a speech to the Press Club last week, this sort of achievement
does not come about haphazardly or accidentally or through good public
relations. It is the result of thinking and doing the long hard slog of policy
development and implementation.
We could not commit ourselves to the things I will announce today without the
policy foundation we have laid for women since 1983.
Policies which have supported the dramatic increase in women's participation
in education and the labour force; a network of affordable, quality child care;
significant real increases in family assistance paid to women; the
establishment of a National Women's Health Program; the introduction of the
Sex Discrimination Act; and the extension of superannuation to 85 per cent of
women workers.
These policies are just part of the Government's program of reform to improve
the status of women. And we are proud of our achievements.
But satisfaction is not complacency. Reform never stops.
For the Government's commitments to be effective, they must give expression
to the needs, concerns, ambitions and interests of Australian women.
The Australian Council for Women, headed by Sandra Yates, was set up to
advise the Government in the lead-up to the Conference on how we could
address the barriers to the advancement of women.
The Council consulted with women's organisations, held community
consultations and conducted the " Purple Postcard Campaign", which asked
women to tell the Government the one thing that concerned them. Not
surprisingly, most women told us more than one thing.
The Government also commissioned research which sought the opinions of
women who were likely to miss out on putting their views through the more
formal channels of consultation.
We learned a great deal about the concerns of Australian women. But four
general areas emerged as the primary focus -for change and it is in these four
areas that the Government is determined to advance the status of women.
The four areas are: balancing work and family responsibilities; violence;
health; and public life and decision-making. 
The most important area raised by women was the challenge of balancing
work and family responsibilities.
In the consultations, women made it clear that they thought their position had
improved markedly. In particular, they said that today they had more
freedom, choice and opportunity.
But they also recognised the downside of these changes. Unfortunately,
because now women can do anything, they often end up doing everything.
As one women put it, her life consists of " Juggling everything, especially work
with the children." She was " the first to get up and the last to go to bed."
And this is not just hearsay and anecdote. There is concrete evidence of it.
Just last week the Australian Institute of Family Studies released a report
showing that the majority of women still had the main responsibility for
household tasks such as cooking, cleaning, shopping and laundry, even
when the women were in full-time paid employment.
Essentially, there is little Government can do to help with this modern
malaise. The " double shift" which women talk about is not one that
governments can arbitrate.
But there are things the Government can do to help women cope with their
different roles.
Many women pointed out that real equality had yet to be achieved in the
workplace. The Working Women Centres set up by the Government can play
an important role here in ensuring equity for women at work.
Over the past six months, the existing five Working Women Centres have
received more than 3,500 enquires from women about work-related matters.
The centres provide information and assistance to women on issues such as
pay, working condit * ions, enterprise bargaining and training. They are
particularly important for blue collar women and are probably the most
important source of information on employment issues for women from non-
English speaking or indigenous backgrounds.
I am pleased to say that the centres have been welcomed by women and
women's organisations. The only thing that has not been welcomed is that
two States do not have a centre.
Today, I am announcing that the Government will set up Working Women
Centres in Victoria and Western Australia, providing national coverage for
this important resource. Given the direction which Jeff Kennett and Richard
Court are taking industrial relations and employment conditions in their
States, I predict that the centres will see brisk business in Victoria and
Western Australia. 
Another issue raised by women juggling work and family responsibilities is
the difficulty of taking leave to care for sick children. There was strong
support for making existing leave more flexible. The Government agrees with
this position and will argue it before the Industrial Relations Commission.
Women were also very strong in their support for the choice to stay at home
to care for their children full-time. And there was a view that the needs of
women at home were often overlooked.
One area where this issue can be addressed at the outset is the new
communications and information technology. The new technology is set to
transform all our lives and we must ensure that the technology does serve the
interests of all Australians, not just those in the workforce or in education. I
have asked the National Information Services Council to advise how the new
technologies can respond to the needs and interests of women working fulltime
at home.
In the consultations, women at home raised the need for training to up-date
their skills: some were concerned that they would be left behind in the
information revolution. To address this, I have also asked the Council to
develop proposals for the training of women at home in the new technologies.
The Council will also report on how all women, including women in rural and
remote communities, can get equitable access to the new communications
services. The Taskforce on Women and Communications Technologies in
the Office of the Status of Women will be extended to ensure that women's
participation in the development of new technologies is maximised.
During the last election I announced the New National Agenda for Women. I
remember at the time saying that perhaps the most sobering message to
have come from our consultations for the New Agenda was the fear of
voilence felt by women in Australia violence on the streets and in the home.
Regretfully, I must say that violence is still one of women's main concerns.
We must and can do more to stop it.
There have been very successful projects in the United States and New
Zealand which show that coordinating the assistance and response of
governments, police, legal services and community agencies leads to a lower
level of violence against women, and fewer repeat offences.
The Commonwealth will work with State and Territory governments to
develop an integrated approach to stopping violence against women.
In the consultations, women frequently raised the need for early education to
reduce violence. The Government will contribute towards running forums in
each State and Territory to develop effective ways of dealing with violence in
Australian schools. 
In the area of women's health, many women spoke of the need to give priority
to better health services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women who
face additional problems because of discrimination, isolation and ignorance
of their needs.
The Government will introduce a new program targeted at Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander women. The Healthy Women, Strong Families Program
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Women will focus on health checks;
maternal and infant health monitoring; and health promotion and prevention.
Special attention will be given to rural and remote communities where such
services are currently inadequate.
Last week, Frank Blount, the head of Telstra observed that at the same time
as the status and influence of women have expanded, and at the same time
as women are generally outperforming men educationally, the proportion of
women senior managers in Australia's largest companies actually fell. As he
said, " There is something quite evidently wrong here".
To promote women's participation in public life and decision-making, the
Government will assist in the establishment of a national peak body of women
in business. The Australian Council of Businesswomen will provide a
stronger voice for women in business to Government, business networks, the
media and the community generally.
The Government will also encourage women's participation on private sector
boards. We will work in partnership with the Australian Institute of Company
Directors, the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry on a three-year initiative to increase the appointment
of women of merit to private sector company boards.
I have concentrated today on the Government's commitments to women in
Australia. But we also have a responsibility to assist less wealthy countries in our
region in their efforts to improve the status of women. Australia has been the
lead regional donor for the Pacific region in the lead up to the Conference
and we will continue in this partnership. Australia will provide funds to nongovernment
organisations in the Pacific Island nations to assist in the
implementation of commitments arising from the Conference.
It gives me great pleasure to hand the Government's national commitments
for women over to my colleague, Dr Carmen Lawrence, who will announce
them on behalf of Australia at the United Nations' Fourth Conference for
Women. I wish Australia's delegation to the Conference and the women attending the
forum for Non-Government Organisations well, and I thank all the Australian
women who voiced their concerns and contributed to the development of the
Government's commitments to improve the status of women. 



IPRIME
MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT A RECEPTION FOR THE AUSTRALIAN NETBALL TEAM,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 29 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much, Kirsten [ Wheeler], Michelle ( Fielke],
Jill [ McIntosh], members of the successful team and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here with John [ Faulkner] on this occasion to be
able to say congratulations and thank you to Michelle and the team for a
great Australian victory. A great victory, out there, against the rest of the
world, to demonstrate on two consecutive occasions that it wasn't something
that just was a flash in the pan, that you could keep it up. And that in what
was a most unusual as you say, won by one on two occasions a most
unlikely outcome. And then, of course, that final win which was, of course, a
very strong and convincing one.
I am very pleased for you all as a team, but particularly as individuals, to be
given this opportunity to be out there to actually have that win and for
Australians to share with you the joy of that victory. I was delighted for you
and for all the people interested in netball, yesterday, to see the reception
that you received.
I think it has meant a lot to everybody in this country. We have always had
such tremendously strong women in sport. It has been a part of our great
sporting tradition and keeping it up, out there, where now of course the
competition is always so fierce and the training is so much better than years
ago, it is so much harder to do it.
I am delighted that the Institute of Sport has been able to play a role because
in the 1980s when we were cutting Government expenditure and I used to
sit in the Expenditure Review Committee night in, night out. We cut many
things, but always put money into sport because this is an area where I think
young Australians can show their commitment, what they are made of and it
is a place where we can show our belief in them and our support for them in
one of the rare ways in which a Government can actually have a role and
make a difference and I hope in this respect we have. 
Running a political party is a bit like running a netball team. Except in public
life there are no grand finals. In your game, at least, there is a grand final.
In our's, even after you win the election, they say " they'll never win another
on" There is a problem a week later and it all sort of turns to ashes.
So there are no grand finals and you know how hard it is to keep the
psychology of the team together and to keep that belief in yourself and that
sort of instinct to go on, that determination, that willingness to will yourself on.
All of these things are true in public life as they are, I think, in sport. It is one
of the rare parallels I think you can make with world championship sport.
Now I am not saying we are as fit a team as you are we are not or that I am
the fittest one of the team because I am not. But the fact of the matter is, we
do have a slight idea of what it is like to be out there all the time in that
competitive environment, all the time knowing that it is a mind-play most of
the time. You have got to have the general state of fitness and the dexterity
to be in it, but in the end you have got to have the belief in yourself and the
belief in the group of you as a corporate entity, as a group of people and
of course, in this case, in your values and what you want to achieve.
In this building we all know you have these things because you can't do what
you have done without them and I think that is the thing that brings so much
pleasure to us. The fact that young Australians, as you are, have this belief
and these values and this is what has willed you on to win and you are, as
John said, a role model for many thousands of Australian young people and
especially young women who in this day and age where we are all buffeted
by opinions and views and news and everything else and cultural change and
economic change and all of the other things that move our lives around
today, much more than they have been moved by other generations I mean
out there to have some shining lights is a really, I think, important thing for us.
So on behalf of all Australians we thank you most sincerely and salute what
you have been able to do.
Could I just say a few words about Margaret Pewtress. I didn't know her well,
but I got to know her reasonably well. She was a great woman, a great
believer in young Australians, a great contributor to sport and we are very
sad at her passing. She always provided such gusto to the general question
of the organisation of sport in Australia, particularly for women, and I know
she is sorely missed by you and will be by the rest of us. She is one of those
real foot soldiers of Australian sport. She was always in there, every year,
through the good years and the bad years, in there basically trying to make it
better. So I am delighted we will remember her by a special award which will
be associated with the Prime Minister's Award and it couldn't be a more fitting
person to have that, if you like, longtermn acknowledgment by all of you and
those associated with you and those hundreds and thousands of young
Australian women in the sport, for Margaret.
So perhaps I will conclude by again congratulating Michelle, on behalf of the
team, and Jill, who has coached them, and the other key members of the side
to say what a great job you have done, how you have kept it together and 
3
doing it on two consecutive occasions is proof positive, if we needed it, that
you really have what it takes. And Michelle the fact that you have been able
now to finish your career on such a high point, is no doubt a personal
pleasure for you and as it is for you, it is for the rest of us.
I think this is another thing, of course, which we have often seen in sport.
That some people never quite retire at the time that they think they should
have and that shows again judgement and good sense and it comes to the
course at the crowning moment in your career. Congratulations. Thank you,
all of you, for your magnificent efforts on behalf of Australia. We are all very
proud of you indeed.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT FUNDRAISING LUNCH, THE VALLEY RESTAURANT,
FAULCONBRIDGE, 30 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you so much, and thank you for so many of you coming. It has been a
very, very pleasant day indeed to be here, and to be in the Mountains, and to
have the opportunity of planting a tree at Faulconbridge with the line of oaks
the Corridor of Oaks which are a symbol, I think, of our continuity of the
Prime Ministership over the period since the Federation in 1901. And I am
particularly pleased to be there today with the Mayor, with my parliamentary
colleague Maggie Deahm, with Minister Bob Debus. I am particularly
delighted that Margaret Free could join us today, and other distinguished
guests, including the Chancellor and members of Local Government. It has
been a very nice occasion, and I am pleased to have been able to make that
link, again, between the Federation and Henry Parkes, and the things for
which my Party has been interested in, and the things for which we have
stood for a very long period of time. And particularly this link with Macquarie
with Chifley, of course, being Member for Macquarie and Prime Minister, I
have even got a link myself because I have been the Member for Blaxland
since 1969, a bit tenuous, but there we are better than being the Member for
something else.
And in this, I think I was saying earlier, for those of you who weren't there
that here we are now, a century on, thinking about our nationalism again.
And I just reminded people of the great decade of nationalism and social
experimentation in Australia it was more than a decade: from the early
1890s until 1914 was the period when the sense of Australia came together.
A period of great difficulty, of economic difficulties, of a very great drought in
the 1 890s, the birth of the Labor Party, and then of course, the Federation.
And then, basically, the First World War snuffed it out, and it only returned
fleetingly again during the period of Curtin's Prime Ministership, and of
course, with Gough Whitlam. And we hope that now, in the 1990s again, we
can where we have had, in some of these economic difficulties, a drought
these things must bring on a renewed sense of Australian nationalism.
Because here we are now, this decade, thinking about that we have to round
the circle off with an Australian Head of State. And it will be when it 
happens Australians will feel very good about the fact that an Australian
person is the head of the Australian nation that represents and personifies
the Australian people. So, it was an opportunity to make these points again
to say that, for my part, I was not about simply planting a tree as one of a
series of Prime Ministers, but to plant it for the reason that we round the circle
on Federation, and we cap it off by making clear that we are a unique nation,
the Australian nation, and everything about us is Australian and our Head of
State is Australian.
I was talking earlier, too, about the categories of Australians who believe in
Australia who have faith in Australia, and faith in the Australian people.
And, many of you I know who are students of Australian history, remember
Manning Clarke's division between the enlargers, and the straiteners and
punishers he said that Australians tend to fall into two categories, the
people who believe in something bigger, and greater and grander, and larger
essentially have faith in their fellow Australians to make it, and those who
say this is your place in life, get your nose to the grindstone, conform, and he
said they are the straiteners. And I think, as time goes on, you can see in this
debate again about an Australian republic, people coming out saying yes it
very clear, we are a unique nation, that our Head of State shouldn't be the
Monarchy of another country but there are still those people who say oh no,
you can't let Australians manage themselves. Not quite yet not quite yet.
They are not sure when it is, but not quite yet.
At any rate, we have come a long way together, and I think we have got an
opportunity now we have never had. And that is, one hundred years ago, all
the markets we dealt with, all the people we traded with, were essentially in
Europe, and sometimes in North America. This is the first time in Australian
history the European history of Australia, the non-Aboriginal history of
Australia where we are closest to the fastest growing markets in the world.
So, now on our doorstep are markets growing faster than the traditional
markets we used to have. And the thing I am most pleased about, is that
Australia has set itself up in the last 10 years to be part of that
psychologically, culturally, economically. Because you can't go and say to
old societies like Indonesia 200 million people here we are, we are the
Australians, not the Australians of a White Australia Policy, but a proud
nation, Australians, we relate to you and we have respect for your culture,
and they say show us how you treat your indigenes, and we will show you
how you will treat us. You can't go there without integrity you can't
approach these nations, and be part of this community here without integrity.
That means that we have to come to terms with our own history and bring
our culture, be clear about what our culture is, and who we are as a people
before we can go out and do that. Now, I believe we are doing these things,
and our relationship is such now with Asia I can't believe that at any stage in
our history that we have had a better relatio nship than we have now, whether
it be with Indonesia, or with Vietnam, and two weeks ago I had here the most
distinguished Vietnamese, the General-Secretary of the Vietnamese
Communist Party, who is now turning Vietnam into essentially a market
economy after those years of deprivation. Or last week, where we had the 
annual Ministerial Meeting with our Japanese colleagues in this case, the
Minister for International Trade and Industry, Mr Hashimoto, and Mr Kono,
the Foreign Minister. The two most important people in the LODP which is
the Party which has essentially managed Japan all through the post-War
years. I mean, we have got these relationships now, and we are building
them up.
And we can see an interesting life for ourselves an interesting engagement
with this region, a better standard of living, more jobs in Australia, and a
higher level of income for Australians. You compare that to the cloistered
little country we were back in 1983 ring-fenced by tariffs, ring-fenced by a
managed exchange rate. Sitting there, wondering which way to go: our
national income falling, because the things we had relied upon traditionally
wheat, wool, minerals being of much less value, and bringing much lower
prices and sitting there watching the income go down, the debt go up, our
competitiveness shot to pieces, no inner faith and confidence about
ourselves, coming out of a deep recession with very high unemployment and
inflation. I mean, that was the sort of yoke we were in, in 1983.
But, when you look at the progress now here we are, we are clear about our
identity, we pulled the tariff wall down, we have now got import competition
and exports. Yesterday, we had the highest level of exports per month in our
history we are seeing, in today's National Accounts, the inflation rate at
2.1 on the broadest measure of inflation for the year. We have just had
680,000 jobs since the last election can you believe that? 680,000 jobs
since the last election. It took us 200 years to get 6 million people in the
labour market, and we have added 10% of that in 2 1/ 2 years. I mean, it's a
profound change. And today, with today's National Accounts, where we have
another quarter of growth, we have 16 consecutive quarters of growth. The
last time we had 16 consecutive quarters of growth was 25 years ago a
quarter of a century ago. Four straight years of growth, four straight years of
employment, four straight years of getting on top of inflation and giving us
back our economic future. And yet my opponents talk about 5 minutes of
economic sunshine in their cynicism, they talk about 5 minutes of economic
sunshine. It is the longest growth phase in a quarter of a century. And it is
now our opportunity to build on these things, but we have done all of this
together the Government has done it with the Australian people. It has
done it with the Trade Unions we have put it into a consensual model,
where consensus matters. We have said at that Economic Summit way
back there in 1983 that the policies of conflict can't give us the economic
future we wish. That we can't have wage explosions that give workers a short
term wage increase to see it dashed by high inflation a year later. That we
need high investment to get high employment and that we need high
investment to rebuild our capital stock to give us the exports and import
replacement that will generate our wealth.
But, we need to do all of this in the context of inclusion. That is, we are one
nation and we are a nation together and it is not a nation for the high fliers
and the top end of town. It is a nation for everybody and so we said you are 
entitled to access and equity in health. You are entitled to access and equity
in education and you can have these things in a country this wealthy and at
the same time the goers who build the businesses can still have their go
becausq the profit share is very high, the tax system, the corporate tax rate is
by western world standards right on the line at about 35 or 36 per cent.
You can do all these things, but we don't have to go for the punishing and
straitening model of tearing people down and building an underclass.
At the last election you might remember me saying we won't leave the
unemployed behind, we won't have an underclass. Not that we might try not
to have an underclass, we won't have an underclass. When I introduced
Working Nation that great social change from the Government last year, that
was directed to the long term unemployed and now we've had since that time,
in these last two and a half years since the election, a quarter of all the jobs
have gone to long term unemployed people. In other words, it is typically the
case in most countries like Australia that the new entrants to the workforce
are the school leavers or the migrants. Those who are long term unemployed
stay out forever and they get marginalised, never to come back. We brought
them back. So, the place is not only more fully employed, but it is happier
and it is more fair.
So, doing it together in a consensual way without a conflict model. It means
that in this country, if you are single or if you are married or you have children
and you wake up and you are sick you have got Medicare there to support
you. Ten years ago three kids in ten completed secondary school. This year
it is eight in ten and we have added about 60 per cent of places to higher
education since the middle 1980s and you can see this by the growth in
higher education and we have the Chancellor here today just to make the
point for us. The reach of higher education and the access for higher
education which we now have.
But, how could we be the smart society that wanted to make the engagement
with Asia, that wanted to sell the clever products and the services and not just
another paddock full of wheat or wool as important as they are but to do
the other things too, the high value added products, the intellectual property,
the services, how could you do it when only three kids in ten completed
secondary school? I mean, what hope did we have?
This is the faith our opponents had in Australia. An elitist higher education
system, an elitist secondary school system. Seven out of ten didn't make it
bad luck. That was their philosophy bad luck, no faith in you. Of course,
never distinguishing the point that so many bright people are the children of
low income parents who make their way and make their change in this
society, but they were marginalised because they were not allowed to take
their place because the great liberator in a society like this is education. And,
it was through this change that we have been able to see the proliferation of
higher education, the regionalisation of higher education, the access to
higher education and now, of course, for that six in ten kids who leave
secondary school who were formerly untrained, we are bringing up the TAFE 
system into a national structure to have vocational education sitting out there
beside the universities as a place to educate our children. The children in
the main of working class parents.
Now, that is what inclusion is all about. That is what the consensual model is
all about. So, when you go to the trade unions and say ' give us sensible
wage outcomes and low inflation', we'll give you back high employment,
access to education for your kids, a decent health system and a decent
system of income support and a decent system of income support in old age
with a pension and superannuation. We have got that agreement. That is
what the Accords are all about. If it has worked so well for Australia, why
would you tip it out? Why would you not have it? To go back to industrial
fights so that one strong group can go and pick up a 15 per cent wage
increase at the expense of other lower income groups to find it blows the
inflation rate out of the water twelve months later and they end up with
another three or four percentage points on interest rates. That is what will
happen under our opponents. Were they to win an election, they eschew and
reject any Accord, you would immediately see the unions protect themselves
and go for wage increases. Immediately the Reserve Bank would start
sticking interest rates back up and it wouldn't be by half a percentage point or
one, it would be by three or four or five percentage points. In other words, we
would hold wages down by flattening growth, by flattening the whole
economy. In other words, rather than try to deal with the problem through an Accord or
some consensual arrangement directly, the Coalition would deal with it by
flattening the whole place and you end up like a west European economy. A
low growth economy running at one to two per cent. But, one to two per cent
doesn't provide the jobs. What we have in today's National Accounts is 3.7
per cent growth for the year. You may remember about a year ago it was
running at about six per cent and it was too. strong because we just couldn't
keep the goods and services up to it and the demand for imports was too high
and it went over into the current account and we said we have to slow this
down and we have. And, it has come back from six per cent to a strong,
sustainable 3.7 per cent. In other words, if you look at today's Accounts
figures 3.7 per cent for growth for the year, 2 per cent for inflation and
strong employment growth which we have seen over the course of the year
we have got the economy, at the moment, where we want it. We have got the
economy growing sustainably as I say for four straight years or 16
consecutive quarters.
This didn't happen by accident. It has been put there, not by spin doctors or
smart advertising agents, or smart party secretaries or people passing notes
to ministerial offices or words into the ears of journalists, it happened there by
policy. This all happened by policy. It happened by substance and that is
why we can sit here with our lunch and know that the Australian economy is
growing at a strong sustainable rate. That our core competitiveness has
been protected by low inflation. That those huge export growth figures that
we saw yesterday are going to continue because the model is in place. 
Look at the Government's last two major policy statements the Budget and
Accord Mark VIII. The budget took the budget back into surplus. We will be
in surplws now for the rest of the 1 990s. Which means as we need money for
investment and in these National Accounts today, these are strong
investment figures, as we need funds for the investment we will see it come
from the budget surpluses. We will also see it come from that other element
of the budget, national superannuation, where every Australian person by the
year 2002 we are talking about seven years from now will have 15 per cent
being put away for their income supplementation for the rest of their lives.
Which will mean for somebody who is now about to join or just joined the
workforce, they will have an income in retirement equal in today's dollars to
average weekly earnings. In other words, it will be about twice the pension.
But, it will do more than that. It will save trillions of dollars, thousands of
billions of dollars for our long run investment and our long run savings. So,
we don't need to put weight on overseas savings or on overseas debt. That
was the Budget.
A couple of weeks later we introduced Accord Mark VIII. Eight variations of
this since 1983. What did it say? Essentially, that we will have a wages
policy which is enterprise bargaining underpinned by a safety net. If you
don't get anything in the bargain, you get the safety net adjustment to make
sure that you can maintain your standard of living. They are modest safety
net adjustments of around $ 10 per week. Completely affordable in national
economic terms. But, the underpinning commitment which was in there. The
core commitment was that the ACTU and the unions will run the wages
system to produce two to three per cent inflation which is the target of the
Reserve Bank. So, you have got the trade union movement of the country
coming out, endorsing as a policy, the Reserve Bank's inflation target. It is
unheard of in the OECD area, in the western world area. I mean, you don't
find that kind of co-operation in countries they just generally don't have that
willingness, groups in society don't have that willingness to make those sorts
of commitments. Under the consensual model, we have got those sorts of
commitments and those two things, the Budget in surplus, the huge stock of
savings as superannuation and the commitment to low inflation, are the sorts
of things that really matter.
Now I noticed today in the Sydney Morning Herald, one of the barnacles of
the Press Gallery, Alan Ramsey is saying the Government has wasted the
year. The Government has wasted the year. Well have we wasted the year
with 16 quarters of growth, four straight years of growth? Have we wasted
the year with over 400,000 jobs in the last year, or 680,000 since the
election? Have we wasted the year bolting inflation down so that we maintain
our core competitiveness? You know, have we wasted the year giving
Australians, particularly the younger Australians, the notion that in retirement
they will have a standard of living akin to what they will have at work?
You know, have we wasted the year building a stock of savings our
opponents could have only dreamt of? Thousands of billions of dollars. 
Can you imagine the whole of the workforce having 15 per cent of their
income put away. That huge cash flow of that coming into national savings.
Instead -of that, what they want us to do is chase down Parliamentary
scandals and so-called, or worry about the sort of froth and bubble of public
life and not the policy. All that matters are the policy changes and I face an
opponent I mean I became Treasurer in 1983 after John Howard had left it
after five years as Treasurer. It was like a dentist going over bad work. You
know where he has done all the cheap jobs. You know, didn't touch the
exchange rate, believed in deregulation but didn't have the bottle, didn't
actually have the horsepower to actually float the dollar, believed in low tariffs
but couldn't knock over the tariff wall, believed in changing the waterfront but
couldn't do it. You know, believed in having a competitor to Telecom and
decent telecommunications services and lower phone prices, but never got
around to it. Left us with 11 per cent unemployment and 11 per cent inflation
and just by the sheer effluxion of time, and as their third choice in this
Parliament, he now says " well after you've spent 12 years of life putting it
back onto an even keel with your colleagues, I think I'll now take over. I will
come back and have a second go at wrecking
Well you see, you have got to say well look have you really got faith in this
country? Do you believe an Australian person should be our head of state?
No, he says " no, I still believe that the monarchy is best for us. Mind you, if I
were the Government, I might give you a referendum on the republic." But at
the referendum, the Government itself, would be in favour of the monarchy.
Oh say, oh that's terrific, thank you very much.
In other words, do you believe " No, I believe that the monarch of
Great Britain should be our head of state." Right. Do you believe that there
are good instincts in the Australian community, that they will come together,
that you can have things like Accords and that you can have, therefore,
higher growth, higher employment growth and a good social wage?
" No, don't believe in Accords, don't believe -there are these good notions
there at all. Believe it is going to be survival of the fittest. If you are
industrially strong, you take your pound of flesh. If you're not, bad luck."
Well, therefore, do you believe in a safety net? " Don't believe in a safety net.
You know, believe in the US system?
And here is the US Labor Secretary, Robert Reich, saying " In America, we
have had some of the highest employment growth in the world. But the army
of working poor in America, the lowest half of the American workforce haven't
had a real wage increase in 16 years." They haven't got beyond inflation in
16 years. In fact, they have wage declines. And I read a statistic last week,
that 70 per cent in the growth of American household income has gone to the
top 10 per cent of households and the bottom 20 per cent of American
households have lost 10 per cent of their income: an unconscionable division
of wealth. That is the sort of thing my opponents believe in. And then they
want to walk around and say " we believe in Australia, we believe in the good
things." I mean they want to take us back to an obscurantist, conflict model 
that we left in the late 1970s, early 1980s. And to pass up 16 quarters of
growth and low inflation and linkages into Asia
I said yesterday in the Parliament, I mentioned the General-Secretary of the
Vietnamese Communist Party. He came to Australia the week after Vietnam
was admitted as a full member of ASEAN the Association of South East
Asian Nations, with Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand etc full
member. That was two weeks ago. A week before that, the United States
had diplomatically recognised Vietnam again and they had exchanged
Ambassadors. The day he went home from here, the next day, he saw
Warren Christopher, the US Secretary of State in Hanoi. But John Howard
wouldn't see him in Australia because he is still fighting the Vietnam War and
he thinks a few Vietnamese in Western Sydney may not vote for him if he
were seen to be meeting Mr Do Muoi because of their memories of the
settlement of the Vietnamese conflict.
Now how can Australia hand stewardship of its Asia relationship to somebody
who plays these games and who doesn't understand that when you say to
these people a full member of ASEAN, to the leader of the country I will not
meet you or see you, I will snub you. Does he expect to be treated well by
the Thais, or the Malaysians, or the Indonesians, or even the Japanese who
run a western style economy? When Kono and Hashimoto were here last
week, they knew about it, they knew Howard had snubbed him. So these
things go around the region and then expect to say, after winning an election,
for Mr Howard to wander out there, into the Asia Pacific, and say " Here I am.
I believe in the monarchy. I still believe in all the trappings. I would have
knighthoods back, if I had the chance. And just, by the way, I will only talk to
the ones of you who I like."
Now, the thing is we are either in this, or we are not. We are either part of
this community of nations here, or we are not. We either go as a strong
vibrant society and culture, or we don't. We either go there proud of what we
are and what we have become, or we go there as some sort of derivative
society on the back foot. Now these are the issues. But you can't be like that
away from home, if at home you are divisive, you have a conflict model, you
don't bring everybody in and we are all not part of the one nation. You can't
cheat at home and kid people outside. It has got to be genuine right through.
You can't say the Native Title Act is a day of shame. That Mabo is an act of
shame and, at the same time, say to the Asian nations around us, we want to
be part of the community of nations in this part of the world.
So in coming here today to support Maggie, who is a new Member of
Parliament, but a good Member of Parliament. Who is a person of the
community who has faith in Australians and likes them, wants to be with them
and know them and represent them. This is the sort of governing Party
Australia needs, of people like this. Who have a genuine understanding of
community sentiment and see the good things in Australians. Who feel the
good sentiments and the good vibrations and not wanting to put their heads
down and make them keep their place and straighten and punish them and 
say " Well, if you are strong you get a big wage increase and if you are weak
bad luck and there is no safety net for you and there is no Medicare for you.
You go out there and put your hand in your pocket and if your kids get sick
you go and pay for it and by the way we only like certain Asians and not
others." I mean this is not the sort of Government Australia needs. But the
Government Australia has got has been the great Government of post-War
change in this country and the runs on the board are sitting in those national
accounts data today. And it should be a matter of great pride to Australians
that together we have all produced this result 16 quarters of growth.
I guarantee there is not another OECD economy, since the world recession,
which has had 16 consecutive quarters of growth.
So these are the things to have pride in. That we care about our children,
that we won't leave them uneducated, that we give them that access and we
lift them up and we believe in them and we let them do their best to put their
mark on Australia and that we have equality of opportunity and fairness.
But, at the same time, we have a good profit share, strong investment growth,
a sustainable growth rate in the economy and good employment growth. In
other words, everyone gets a cut of the action. It is not for one section or
another. Now, I think, that is the model we believe in. We believe in the model that
brings the best out in Australia and Australians, that doesn't play favourites,
that doesn't try and chop the thing up factionally, or in a partisan way. And
what these last 12 years have proved is that that model works and I think the
point we would like to make to you today is that it is the model for Australia to
have one where we are together and we believe in one another and that we
are kind to one another. A society which is a kindly society and not a hard
bitten, devil take the hindmost, society, . a Ia the American Republicans,
a la some of the other right-wing governments around the world. It is not for
Australia, it is certainly not for Paul Keating and it is not for Maggie Deahm.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT CORRIDOR OF OAKS TREE PLANTING, JACKSON PARK
AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It is a great occasion for me it may be that one's Prime Ministership is
confirmed when one plants a tree here. At any rate, we will have a tree. And
I am glad that I have had the opportunity to plant it. It's always been
that... . there are places in Australia which are quite important to the
Federation, to the nation, and also the Labor Party. And Maggie ( Deahm)
has mentioned the fact that Macquarie was an electorate which, of course,
was the home of a former Labor Prime Minister in Ben Chifley, and as well as
that, Tony Luchetti when I first went to Federal parliament, had been the
Member for Macquarie for the better part of a quarter of a century. So there
are very great Labor traditions here in the Blue Mountains, and interestingly,
we have this connection with Henry Parkes. And it was the case, of course,
in the 19th century, most people of his standing in public life had a house in
the country. And his house in the country, of course, was at Faulconbridge.
And happily, it has been preserved. And he was one of the principal people
involved in the Federation of our nation. And the notion occurred to him as it
did to many others, that there was no point in us being simply colonies, but
rather that we should federate and become a nation. And this happened, of
course, on the first of January, 1901. And he played a very proud role in it.
And Faulconbridge has kept that connection with the birth of the Federation.
And here we are now, just a hundred years later, trying to close the circle and
see us establish an Australian republic with an Australian person as our
Head of State. It shouldn't have taken one hundred years, but better late
than never.
Now, I think that in these years, when we think back upon it, that great period
of Australian nationalism was in the 1890s it was one hundred years ago.
Where we saw the big maritime strikes, one of the worst droughts, one of the
worst depressions recessions but we saw the birth of Australian
nationalism, we saw the birth of the Labor Party and that sense of the nation,
of course, we saw the Federation in 1901, and that nationalism went through
until it was snuffed out in 1914 by the First World War. And we are seeing in Q 
a sense that regenerate in the 1 990s, where we have seen some of the same
characteristics: the early 1990s, the recession, the drought, but again, I think
a new sense by Australians in who we are and what we have become what
we have made for ourselves as a nation, and now, how we have come to
celebrate what we have created here in Australia. And we know that our
aspirations as Australians that the sentiments we feel and the instincts we
have will be completely represented when we represent ourself to the world,
as ourselves. And that we can't go on one hundred years later borrowing the
monarchy of another country and say here we are, making our way in Asia,
with this great opportunity, this ancient continent bequeathed to us, where
just two hundred years ago there were no people of European descent,
where this continent in a sense was saved by the Aboriginal community and
kept in trust for the rest of us. And having been kept in trust, and again
having that opportunity to go now as part of the community in Asia and say
" oh, just by the way, the Head of State of Australia is the Queen of Great
Britain". Now, it has served us, and in some parts of our history it has served
us well. But now, of course, we must make the break to do proud, to do
justice to all of the instincts which Henry Parkes had, and all of those people
interested in the Federation of the nation we now have to make that change,
and make it to an Australian republic.
And let me tell you this the moment it happens ( interrupted by train
passing) lI was going to say this that as we make this change, we will feel
good about ourselves. You know, once people understand that there is an
Australian person who represents the nation, and who is the embodiment of
the nation, it will make us feel stronger, and it will make us feel better about
ourselves it will make it more clear to us who we are and what we are, and
who we have become. So, today, I plant this tree not simply to do as other
Prime Ministers have done, but to celebrate the spirit of nationalism of a
century ago. To celebrate the fact that Henry Parkes his way up here from
Sydney, weekends and from time to time, while having in his heart and mind
the notion that we were better and deserved to be better than a collection
of disparate colonies. That we were a people and that we were a nation then,
as we certainly are today. That's why I am very pleased to be here.
I do have this collection of Henry's letters, and they are quite an interesting
lot of letters they are letters between Henry and his financier. He used to
lend him money from time to time, and a few other personal things as well.
So, all it proves is nothing changes nothing ever changes. So, can I say
also how pleased I am to be in the Blue Mountains, and particularly with
Maggie Deahm. I see her sitting next to Bob Debus part of a Labor
Government. The thing I say about the Labor Party is that it has always had
belief in Australia, and belief in Australians.
We have always seen the better instinct in. people there has always been
two categories of Australians, as Manning Clarke has always said: the
enlargers, and the punishers and straiteners. The people who have believed
in something bigger and better, who have faith in Australians, and belief in
them, that knew they could always do something more, and the people that
said " know your place, keep your eyes down, stay at your last that is our 
3
place in life", the straiteners. And it has always been about this. And the
enlargers have always had to pull Australia along, whether it has been into
Federation, or whether it has been into engagement with the rest of the world,
or whether it is to the republic, the enlargers whoever they might be have
always been about pulling the country progressively to the next stage. And I
was saying the other day John Olsen, the great Australian artist, at a
presentation about a year ago in Canberra, said " there are only two kinds of
Australians lovers and others, and we know what to think of the others, don't
Well, anyway, I am here on behalf of the lovers, of the enlargers, of
the people who believe in a bigger Australia. Who have faith in themselves,
have faith in these young people, in the children, who always see something
better. So, that's why I am planting the tree not simply to be part of a series,
but to be part of something new, and be part of something better. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE REMEMBRANCE DRIVEWAY CEREMONY, BASS HILL,
1 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you for those very kind words, Major General Latchford. Could I
recognise the Mayor, Councillor Max Parker, other distinguished members of
the Council, my Parliamentary colleague, Doug Shedden, members of the
Remembrance Driveway Committee and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here on this occasion. Indeed I have been
delighted with the Australia Remembers ceremonies over the course of this
year and I think it has been a good thing for our country, a good thing for the
soul of the country, to remember those who fought for us and those who died
for us. And, in doing this, we are saying that every Australian is special.
Every Australian particularly who fought for the liberties that we enjoy and
especially those who died for us. And that is why we are here to see this
Remembrance Driveway extended and to make that memory clear.
It is, I think, very poignant that this week we see this trouble in Sarajevo
where the First World War really began 80 years ago, the same city. And it
is a bit depressing to think that 80 years later, we are not free of these sorts
of conflicts and it makes it very obvious that we are not because the conflict
is in exactly the same place as it began. And we have spent most of this
century scrambling out of it. The First World War, of course, saw carnage on
a scale unequalled in human history and then it set up the conditions, of
course, for the rise of Nazism in Europe and Fascism in Italy and, as a
consequence, then with militarism in Japan we saw the Second World War.
And I know that the presumption is, of course, for the victors that the
righteous people won, the good guys won. But, of course, we nearly didn't
win in Europe. Had Hitler invaded Britain in 1940, and had he emasculated
the British Army in Dunkirk, we would have had great difficulty in getting a
beach-head in Normandy or anywhere else in Europe. And had he not made
the mistake of attacking the Russians who carried the war effort and the
burden of the war, really, from 1941 to 1 944 then we would have seen a 
different world in which Japan's expansionism may have been more profitable
for them, though it would have taken time to build the United States military
machine up. Countries, like Australia, would have been under even greater
threats than in fact we finally were.
So it would have been a different world and one can't say whether the
democracies would have triumphed in the final analysis. In the Pacific,
I think, we would. But, again, with a neutral Russia, one even wonders about
that. One thing is for certain, there was great sacrifice made all the way through
and we have enjoyed, now, 50 years of peace which is one of the longest
periods certainly the longest period in this century. But one we rejoice in
and one that we thank those who had to fight and, of course, who paid the
greatest sacrifice of all.
These are the things we remember and we want to teach our children about
these things, that liberty always come with a price and the freedoms we have
taken to be our own and are endemic to our way of life are not necessarily
part of the way of life of many people around the world and that the price of
liberty and freedom can often be an expensive one and many Australians
have paid the price.
The Second World War, of course, is the time when Australia's sovereignty
was threatened. It wasn't threatened in the First World War, directly.
It certainly was threatened, directly, in the Second World War and this was
the fight to save Australia and Australia was saved, in part, by the gallantry of
Australian servicemen and women, particularly in the campaigns in the
Pacific, in Papua New Guinea where I am going in another week or so in
places like Kokoda and, of course, before that in the Middle East and in
Europe. So this was great conflict and I think that we make clear that for those who
fought and died that it just had to mean something, that 50 years later it just
shouldn't be something that has happened in the past which has scant
attention paid to it. But that it had to mean something and that we remember,
that we do remember these people and that our children will know about it
and they will remember it too.
So I remember the Remembrance Driveway as being begun in my youth
because I used to motor around here not in a car, but on a bicycle past
those trees and we were conscious then what they meant. We have been
conscious since, probably not as conscious as we should be, but now of
course our consciousness about it will be renewed by this new endeavour
and stands of trees which are there to grace this area and to refresh our
memory and to pay tribute to these people.
I am particularly delighted that so many young Australians can be associated
with this. The LEAP Program is a program which has seen part of the
Greening of Australia right across the country. It has been done by young 
people with enthusiasm, under the Commonwealth Department of
Employment, Education and Training programs, and we thank them most
sincerely for their efforts and for their dedication and underline the fact that
this young generation of Australians have felt more poignantly the value of
Australia's environment and its nature, than other generations before them
have. And it is really to them we look for the preservation of this great
continent we have been bequeathed, to keep it in the kind of environmental
shape, to have respect and regard for it and to, perhaps, try and repair some
of the thoughtless damage which has been done.
Well here we are doing that to a dual purpose, to repair it, to replant it, but to
do so in memory of the people who served and were lost. So this is a nice
thing to do. I am delighted that the Committee has committed itself to this
project. Also, I am very pleased that the Roads and Traffic Authority can be*
involved. As is, of course, Bankstown City Council, which has always had I think a
good social heart and a good understanding of these things. But always
more importantly than all that, the community of this area which has always
been quite a clannish community, one that has always felt a sense ofcommunity.
And I think if the Second World War commemoration meant
anything, they really celebrate community action because the things we
always feel good about are the things we do together.
And I suppose the biggest thing we have done together, as a nation, is:
defend this country in the Second World War and it is that community action
we remember and that we commemorate. Again, it is the community actionhere
the community action by the Committee, and the young people, and.
the Government, and the Council but it is the community action of thepeople
of the area of Bankstown, which has in this case Bass Hill, which has
of course always given support to community values and to community
aspirations. So I am pleased to be back here. I used to drive down that road to thedrive-
in theatre, years ago, when it used to be there and around these
grounds on a bicycle. But they will always be special places to me. Morespecial
because of the things we have done today. Congratulations and
thanks. ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT A RECEPTION HOSTED BY THE HON WARREN
SNOWDON MP, HOTEL DARWIN, DARWIN, 5 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thanks very much indeed for that very warm round of applause.
I am delighted to be here with Brian [ Ede] and Bob [ Collins] and
Warren ( Snowdon] and Laurie [ Brereton] and our very distinguished
Parliamentary representatives and candidates here in the Northern Territory.
It is true, I think, that Bob and Warren have been a great team and yes they
have wrenched the money off me every time they have come through the
door. I used to say every time when you see that fat guy and the skinny
walking in, it is going to cost me money and they would saunter in all very
casual, but all very effective.
But the thing is it is a great thing for the Labor Party and Bob says we are
years old here. This is the oldest Labor Party in the world and we keep on
renewing ourselves and the thing that always keeps us going is faith in
Australia, faith in our fellow Australians and faith in the country.
Above all else, we have the policy disputes, but they are the things that keep
it rolling along and we keep producing these people that always push the
envelope out, that always enlarge it and make it bigger. And we have got a
double here in the Northern Territory with Bob and Warren and I sometimes,
you know, because you tend to, in Cabinet meetings, study people in sitting
there opposite you because everyone is a psychiatrist in politics, you look
into your little foibles and manners and characteristics, strengths,
weaknesses and you know you get very proud of a group of people like this.
And I was looking at Bob only a week or so ago, I am not saying that..
I mean it is hard not to miss him by the way. I am not saying this because
I am here, but I thought well there he is, he has sauntered in and you know
he is in an open neck shirt and I thought well look at the change he has
brought to Australian agriculture.
The previous week I was in Queensland at the. Graingrowers Conference and
there was great warmnth toward&amp; s the Labor Party from an area which has 
2
been traditionally a non-Labor voting and supporting group and it is because
with the drought, and the severity of it, this Government has kept income
support under that whole community. Now 10,000 farm families get income
support from the Commonwealth to tide them through this drought. There is
also funding under the Rural Adjustment Scheme and these are the sort of
props we put in to keep agriculture in place while the drought was on and
Bob has done an absolutely original and first rate job in putting all of those
things into place.
And you think well remember him in the Assembly, he goes to the Federal
Parliament as a Senator you take your chance in the lucky dip of the Federal
Caucus. He bobs up in a ministry, in a number of ministries where he has
done important jobs in transport, in communications and in agriculture and
we keep on producing people that do these things, that do good things for
Australia, understand the ethos, really love the country and want to advance
it. You know the others just don't breed them like we do. They just don't.
So he is almost tailor-made for the job of Minister for Agriculture. Bob is out
there, sort of you know, chews the fat with all these farmers and he
understands, of course, well. And the same I can say about Warren. I mean
Warren is a terrific Member of Parliament, a great constituency member.
He genuinely represents the place, understands all the balances, pushes the
envelope when he can, knows when not to, tries to get the best right and
I think this is most obviously true during the Mabo discussion, the Native Title
Legislation, which was a year long, tooing and froing over little details of a
complex piece of property and cultural law, which we had to build from the
ground up.
And this sort of value for the Labor Party.. you know it is not a huge
financially strong organisation, it's a collection of ordinary Australians who
have come together for the public good of it because of their commitment to
the country and we have produced Members of Parliament and Senators and
they go on to the Government and they make a tremendous contribution.
Whatever people might think organisationally about the Labor Party in the
Northern Territory, or in any of the other States, here you have produced two
cracker representatives who really are doing you proud let me assure you.
I am delighted to know them and to be in a Party with them and to be
colleagues of them and Laurie, of course, followed Bob in the transport
portfolio. And they have extended you know we were down today opening
the international terminal at Brisbane airport which we did in 1992, I think.
You turned the sod? He is a good sod turner. Turning over sod is an
accomplished art, I can tell you, and of course Laurie is here today as the
Minister presiding over the opening. So you know, again, it is just another
milestone in the great aviation story of Australia of course which the north
has played such a role in of course as we know Queensland with Qantas in
particular. So these are the things that make you proud to be in the game and, you
know, standing. here with a fellow like Brian who is a good leader, with good
values, you are~ proud to belong to the same Party as these people. I am
very proud indeed. 
When I came across today we took off from a very nice ceremony in
Brisbane, where again you see one of the principal gateways of the east
coast of Australia to Asia, you think of the way in which the country has
changed. And we flew over across the north, across Cape York, up through
the Gulf, some of the most beautiful landscape you could imagine on the way
down into Darwin. You think how big it is and how beautiful it is and to think
that it was held in trust for the rest of us by the Aboriginal community all those
thousands of years and that is why we owe it to them and to ourselves to
make a decent fist of it.
To know what a great thing we have been, a great bequest it is that this
ancient continent has been left to us to enjoy, to live from and to protect,
to protect this place and to understand that you almost have to live half your
life, if your a non-Aboriginal Australian, to understand a little bit about it and
to appreciate it more and there is something about the ancient quality of it.
It gets to you as you get into your middle years, I think.
I don't think I understood it as well when I was young. But I understand it
better now and you feel the ancientness, if I could use the expression, of it
and you know what an absolutely enormously rich bequest it has been
because there is no continent reserved for any other group our size and here
we are with these old societies like Indonesia, near us, and the great
emerging country of China, an emerging economy of a billion people and
these old proud societies like Japan and Korea in the region.
We are now part of that region. We are part of that family of nations.
We turned over the leaf from 20 years ago, when we were selecting people to
come here on the basis of race. It is not that long ago and we have done a
good thing in supporting the High Court, when the High Court -said in an
English speaking country like this, your common law comes from European
custom and tradition and we have now said your common law also comes
from Aboriginal custom and tradition. This is a great change. Because it is
the most honest recognition of the value to the rest of us of Aboriginal life and
custom and tradition and, as Brian has remarked, we have had the pleasure
of giving expression to how that title will be used and awarded in law with the
Native Title Act.
But these things and this opportunity we have in this part of the world, I am
sure they [ in Asia] say of us " show us how you relate to your indigenies and
we will show you how you relate to us" and I think we have made a
psychological leap as a country. We have righted a wrong with terra nullius.
We have engaged the community of countries around us. We don't select
people on the basis of race. We know we have been given a great
opportunity, that we can't squander. But Australia is a different place, it is no
longer a monoculture, it is a multicultural place. It is a lively interesting place
and we are now clear that we have been given this great opportunity.
I think as we have intemnationalised the country, as we have made the leap
with our exports into Asia, as our business culture has changed, as we have
approached these countries, we have changed ourselves. We have changed
our outlook in our culture and we do want to be a part of this community of 
countries around us and we do see this as a tremendous opportunity here.
And it has always been true, I think it is completely true because the
Labor Party has always had this belief in Australia and through the
wholesome view it has, it wants to see a happy society here and wants to see
us be a-part of this greater society around us.
I think there is a point of excitement about Australia, we haven't seen, not in
my lifetime, that we are seeing now. You see the bounty and the opportunity
when last week we had the economy growing at 3.7 per cent against the
year, sixteen straight quarters of growth it is the longest phase of growth in
years we have doubled our exports in ten years, we are educating about
three times as many kids as we were ten years ago. Eight out of ten young
people now finish secondary school, that is feeding through our higher
education institutions, that is feeding the product innovation, that is feeding
the exports.
All of these things are making this a much more bountiful and exciting country
and that sense of excitement is out there. I mean the polls might'nt measure
all this. But if you go to Australians today and say " do you think Australia has
a greater future, it is more secure, more certain of itself, more clear of what it
is, more exciting?" I think they would answer in the affirmative. And I think
that is very much what the next election will be about.
John Howard thinks he is being tricky and clever hiding his policies. But he
is not hiding them from me, he is hiding them from the Australian public.
He says " I am not going to show that Prime Minister our policies until it suits
me." That really is just simply cynical code for saying " I am not going to show
the Australian public my policies, until the last moment or if ever'.
Now I think that honesty in politics can only be about policies. It can only be
about policies and where you stand and I take the view, maybe an old
fashioned view, that the public have a right to know from the major parties
what we think the big issues are and what the direction for Australia ought to
be. I mean if they don't have that right, what right do they have? At least for
the party leaders and the party to articulate the visions, the steps and the
future for Australia. That is what we are doing.
But John Howard is not doing that. He is playing a tricky, cynical, little
political game trying to hide his policies because he thinks the public won't
like them and you see this is not, if you like, honesty in politics. They try and
compare themselves with the American Republicans. But at least you have
got to see of Newt Gingrich, even if you don't agree with him, he puts his
policies into the marketplace " that is what I stand for, If we get a Republican
majority in the Congress that is what we will do. These will be our yardsticks.
This is what our sheet anchor will be. You will know where we are coming
from. We will go in there and we will actually do it because we will have your
authority as a community and the constituency of the United States to do it."
What do our conservatives do? No contract with Australia. No honesty.
No policies in the marketplace. No mandate that they can claim. They want
to try and slip under the wire without owning up to what they stand for and
when they get there, without of course a mandate, they will just slip back to 
their prejudicial policies of old. And for Howard it will be the old ones
cutting the guts out of wages, straightening up working people, gutting
Medicare.. ( Interjection: And Anti Discrimination legislation.)
Well that too. All the things. You see that is what he will be about. He will
be about back to those sorts of things. You saw them at the last election.
You know there are only two members of the Shadow Cabinet that were not
there when Fightback was put together. Now have they all had a Pauline
conversion on the road to Damascus? Have they seen the light, or do they
really believe in full fees for university students? Do they believe in the
lowest common denominator for wages? They believe in no award
protections. They believe in no support of award underpinnings of a wage
system, that gives all the flexibility in the world. Well, of course, they don't.
They believe in all the things they have always believed in and, of course, the
unspeakable thing that Howard believes in, the three letters they can't utter,
is GST. He really believes in the GST.
You look at his whole career. It has been about three things. It has been
about kicking income up to the highest level income families to income
splitting. It has been about introducing a consumption tax and it is about
what he calls labour market reforms, which is code for cutting the bottom
quarter of the labour market back. That is what he believes in. That is all he
has ever had to say and I mean Australia is a small country. We all know he
goes on. He goes around the board rooms. I don't know whether he thinks
I don't know about these things. I mean in some of these board rooms, I can
hear the ants change step. You can hear the little zings. See the thing is I
know they say: " Look he has no ideas. He has no ideas." He sits there, he
goes there and recites all the old stuff and about mostly how they are going
to nail us.
But, of course, these people are running businesses. They want to know how
they are going to keep their business growing. So he thinks because they
are business executives, they are part of the sort of Liberal Party club, or the
Liberal supporters and when he leaves they are all happy with him. Well
they are not happy with him. They are not and we have some people saying
to us in the media " oh well, Labor has lost the touch with business".
You know some journos sitting constipated on a stool looking at a PC,
tapping away in the Press Gallery. You know never been near a board room
in ten years, telling us we have lost contact with business. I mean the fact of
the matter is, that the Coalition has the same obscurantist view they had back
in the 1970s. Australia has moved on, we are a completely different country,
we have changed, we have made the leap into Asia, we are more confident
about ourselves. Our culture has changed, it is ours now, it doesn't belong to
anyone else. We want it to be like this.
We have made great changes as a country and the public have been right in
there with them and that is the sort of country it is -now. There is a floating
exchange rate. Interest rates are set in the market. Wages are set by 
enterprise or collective bargaining. It is not the old tricked up, bolted down,
scene it was when Malcolm Fraser and John Howard were playing
Prime Minister and Treasurer all those years ago and they think they are
going to walk back in and because they think they're the pinstripe suit
brigade-and they are back in business, the people are going to say " oh well
that is it, let's put another five cents on the dollar, you know let's knock a
couple of percentage points off interest rates". I mean they have got no idea
of what it is like keeping all of those balls in the air the exchange rate,
interest rate, wages, inflation, keeping it all up there.
Only a Labor Government has ever done it under a market system like this.
They have got no idea and have a look at them. Howard will be the
Prime Minister and Fischer would be the Deputy Prime Minister. You have
got to say where are we going? And then you have got Costello who does
his you know.. I didn't think anyone could out-snarl Peter Reith but he has.
Look he is one of our great assets. He always earns a round of applause.
Him and Andrew Robb, they are out there.. you know that song " I've got my
mojo working." Well we have got them out there working. Costello and
Robb, every day, every time they are out there, we move up. So there is him.
And then after that you'll say " well who else is there? Who is the education
person?" Well that is.. we always call him Count Yorga Vampire Kemp.
And then for business, there is Prosser. I mean what a side, what a side,
and, of course, this is not lost on the business community. I mean those
captains of industry who are picking up the million dollar salaries, they are
not going to be managed by this crowd. There is a bit of professional pride
there. I mean they may be in the Liberal Party, but they are not going to be
run by them.
So look, the thing is, I think that from our point of view we have got Australia
now growing strongly. We have had 680,000 jobs growth in 2 1/ 2 years.
That is an absolutely phenomenal number 680,000. I mean I made the
point this way recently. It took us from 1788 to 1983 to get to six million and
we have added over 10 per cent more in 2 1/ 2 years. It is unbelievably
strong. I mean we went to the election. What was our principal commitment?
That we would restore the economy to growth and employment. We have
had 16 quarters of growth, we have had enormous employment growth and
there has been complete fidelity in those core commitments we have made to
the Australian public throughout the period.
So we can go and we have taken the big issues on like Native Title, like the
Land Fund, like the republic. All the things that will paint the way Australia
will be in the 21st century. So we can look the public in the eye and say
these are the sorts of things we stand for great initiatives like Working
Nation, that pick up the long term unemployed. Or the labour market
programs, or in education, or in health and we will develop, as always, our
policy stance for the next election. We won't be hiding.
There will be no obfuscation on the part of Labor. We will have our policies
out there in the marketplace. We won't be slipping around and there will be
no business saying am not going to show my policies to John Howard",
because all that would mean is we are not going to show our policies to the
Australian public and we have an honest relationship with the Australian 
public. We don't need to be tricky. We have faith in them. We have faith in
them to see through charlatans, people who have no ideas and people who
are not going to be honest with them.
So this is going to be, again, another important election, when it comes, for
Australia. It is going to be to keep the strength of the changes coming
through, to keep the linkages with Asia. Here was Howard last week.
We had down, on his first ever trip to the west, the General Secretary of the
Vietnamese Communist Party, someone running a country of 70 million
fought the French, fought the Americans, fought the Chinese turning it now
into a market economy. He wouldn't see him. He wouldn't see him, he
snubbed him. He wouldn't meet him and Do Muoi went home to meet the
American Secretary of State two days later.
I mean it gives you some idea and yet Howard says he wants the stewardship
of the Asia relationship for Australia and yet the week he snubbed Do Muoi,
was the week they became full members of ASEAN. So what do the
Malaysians, the Singaporeans, the Indonesians, the Thais, the Philippines,
what do they think about when one of their partners was snubbed? Because
why? Because he thinks there are a few votes out there with the Vietnamese
community in Western Sydney and in parts of Melbourne. That is it. Just for
the same reason he told those kids at Saint Ignatius High School that he
would put a prohibition on uranium exports to France. He will say whatever
he thinks will get the attention and the approbation at the moment. But in
terms of the serious stewardship of the country's interests, he can't be relied
upon and he can't be trusted.
So I want to thank you for believing in us, for supporting us, for having faith in
the better values which the Labor Party has always had on offer and knowing
that we are at the cusp an exciting part of our history as we come into the
21st century, as we throw off all the linkages to the vestiges of our past in
terms of the things, our Constitutional linkages with Britain. These things
which have been useful to Australia but are useful no longer. And that as we
take that turn on the centenary of our federation and into that 21st century,
that we will be the people marking out the way for Australia.
Now that is what I think this election coming is going to be about and that is
why I thank you for supporting us, supporting my colleagues with me tonight
and coming along to hear what we have got to say. But more than that,
simply to lend a hand. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW INTERNATIONAL TERMINAL
AT THE BRISBANE AIRPORT, BRISBANE, 5 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much, Laurie [ Brereton], Frank Conroy, Premier,
Parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen.
Well it is a pleasure to open such a lovely building. This is an obviously
elegant and functional thing and what I like about it is that this is not an
international building. It wasn't borrowed from the plan cupboard of some
firm of American architects, or European architects. It was designed by
Queensland architects I think the name is Bligh Voller. They were involved,
also, in the other terminal and I congratulate them and I congratulate the
builders, Civil Civic, for doing something that reflects the confidence all of
us have in Australia.
This building is a confident building. It says something about Australia and it
says something about Queensland and I think the confidence that Australia
has, Queensland has by the bucket. This-is a very confident place. I think it
has and I have said recently a wind behind it now in Queensland it didn't
have so many years ago. And it may be that the state of political opinion is
divided in Queensland, but the state of confidence certainly isn't.
It is growing. It is growing at the moment about 1 percentage point faster
than the rest of Australia and it is a great tribute to Wayne Goss and his
Government that when the rest of the country is moving along at 3.7 per cent,
Queensland is moving along at 4.6 per cent or 4.7 per cent.
So it is, I think, not just simply an addition to the stock of the aviation assets
in this country, but it is a building which says something about a few
important statements. One, about Australian architecture; two, about our
confidence; three, about the pride we have in the place; and, I think it
beckons to the neighbourhood we live in saying that here is an entrance to
Australia from the rest of the world, or an exit from Australia to the world we
live in around us, because we know we are now part of that community as we
have never been before and that we know we are a welcome part of that
community as well. 
2
We were just speaking at the table here talking about the impact of the
Kansei regional developments and Osaka airport, the impact that had here on
Brisbane, that one development. And we know that one of the great
challenges of foreign economic policy in these years will be preparing the
world for the entrance of the Chinese economy to it. That huge country with
its vast, rapidly growing economy and with it, of course, will be wealth,
consumerism, travel. All of this is going to have a major impact upon the rest
of us, upon our lives, upon our outlook and upon our business and travel
opportunities and these are all things, I think, that we are preparing for here.
If you look at Brisbane Airport, the domestic terminal and the international
terminal, you would have to say this a place going somewhere. This is a
place that wants people to come here. So I think that we are in that part of
the world where most of the major decisions in aviation are going to be made
and we made a few big ones ourselves in One Nation.
We took away any of the interface between the domestic and international
carriage of passengers. We folded Australian Airlines into Qantas. We gave
Ansett an international license. We have sought to build and we haven't yet
a trans-Tasman air service, a single Australasian destination, a single
Australasian airline market. But we have succeeded, I think, in strengthening
Qantas, which will now be a capital adequate company. In times of scarce
resources, Governments can't put the capital into businesses such as
Qantas.
We did a trade sale with British Airways which will bring, not only synergies,
but some airline intelligence to the board beyond that which, of course,
resides their naturally. But from, of course, another company with a different
perspective. Qantas will be a strong airline. The challenge now will be to
make Ansett strong and that will mean keeping the capital up to it and seeing
the growth opportunities come and seeing the development of a good solid
aviation market in Australia and in Australasia. These, I think, have all been
milestones. We have sought in that One Nation package not only to kick start the
economy back to growth, which in fact it has succeeded in doing but, at the
same time, drawing all the transport linkages together. Only just a month or
two ago, Laurie Brereton and I and the Premier have had the pleasure of
getting on the One Nation train, which is the first standard gauge linkage
between Brisbane and Perth, via Melbourne.
Now we are talking about bringing Track Australia into being, which will have
one track, a track business, whose job it will be to run a competitive
permanent way on which all manner of railway companies and locomotive
operators can operate, so we can start to see some balance back in our
transport away from road, to rail see these efficiencies rise while, at the
same time, we are seeing hubbing and also these linkages with the aviation
industry. So, there were, I think, some important touch stones there, certainly for
aviation. One of them was to bring the development of this airport forward.
Another through this period, of course, has been to fund the capital 
subscriptions we have needed for the FAG and to guarantee its borrowing
program and I'd like to take this opportunity to add to Laurie Brereton's
remarks in congratulating Frank Conroy and his fellow Directors on a job well
done in building quite rapidly the aviation assets, the terminal assets we've
needed in Sydney, Melbourne, Alice Springs, Darwin, Brisbane et cetera. To
get that critical mass for us for the growth in the tourism industry which we
have had. We can now start to sell those assets off, but we have now a
critical mass of assets that actually work for the country.
By bringing those market disciplines to aviation we are going to see a better
industry. We will see, probably, better services over time, tighter services,
better price services. We can see it in aviation when we deregulated the
airline industry, we saw prices fall by around 20 to 25 per cent and a 60 per
cent plus increase in passenger movements and already Sydney airport when
we sat down looking at that second runway, I think, Sydney is now just in a
few years since we began that construction is already well into the turn of
the century traffic levels that have arrived in an unanticipated way from the
deregulation of the airline system.
So, these things have happened and it does mean that we have a very large
tourism market on our hands and one which we can grow and, of course, with
the Olympics coming up at the end of the century it is going to make a terrific
difference to that.
But, I think, the thing that is making the greatest difference is the confidence
we have in ourselves. The confidence we have in Australia. The faith we
have in what we are able to do. Our sense of ourselves and our identity. All
these things are underpinning the growth of our tourism market, it is
underpinning the growth of the economy and here we are bolting along at
around 4 per cent growth with a couple per cent of inflation, just about the
highest employment growth in the western world and at the same time
anticipating now the building of a pacific rim community through bodies like
APEC, making these bilateral linkages around the region with important
countries we trade with and now grow with and live with. These are, I think,
the hallmarks of the sort of view we will always have of the place.
I was very pleased to see our Aboriginal dancers with us because Aboriginal
culture and tradition is now an important part of Australia's culture and
tradition. There was a milestone met when the High Court said that
Aboriginal custom and tradition will be a source of Australian common law
and there is a native title there. The ' Government had the pleasure of
legislating that. But not just that, in the celebration of those traditions and
customs, we are seeing that also reflecting in our tourism industry. We are
pleased about it and we know that when we come to terms with the Aboriginal
community we will come to terms with ourselves and understand better and
appreciate more the fact that this ancient continent has been bequeathed to
us and that they have held it in trust down through the centuries for us to
enjoy with them.
This view of Australia and Asia is important. Those societies around us like
Indonesia 200 million people old societies, say, show us how they treat
their indiginies and we'll see how they treat us. It is an indication of whether 
Australia has turned over a leaf or whether it hasn't. Whether it is still the
country that only 20 years ago selected people on the basis of race for
immigration. It is not a long time ago. They are big sins to live down, but we
have made a great start.
These are all the things, I think, that are caught up in the confidence we now
have and we are now well and truly locked into the fastest growing part of the
world. For instance, the thing that changed most our lives has been the 747,
given us mobility that other generations have never had and yet the decision
about whether Boeing puts another lid on the 747 or builds a new aircraft are
going to be made in Asia. They are not going to be made in Europe or North
America, they are going to be made in Asia. They are going to be made
probably in APEC. They are going to be made in airports such as these and
they will have huge implications for us when they are made.
Today we do celebrate the opening of this terminal, in a way we are
celebrating the buoyancy that Brisbane has as well. We are celebrating the
fact that very shortly we are going to see further growth in air traffic
movements here. This will be the second busiest airport in Australia before
very much longer and I think the things the Premier mentioned the Casino,
the Exhibition Centre even more perhaps poignantly and recently the
Australia Remembers 50th commemoration, I think, lends further support to
the notion that Brisbane has caught its wind and it is really off and running
and it has got a critical mass and a depth and a cultural interest that it didn't
have in the past. This should be a matter of great national joy. It is to me. It
is why I am very happy to be here today to see this built in a Queensland
way, a Queensland sort of building with new things, like, there is no interface
( airside) of the building is now the one side with this innovation we see
upstairs and there won't be a wailing wall anymore at the airport. We will be
able to look through. So here we have got space, light, colour, elegance, we
have got all of those things and it is unmistakably Australian. That is why I
am so pleased to declare it officially open. Thank you.
ends 



771
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE MCARTHUR RIVER MINING PROJECT,
NORTHERN TERRITORY, 6 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed, Administrator, Chief Minister, Ambassador Hasegawa,
your colleagues Mr Kohno and Mr Sakamoto, the Chairman of Mt isa Mines
Mr Bruce Vaughan, distinguished members of the company, my ministerial
colleagues who are with me Laurie Brereton and Bob Collins Barry Coulter
Minister from the Northern Territory involved with the project, Warren
Snowdbn the Member for the Northern Territory, members of the Government
of the Northern Territory, other distinguished representatives and ladies and
gentlemen. It has been a great pleasure for me to be able to come here today, to
participate in this project which, I think, many will see as part of the
renaissance of one of Australia's great mining companies Mt Isa Mines.
This is a company with a great tradition in mining in this country. One that
goes back many years to that great deposit at Mt Isa and the mining of it and
in other important projects and that great pioneering and adventurous spirit
which we have seen from this company and from Australian mining.
I think we are seeing something new today. We are seeing the adventurous
spirit of Australian mining coupled with a new understanding about the
environment, new technology and social responsibility. That is what, I think,
makes this project so significant. It is not just another project. It is a project
which might not have happened though it always had the potential to happen.
It has happened because people wanted it to happen. Governments wanted
it to happen. The company with this technology wanted it to happen and they
found a partnership again with our great partners in Japan to make it happen.
All of these things, I think, are milestones in its future.
Mr Fruend ( Executive General Manager, Project Development, MIM Holdings
Limited) was kind enough to mention One Nation and yesterday I had the
pleasure of opening the new international terminal in Brisbane which was part
of the One Nation program as well. A month earlier, I had the pleasure of
joining Laurie Brereton on the One Nation train which for the first time carried
freight from Brisbane to Perth via Melbourne on a single gauge and which 
tied the country together as never before and yesterday I reminded people in
Brisbane that in One Nation we removed the interface between the domestic
and international carriage of passengers, where we folded Australian Airlines
into Qantas and then made it a strong private company, where we are now
trying tobuild Ansett as an international as well as a domestic company. We
saw One Nation as pulling Australia together the very name underwrote the
concept and at the same time kick start the economy which it did and since
then, of course, we have had 16 consecutive quarters of growth. Four
straight years of growth. It is the longest phase in Australian growth in
years with low inflation at around 2.5 per cent.
We are now outgrowing most other western economies and as a
consequence we have had huge employment growth at around 4 to 5 per
cent employment growth, around three times as much as most other
comparable industrial societies.
As a consequence of One Nation we introduced something to kick start
projects such as this. And we kick started them with the investment
allowance, but they needed more than that, they needed co-operation. They
needed to be brought together and because One Nation also implied bringing
it together as one, we had a co-operative venture between the Government of
the Northern Territory, the Government of the Commonwealth, Ministers of
the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory and, of course, co-operation
with the Aboriginal community of this area. With that co-operation we gave
the lie to the notion that the Aboriginal people are opposed to development,
that things can't be done and we have given not only birth to a new mine and
to a new enterprise, but a new spirit of co-operation which will underpin the
Mabo legislation and all of the other things which will follow once we
recognise some of the essential truths that had to be recognised. That there
was a civilisation here before European people arrived. That now, because
of our High Court decision, the common law of Australia no longer comes
from European custom and tradition but also Aboriginal custom and tradition
and that the Commonwealth has enacted a piece of law which pulls together,
understands who has this title and how it can be awarded, but in the granting
of it tries to make a reparation or reconciliation with Aboriginal Australians
which is honest and real.
That is why this project is going because that good will is there. And it came
from the companies, it came from the governments and, I hope, one of the
consequences of it is that MIM which has been at various times in recent
years, in the doldrums particularly with low zinc prices, could find itself reborn
as a company, as a new age Australian company, as a can do business that
gets things done. Against the odds, it has been able to develop this project
and I certainly pay a tribute to the company. To Bruce Vaughan Chairman,
Nick Stump Chief Executive Office and to Peter Freund who was the ramrod
on the project to get it going, that these people saw something better beyond
silly factionalism and mindless politics and mean spiritedness towards the
Aboriginal communities displayed by other mining companies and they
actually got it up and got it running. At $ 300 million a year or thereabouts, if
the mine runs for 20 years we will see around $ 6 billion a very large addition 
to the country's wealth and accords a large addition to its capacity to pay its
way. Let me also take this opportunity to salute the technologists because there is
a new terchnological barrier being breached here in milling this product down
to a very fine powder and then finding the extractive processes to take the
silicates et cetera from it to produce the zinc. I would say to our colleagues in
Japan I hope that they understand that when they deal with an Australian
business, and I'm sure they do, that it is real and it will be here in five years
or ten years or 15 years and that when you do business with Australia you
don't wake up in the morning, some morning, to find a general in charge of
the country, that it is the solid democracy, that our word matters that you can
litigate your interests here in our courts and like you we are a democracy and
also like you we don't have a two tiered society. We used to have the
remnants of our failed upper class, they have disappeared, thankfully, into
obscurity. And as a consequence, we have essentially, one group of
Australians as you have one group of Japanese. I think this is an important
thing, that the egalitarianism which exists in Australia also exists in Japan.
This is not well understood in Australia. It is one of the reasons we do things
together and we do them well. As the Ambassador and I know, all to happily,
of the great partnership we now have with the Government of Japan and the
people of Japan, better than a commercial partnership, a great political and
human partnership which has put the war years and the rest behind us and
where we are now, through APEC, building a great pacific rim community and
where, I think, we enjoy a relationship of trust which our two countries have
never enjoyed before and one, I think, Japan rarely enjoys with any other
country in the world. This is a matter of great pleasure to us.
I'd like to say that I hope that our Japanese colleagues Mr Kohno and
Sakamoto will find pleasure in this relationship as well as business and that
we will go on to do other great things together. Because we can, I think, be
relied upon. I'd like to take the opportunity to pay tribute to my colleagues,
one in particular, Laurie Brereton, who I have grown up with, of course, in
public life. Who pushed through all the big projects in NSW when weaker
spirits wouldn't have and who took over this transport and mining
responsibility from Bob Collins, who himself picked up the initial One Nation
projects but where Laurie had this particular task as a facilitator to try to push
this through as my Parliamentary Secretary. He did that, of course, with his
colleague beside him from the Northern Territory, Barry Coulter, and I think
Shane Stone and I here today to give evidence of that co-operation and to
say how pleased we are about it.
I hope the people of the Northern Territory can understand this. That their
media can communicate the fact that something good is going on here and
that something valuable has happened and that it is not about petty politics
and mean spiritedness or even the narrow and limited gaze of news editors.
That it is something grander than all of that and that people start to
understand these things. 
I want to say a special word about the Borroloola Aboriginal community and
their good will. To the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commercial
Development Corporation ( CDC) and Mawurli Corporation partners with
Bums Philp in the Bing Bong Project which we have just seen and to say
again this is the sort of involvement that we want to see with the Aboriginal
community. Not simply royalty takers, price takers in a market, but people
who are actually engaged in the business as well. Useful, responsible
partners in the development of Australia. And if we have trust in them and
respect for them we will see more of this. But those without faith and those
without trust and those without respect will get obfuscation as they have in
the past.
I'd like to say that the freehold title, I think it is Bauhinia Downs, which the
Commonwealth has purchased and given to the Gurdanji people and the
freehold title which will come from it pleases me enormously. I was glad that
the Commonwealth could spend $ 6 million diverting the road around the
Borroloola Aboriginal community to make this a much more pleasant project
for them. That all of these things could come together and that we could
underwrite a new future of co-operation for mining and for governments and
communities in this country.
This is a great continent. It is a rich continent. It is inhabited by people who
believe in the human spirit and in democracy. There is no end to its wealth,
to its bounty, to its abundance. We only need the sense and the good will to
be able to exploit it, but to do so in a way that pays tribute to the environment.
That lets people understand that the Aboriginal community were trustees of
this place for 40,000 years and have now given it to another society in
partnership which must have respect for the land and must understand what
a great inheritance we have been given. That is why it is incumbent upon
mining companies and the exploiters of the land, the pastoralists, to
understand this point. I am very glad that MIM does and in the new age of
mining that taking the best and leaving the rest is something that does belong
to some other epoch, that doesn't belong to now.
So, respect for the environment, for the Aboriginal community, for the
economic imperatives of Australia, for co-operation for the partnership with
Japan, these are all the things that we celebrate today and why we are so
pleased to be here for the opening of this historic project.
ends 



( 9
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS IN ANZAC PARK, THURSDAY ISLAND, 12 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Mr Getano Lui ( Chairperson, Torres Strait Regional Authority), Mayor ( Mr
Pedro Stephen), Elders, my friend Mr Ettle Pau ( Torres Strait Ex Servicemen's
Association) who presented a wreath with me, my colleague Peter Dodd,
distinguished members of the community, ladies and gentlemen and boys and
girls. Thank you very much for that wonderful warm welcome this afternoon. I have
always wanted to come to the Torres Strait. I am most happy to be able to
have come as Prime Minister and to come to this beautiful part of Australia.
I have been very moved by the speeches, the things that have been said by
your Mayor, by Miss Bakoi Bon ( high school captain), by Mr Waraka Adidi ( ex
serviceman), by Mr George Mye ( Chairman of Damley Island) and they all say
one thing, I think, and one thing that I certainly agree with and that is to say
that we are all pert of this great country Australia. We are all Australians, we
are Australians together. We will be Australians forever. And, that this great
multicultural country of ours is different in parts. We do have our separate, if
you like, ancestral backgrounds, but we have this commitment to this great
country and this great continent, held in trust for most of us by the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people of this country. It is now our bounty to enjoy
thanks to this wonderful bequest which you as indigenes of this country have
given us.
I am pleased to be here today. I am pleased to be here with my daughters, so
they can see this part of Australia too and know that the land they grow up in
is one of tolerance, one of equity and one of decency and one of pleasure and
one of frendship and one were the environment matters to us all. The place
we can all enjoy together.
I was particularly drawn by the references to Eddie Mabo. This is, I think, the
right place to say that a good thing was done a couple of years ago. A truth
recognised, a lie overturned when the High Court said that the common law of
this country doesnt simply come from the tradition and customs of people of
European decen It doesnt simply come from the British common law. Now it 
2
is said by our highest court that Australia's common law comes from the
traditions and customs of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander people.
So, it means that your customs and your traditions are as much a part of my
common law as they are of your common law. That is, in no stronger way
could it be said we are together and we are one than to say that our customs
and traditions and our cultures and beliefs form part of our common heritage in
our common law. From that law, of course, has sprung an indigenous title
which means you, as a people, are entitled to certain lands that have
traditionally been yours. This is a far greater right to come from the
recognition of your culture than to be given by some statute or act of
Parliament or act of grace or act of giving by a legislator because now it is
yours as an inherent right and perhaps it is late, but better late than never that
we have drawn a line in the sand and said that the lands which you make your
traditional connection with, that are not alienated are yours and we have set
up the processes for it.
The contemporary word was by the High Court, but the contemporary act was
by the Commonwealth Parliament in the Native Title Act and it all started here
in the Torres Strait Island. That is, in recognition of the justice which Eddie
Mabo sought, in seeking it and finding it, he has changed all of our lives and
all of your lives especially.
So, this is, I think, a good thing to ponder. We have got great ground to make
up and there are great social issues that we have to address, but we could
never address those, no act of giving from the Parliament or the Government,
no matter how generous can be as complete or as valuable as the recognition
of our essence as Australians our custom and tradition and law comes as
much from your traditions as it comes from non-indigenous, non-Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Island culture.
This is, in a sense, starting the slate again and the things we want to draw on
it are the things we must do together. I think it does underwrite the fact that
we are all members of the one country and that we are Australians and you
are as important to this Parliament of ours as the people from the regions of
Sydney as I am from or those other great parts of Australia, that we are all
Australians one and we are together. The proof of that is, in fact, the very
sacrifices which we have seen commemorated here today. In the Second
World War where Torres Strait Islanders fought in defence of Australia, fought
in defence of themselves and the rest of us, for the democratic values and the
culture and the tolerance we know our country has, but we knew that the
aggressor would deny us. Today, I give thanks on the part of all Australians
for that sacrifice, for those who suffered and for those who died and I want
that known and understood by all Australians.
Could I say that in speaking about your culture and your rights, George Mye
made reference to the fact that with ATSIC your fear is that the Islander
culture may be subsumed in the greater culture of Aboriginal Australia. This
has always been a risk, but one always believes that again in tolerance and
fairness, this will not be so. But, you are suggesting to us that there be a
Torres Strait Islander Commission. That you receive the funding from the
Commonwe ttl Pariament and not ATSIC and that you decide how this might
oa 
3
be spent in the best interests of Torres Strait Islander people. Let me tell you
this is something the Commonwealth Government is prepared to consider.
This is something we are prepared to think about. This, of course, will need
discussions, it will need negotiation with our Aboriginal brothers and sisters to
know that we see that commitment to ATSIC as being a solid and firm one and
yet at the same time, it is possible that we can more adequately perhaps look
after the interests and the culture of Islander people. To see that it is not
subsumed in any Ohe culture Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal.
At any rate, I am pleased to be here today to see the Torres Strait or the part
of it I can see. To come to Thursday Island, to see you as a community, to be
among you, to speak with you and to receive your hospitality. I thank you for
the warmth of it. I most especially thank the children for comning in such
numbers. For all you people who have been so generous in coming to meet
me, my family and my party today, I give you my heartfelt thanks and best
wishes. ends 



I D
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AGRIBUSINESS ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND,
ORANGE, 20 SEPTEMBER 1995
Let me begin with a story about a fish tuna to be more specific, Australian
Southern Bluefin Tuna. Beautiful food especially raw.
At the bottom end of the market the canned fish end tuna fetches about $ 2
a kilogram. At the top end at the sashimi end in Japan the price is around
a kilogram.
In the last three or four years the quota for Southern Bluefin Tuna available to
the Australian industry reduced by around 70 per cent. But in the same
period the value of our exports has risen dramatically.
The difference is tuna farming. In 1991-92 the industry was worth $ 1.8
million. Today it is worth around $ 50 million.
By 2000, it may be worth around $ 200 million.
Tuna farmers in South Australia have become business people. They are no
longer hunting and selling a declining resource for low value uses.
They now harvest the tuna for sale in Japanese sashimi markets 4 days later.
They have invested in a culture of scienoe and husbandry, markets and
distribution. And they are succeeding in a highly competitive market.
The lesson of South Australian tuna farming is being learnt around the
country. In Western Australia they are about to begin a trial tuna farm. In
South Australia they are investigating the possibility of applying the same
principles to rock lobsters.
I am sure the lessons will not be lost on this audience.
We don't need to restrict ourselves to fish. 
The Australian dairy industry tells a similar tale. The number of dairy cows in
Australia has declined by 10 per cent in the past decade and the number of
dairy farms by 30 per cent.
But the gross value of dairy production has doubled in money terms and the
value of exports has more than trebled. We now export over 40 per cent of
our annual milk production and over half of our manufactured products.
In both these industries the potential to grow is almost unlimited. But doing
so will require not just maintenance of their present levels of energy,
efficiency and enterprise it will need constant improvement.
And responsibility of course will not lie with the industry alone. It will require
improvements in the way we do things right across the nation.
I think this is the point that Reg C lairs; is making when he says we have to
shift the emphasis from the principle of screwing the cheapest price out of the
supplier into one of working together from the bottom up to satisfy the end
customer. I know Reg Clairs has a passionate belief in the potential of our food industry.
I know he believes that what has been done in tuna farming and dairy farming
can be done right across Australian agriculture and horticulture. And I know
he believes in it at least in part because he has pulled off something of a
revolution in food with Woolworths. He knows from personal experience that
radical change is not only necessary but possible.
I have had some experience of change making in the past decade or so.
Anyone who has experienced change has also experienced resistance. Half
the problem is fear or a lack of confidence the innate side of conservatism.
You can't change that in people and it is pointless to try.
But what we can do is make people understand. In the end what drives
change is recognition of necessity and opportunity. Necessity pushes it
along and opportunity pulls it, if you like-
And once it gets going the confidence comes. Change breeds change and
success breeds success.
This is where government and management have their principal roles. First,
to recognise what has to be done, second to create the environment in which
others will begin to recognise it. In a sense, it's our job to start the chain
reaction. I could give you two obvious examples from the past decade. 
Take the Accord. The Accord has changed the culture of work and
productivity in Australia and in turn it helped to change the culture of inflation.
It has quite dramatically changed the country.
A second example would be the Landcare movement. Landcare has
changed the farming culture as the Accord has changed the industrial
relations culture.
And with the change in the culture new horizons constantly emerge.
I have to say that I share the view of Reg Clairs.
The fact is that food should be Australia's long suit.
We have the land, the skills, the scientific base and 120,000 farmers
determined to succeed.
And we have the markets as never before we have the markets.
I was in Indonesia earlier this week talking to President Soeharto about our
relationship with that country of 180 million people, and about the next steps
to be taken in the development of APEC.
The trade prospects for both the bilateral relationship and our relationship
with the region are simply immense. And the prospects for food exports are
second to none. The total food market in the Asian region is estimated at
almost $ 900 billion, and food imports are growing at a consistent average of
12 per cent per annum.
For all that, it is not easy to get a foothold in these highly competitive
markets. It requires work, dedication, skill and adaptability. It requires the willingness
to embrace change as well as the capacity to do it. And I think we are seeing
that capacity and willingness in modem Australian farmers.
And as the dairy and seafood and man~-ther industries demonstrate, when
these markets are cracked there are huge rewards.
The Government has been working with industry to see how we can best
position ourselves. We have been looking at new products and new
production methods.
We have found, for instance, that the potential is not only in those goods we
currently produce. There are all sorts of Asian food items, such as soya
products and specialist vegetables, which we can produce and sell both into
Asian and our own domestic markets. 
Sakata Rice Snacks for example is establishing a rice cracker business
manufacturing plant in Victoria with the support of the Government's
Innovative Agricultural Marketing Program. We currently import all our rice
cracker requirements. This operation will not only play a significant import
replacement role but also see export markets developed in Asia.
At present, our imports of Asian food items are adding about $ 800 million a
year to our trade deficit.
We have also found that the companies which do best are those who
establish networks with Asian partners and maintain a strong physical
presence in their target countries.
We have found that success depends on a strategic view a long view.
And, of course, it depends on quality and reliability of supply.
It means delivering the right product to the right place at the right time.
That creates a major challenge for our freight system particularly air freight.
At present air freight is the poor cousin a very poor cousin to the
passenger trade. Ninety per cent of our air freight leaves on passenger
planes which means that flight times and capacities are designed to meet
the passenger needs, not the needs of our food customers.
Our distribution systems on the ground are also underdeveloped and will
have to be improved.
Those tuna would arrive sooner and in better condition if they could go
direct. And I'm pleased to say that the industry and the Government are
working on the problems.
As you probably know, a number of groups in the community as well as
government bodies including the Agrifood Council, have been working on
how we might improve our transport links and air freight system particularly
how we might improve our capacity to mneet our aspirations for exports of
perishable and time sensitive goods.
To build on these initiatives, I have asked my colleagues, Laurie Brereton
and Bob Collins, to look at the state of our infrastructure, and our distribution
system and the world air freight business and deliver an action plan by the
end of November.
Freight is one of many problems we have to overcome. And we will. 
To give you a non-farm example. IBM's operation at Wangaratta is getting an
increasing share of the Japanese market because it is able to supply
Japanese customers more rapidly and reliably than any of its competitors
around the world including the USA, Germany and Sweden.
The average import cycle time for all its products from Australia is just 2 1/ 2
days. The Wangaratta plant has become super efficient by improving the
coordination between each link in the chain and with no increase in freight or
handling costs.
There is surely no reason why we cannot have similarly well coordinated
systems for all our time sensitive exports.
I don't think there is much I can tell this audience about either the problems or
the possibilities for food production and export.
But I would like to repeat what I said up in Roma a month or so ago. That is,
we do need as an industry and as a nation to commit ourselves to sustainable
practices. On that same trip that ended in Indonesia, I visited Papua New Guinea and
talked to our partners in the South Pacific Forum. Some of these countries
are losing their forests to logging at a rate which is tragic and scandalous.
The Solomon Islands, for instance, will have no forests left to log by 2003.
Yet in condemning the activities of unscrupulous timber companies in other
countries, we cannot ignore what has happened and is still happening here in
Australia. On the way to Papua New Guinea we flew up the Darling River, and the
evidence of devastation through bad land management practices is
frightening. We simply have to turn this around. Whatever we do in our food industry, in
future it will have to be done in a way that is sustainable.
We need to grow a food industry which is sensitive to the environment more
than that, which restores and rebuilds it.
That is the only kind of food industry worth passing on to our children.
It is also the only one which can guarantee that the ranks of our 120,000
farming families and the communities which depend upon them are not
decimated over the next 10 or 20 years. 
Sustainable agriculture is also the best way to get maximum returns on what
we grow. It is in the end the only path to premium products and premium
prices. Let me dwell for a second on those farming families. They are a great
national resource they contribute not only to the national product but to the
national character and spirit. We have to keep them on the land and it
follows that the land they farm must be able to sustain the use they make of
it. I know that the Landcare movement has produced something like a revolution
among Australian farmers. It has tapped their passion for the land itself and
created a much more favourable environment for further necessary change.
I include in that a greater willingness to look on farming as a business and as
a science. From there it is a much shorter leap to becoming more adaptable,
more efficient and more capable of adopting a long-term strategic view.
And perhaps the lesson to learn from this is that when you start thinking
about sustainable agriculture, you start thinking more clearly about the
industry itself. In other words, when we start recognising the environmental
necessities we begin to more generally recognise the commercial
necessities.
A more scientific or sustainable approach has implications for quality and
efficiency. It therefore has implications for exports, as well as implications for
the long-term future of farming communities and families.
The point I want to make is that we have a lot more in our favour than just the
land and the markets, and we have done a lot more in recent times than
perhaps we give ourselves credit for.
I mentioned Landcare, but there is more than that. Earlier this year I set up
the Land Management Taskforce and they will be reporting to me in the next
few weeks. The taskforce recognises that sustainable agriculture dependent
on the ability of those 120,000 farmers to manage in a complex natural and
commercial environment.
I also mentioned the work I have asked Laurie Brereton and Bob Collins to do
on freight, but I could give you a very long list of things already done of
hundreds of millions of dollars spent on aviation infrastructure since One
Nation was introduced in 1992.
Equally, we could talk about the money the Government is spending on
research and development or on efforts to combat salinity, or on road and
rail, or on the environment of the Murray Darling, or in the past 12 months on
drought relief. 
For all the hardship it has dealt to farmers and all the cost to the nation, the
drought itself has constituted a considerable extension of the learning curve.
It has forced upon us with new intensity the recognition that we must do more
to drought proof our farming land.
There have been huge changes, not least among them, I think, changes in
the relationship between the Government and farmers and the industry itself.
The greatest changes of all, of course, have been the structural reforms that
have affected all areas of the economy.
Those deregulatory reforms of the 80s did more to overcome the perennial
structural problems of Australian agriculture than anything else we will ever
do. Floating the dollar delivered the biggest increase in competitiveness we have
ever achieved in Australia. Dismantling the tariff wall greatly reduced the
burden on our internationally competitive industries. The Accord meant that
the depreciation in the exchange rate did not simply translate into higher
wages but rather into a permanent increase in our competitiveness; and it
has meant greater productivity, flexibility and industrial harmony than
Australia has had since the end of World War 11.
And to these reforms must be added APEC and the GATT the benefits to
flow to Australia's agricultural industry from the Bogor Declaration and the
Uruguay Round will be beyond measure.
Reciting these initiatives is not a way of saying that all that can or should be
done has been done.
As I have said more times than I can count, the process of reform never
stops. But reminding ourselves of how far we have come does have a worthwhile
purpose. It does or at least it should give us the confidence to meet the
new challenges and embrace new aspirations.
And when I say that is precisely what I mean. Governments can always
give a lead, they can always do more to get the environment right, they can
lend a helping hand in the market places of the world or on the farms
themselves when disaster like the recent drought strikes.
Governments can joint venture in reality and metaphorically at all sorts of
levels. But I think what we have to do from now on in the food industry is
recognise that the chain which ends on the dining tables of Taipei and Tokyo
begins with the land itself. It begins with Australian soil and water. And
everyone engaged in our agricultural industry needs to understand that. 
We need to recognise that everyone engaged in the industry from the
farmers to the distribution networks, the packagers, the transport companies,
the banks, the funds, the trade officials, the manufacturing companies, the
regional authorities, the CSIRO, all tiers of government and all tiers of the
industry needs to work in accord with each other and with a sense of
common purpose.
That means a shared ethic of efficiency and excellence, a shared
commitment to sustainability and though I am sometimes suspicious of
people who habitually use the word a shared " vision".
Earlier this week we all read about the World Bank's calculation that
Australians were the richest people in the world. I happen to think that in
many ways we are but of course there are more important things to be read
into their calculation than that assessment.
The ratio of resources to population in Australia has always made us
relatively rich and quite properly encouraged us to believe that our potential
for development is virtually unlimited.
But there have been, as they say, certain downsides. We could start with the
current account deficit.
Our resource richness was bound to make us a large importer of capital.
It was also inclined to make us at times complacent. Remember the
" resources boom" that was going to carry us on a wave into eternal prosperity
-without an efficient manufacturing industry, without downstream processing,
without working as hard as we have in recent years to get into new markets
and shape the world trading environment.
And the same resource richness made us wasteful and destructive with the
environment. We all know that this cannot go on any more. And not only the agricultural
industry knows it.
A fortnight ago I opened the McArthur River zinc and lead mine in the
Northern Territory. It is a model of a new age of mining in Australia. It takes
considerate and intelligent account of Aboriginal interests and Aboriginal
rights under the new Native Title regime.
It also takes account of the fragile and precious environment. Mount Isa
Mines has gone to great lengths to protect this environment.
And the McArthur River mine will earn in the region of $ 300 million a year for
the next 20 to 30 years. 
What is happening in mining, we can do in our forestry and fibre industries.
We must do it. In these industries and in agriculture necessity is now driving
us.
This is a conference of experts and interested parties. It is a conference of
the players in the agribusiness game. And I don't want to tell any of you
things you already know.
But I do want to reaffirm that as a government we are very conscious of our
role and responsibilities in this industry particularly our responsibilities
towards the natural environment of this continent and the prosperity and well
being of future generations who will inherit it from us.
For that reason, as we see it, there is no more important business in Australia
than agribusiness.
And we also take the view that there is no business with more potential
potential for doing good for Australia and good for the environment. For that
matter good for the world.
Let me conclude by reiterating that we should be proud of what we are doing
with tuna or dairy or, in fact, parts of most agricultural industries. But the
changes as a whole are coming too slowly. We must find a faster path to
sustainable agriculture, and become a global supplier of food.
In the very near future I will be inviting some key players to a meeting to
discuss how we can best set the ball rolling.
The essential thing is that the private sector the farmers, the processors, the
retailers, the distributors, the banks and funds drives this process.
And it must be driven with a long-term view, with an environmental as well as
a commercial strategy and with a determination that the industry delivers
benefits right across the Australian community.
I have absolutely no doubt that it can be done.
The trouble with visions is that they are readily translated into mirages the
horizon keeps receding and the exploring party develops the habit of
stopping too often for a drink.
So let's make it perhaps earlier than 2020, and get started on it straight away.
Thank you for inviting me to speak at this conference. 
It has been a very important meeting. If in 10 or 15 years' time we are
applying to all the things we grow in Australia the same principles as they are
applying to tuna in South Australia the principles of conservation and
sustainability, premium product and rapid and reliable delivery it may yet
prove to be an historic one.
I sincerely hope so. 



-N
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED: 7.3OPM
*** PLASE CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
CEDA CONFERENCE APEC AND AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS,
APEC THE OUTLOOK FOR OSAKA
SYDNEY, TUESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 1995
I am grateful to CEDA, to the Macquarie Bank and to the other sponsors of
this conference for the effort that has been put into arranging it and for this
invitation to speak to you.
It is proof of APEC's progress that four or five years ago conferences on the
subject were held at universities and attracted largely an audience of
academics and officials.
Now APEC requires practical attention from business people the sort of
attention you have been giving today.
I can't stress too strongly my conviction that a fundamental measure of
APEC's success from Australia's viewpoint will be whether it serves the
needs of Australian business.
Whether it helps you to export your products or services more quickly and
efficiently into currently restricted markets around us.
Whether it maximizes your opportunities to develop cooperative
arrangements with your counterparts in other APEC countries.
Whether it helps create new Australian jobs and develop Australian skills.
I am sometimes accused of being preoccupied with APEC. I am happy to.
wear the charge. But it is not, in fact, true.
I have certainly put a great deal of effort into APEC. And I am convinced it
offers Australia enormous opportunities. 
But I am concerned and I think we should all be concerned with something
broader than APEC: by our need to establish in the Asia Pacific structures for
the long term which will cement our integration into the region.
It is no good expecting that our geography alone will deliver the economic
benefits of being part of the fastest growing region in the world.
And it is no good just declaring that Australia's future lies in Asia and
expecting that to be the end of the matter.
It is not the end of the matter for governments and it is not the end of the
matter for business.
Beyond recognition of the fact of our proximity and the fact of the opportunity,
there is a great deal of thinking and a great deal of work that needs to be
done. That is what the act of our engagement demands.
We need sustaining ideas about how to support our involvement and how to
secure the future.
And, above all, we have to be comfortable with Australia's place in Asia.
As I have said before, Australia's engagement with Asia is not a take -it-orleave-
it-affair. Asia is not a target of convenience for us us. It is not a
fashion, or a flavour-of-the-month or a political gimmick.
The structures this Government has been helping to put in place go beyond
APEC. They include the ASEAN Regional Forum, which deals with security
issues, and the new linkages we are establishing between the ASEAN Free
Trade Area and the Australia/ New Zealand CER arrangement.
We have just held the first, successful, AFTA-CER Trade Ministers meeting.
The structures also include the range of bilateral arrangements we have
made with our regional neighbours, such as the Austral ia-Indonesia
Ministerial Forum, which help to open up new areas of cooperation quite
outside traditional diplomatic contacts.
We have been helped greatly in our efforts to build these structures by a
little-remarked but quite historic shift which has taken place in the past year
or so in regional attitudes towards Australia.
I am convinced that, in a way which has never been true in the past, our
friends and neighbours; have recognised that Australia the continent and its
resources, the people and their skills and knowledge, the securedd emocracy
and the strong diverse society represents a substantial asset for the region
as a whole. A substantial asset and a valuable partner. 
Evidence of this change was seen, in the unprecedented joint statement
about the Australia-Japan relationship which Prime Minister Murayama and I
issued in May. In that document the government of Japan said it " Welcomes
Australia's decision to create its future in the region and reaffirms that
Australia is an indispensable partner in regional affairs".
It was seen in the comment by President Ramos of the Philippines during his
visit last month that " For clear and practical reasons, the countries of our
region see Australia as an integral and vigorous part of the region"
It was seen the comments of the Indonesian Minister for Research and
Technology, Dr Habibie, when during his visit in May, he described Australia
as an asset in the region.
It was seen in Singapore's decision to establish its airforce flying school in
Western Australia, and in the original proposal by the former deputy Prime
Minister of Thailand, Dr Supachai, for the establishment of links between
AFTA and CER.
One of the reasons behind this change is, I am sure, the conviction in the
region that this Government has committed itself to the cause of engagement
with Asia in a way which Australian Governments have never done before.
This has not always been easy.
To succeed, you cannot regard this country's international relations as
peripheral to our main interests or as a remote sub-branch of domestic
politics.
You can't, for example, refuse, as the opposition did, to meet the Vietnamese
Communist Party leader, Mr Do Muci, in the very week Vietnam became a
member of ASEAN, because you think there might be a handful of votes to be
picked up in western Sydney, and expect that there will be no consequences.
Our effort has to be consistent and unrelenting.
In my three years as Prime Minister, for example, I have visited Indonesia five
times and Japan three times, with a further visit planned for November.
Important national Australian interests are engaged here.
One of those important interests is APEC, and that is what has brought all of
us here.
There is no doubt that APEC offers Australia enormous opportunities. Its 18
members represent the world's fastest growing economies and account for
half the world's output, and nearly half its exports. 
In area after area the opportunities are vast. For example, expenditure in
regional markets on telecommunications services and equipment has been
estimated at nearly $ 300 billion by 2010. And the World Bank predicts
investment in energy systems of around $ 500 billion before 2000.
I was in Orange last week talking about the opportunities for Australia to
develop a vastly expanded food industry, capable of becoming a pre-eminent
supplier of fresh and processed food to Asia. Conservative estimates put the
Asian food market at nearly $ 1000 billion by 2000.
Already nearly three quarters of all Australia exports goes to other APEC
members.
And by as soon as next year when our exports to Indonesia and Malaysia
will each exceed our exports to the United Kingdom all our top 10 export
markets will be APEC members.
So it is no wonder that getting APEC right lowering the barriers and keeping
the trade and investment flowing is one of the Government's highest
priorities. Just on a year ago all APEC leaders met at Bogor under President
Soeharto's chairmanship and agreed to the audacious goal of free and open
trade in the region by 2010 for developed countries and 2020 for developing
countries. It is important to remember just how ambitious the Bogor Declaration was.
APEC, after all, covers more trade than either the European Union or the
North American Free Trade Area.
And the Bogor commitment to eliminate allI barriers to free trade and
investment was never attempted in the 40-odd year history of the GATT.
But what brought about the agreement to the Bogor declaration was the
recognition by all the APEC leaders that if we are to maintain the great,
transforming, growth in the Asia Pacific which history will judge to be one of
the defining developments of the late twentieth century it is essential to
maintain the dynamism of regional trade and keep dismantling the barriers.
We estimate that APEC-wide free trade will bring gains to Asia-Pacific
economies of around three times the benefits of the Uruguay Round outcome
alone an amount of more than $ 300 billion a year.
But a view of APEC which only pays attention to its economic dimension is
incomplete. Because although it is an economic and trade body and in my
view should remain one it also has very significant political and strategic
consequences for Australia and our region. 
It encourages a continued constructive American engagement in Asia by
keeping open the links across the Pacific. This is important to all of us
because in the absence of a United States balancing security role in the
region, strategic uncertainties would multiply, especially in North Asia, and
the result could be a very dangerous arms race with quite unforeseeable
consequences.
APEC also provides a multilateral framework for regional engagement with
China, whose 1.2 billion people and rapidly growing economy guarantee that
it will be a central factor in regional, indeed in world, affairs into the next
century.
A regional organisation like APEC which engages the three Chinese
economies of China, Chinese Taipei and Hong Kong could probably not be
replicated again. It is certain to be a valuable asset for the region in the
years ahead.
APEC also gives Japan the opportunity to assume some of the higher
international and regional profile to which Australia believes its economic
weight entitles it.
Every step we have taken with APEC has been a step into unmarked territory.
The sort of thing we are trying to do has never been done before.
Quite simply, in APEC we are creating a new style of trade negotiation, but
one which fits the features of our region.
APEC's approach to trade and investment liberalisation will not follow the
model of traditional GATT rounds of trade bargaining. APEC is not about
creating an old fashioned trade arrangement confined to eliminating barriers
to trade at borders. Nor is it about establishing a Europe-style highly
institutionalised political and monetary union.
APEC's approach has already been unique in several ways.
Firstly, APEC has already set the end goal it wishes to reach free trade and
investment in the region by 2010 for developed economies and 2020 for
developing economies.
Secondly, in APEC, developing countries are for the first time, not just
participating in but leading a major trade liberalisation process.
Without President Soeharto's strong leadership, for example, the Bogor
declaration would never have been agreed.
In my discussions with him in Bali a week ago, I was again reassured by the
strength of President Soeharto's commitment to the decisions made at Bogor.
He remains firmly convinced of the benefits which APEC can offer to the
developing country members of APEC. 
Thirdly, APEC has had Asian countries at the helm during its critical early
stages. Indonesia was in the chair last year, Japan is now and the
Philippines will be in 1996.
Asian countries have not yet taken a place in international affairs
commensurate with their economic power. In APEC, for the first time, we
have an international forum and an international agenda that is very much
shaped by Asia.
Fourthly, because APEC will build closely on the liberalisation programs on
which most countries in the region are already well embarked, it will be more
comfortable and familiar and more easily accepted as a ' win-win' outcome
than the traditional adversarial approach of the GATT.
Next, progress in APEC is being driven very much by leaders.
The establishment of informal leaders meetings, which I first suggested in
1992, has been critical in setting the agenda and keeping it moving. It was
national leaders who outlined the vision for APEC at Seattle, who set clear
goals at Bogor and who at Osaka in November will set out the blueprint for
getting us there.
There is nothing like an imminent summit of political leaders to galvanise
officials into action, and no-one other than leaders has the authority to take
the hard decisions when these are needed.
The Eminent Persons Group, and the way in which it has reported directly to
leaders on long term directions for APEC, has been important in preserving
the breadth of the APEC vision. Neville Wran has been Australia's
representative on the EPG for the past three years. I can see a continuing
role for an advisory body for leaders of this sort outside the official APEC
structure to keep us focussed on APEC's goals.
Finally, APEC has taken a new approach in the way it has actively and
directly involved business. Business views are sought, taken into account
and affect the outcome of policy decisions in APEC.
The Pacific Business Forum ( PBF), of course, has been advising leaders
directly. At my request, Imelda Roche and Philip Brass have ably and
effectively represented Australia on the Business Forum. Its most recent
report, released last week, will be considered by leaders at Osaka.
Business symposiums are now also regular events around APEC ministerial
meetings. The APEC meeting on small and medium enterprises in Adelaide this month
had an associated business forum attended by around 800 APEC business
people and business exhibitions drawn from all 18 APEC economies. 
7
The feedback we have received from Australian business participants has
been overwhelmingly favourable. One of them wrote to the Secretary of our
Department of Industry, Science and Technology that we covered more
ground in two pleasant days in Adelaide than we would probably have
covered in a month had we simply gone directly [ to the region]".
Similar experiences were reported from APEC telecommunications and
transport ministers' meetings earlier this year.
And Indonesia also hosted last week a major APEC government-business
dialogue on regional infrastructure issues.
But whatever APEC's potential, and however interesting and unusual it may
be as a model, what really matters is whether it can continue to deliver the
goods.
We are now just two months away from the Osaka leaders' meeting, which
will be another critical moment in APEC's development.
APEC seems to be full of critical moments. But the reality is that unless it
demonstrates continual progress it runs the risk of marking time while the
march of history leaves it behind.
That would diminish an opportunity of unprecedented dimensions to the 21st
century.
While the task of leaders at Bogor last year was to identify the final
destination for APEC trade cooperation, our job at Osaka will be to agree on
a road map to reach it.
Australia will be looking for commitments from members to table before the
next leaders' meeting at Subic Bay individual country plans showing how and
when they will meet the Bogor free trade commitments, and to a parallel
program of collective liberalisation in those areas ( like mutual recognition of
standards and the harmonisation of regulations) where APEC-wide
agreement is the best way forward.
These action plans will be developed individually, but they will have to meet
agreed guidelines.
And the guiding principles must be sound:
liberalisation must be comprehensive, with sensitive
sectors being handled by phasing in over a longer
period not by excluding them altogether
all countries must begin liberalising at the same time,
even if some move more slowly ( as will happen with 
the different end dates for developed and developing
countries) and plans must balance members' interests to ensure
that they all benefit from the liberalisation program.
Plans do not need to be the same for each member. They only need to have
each member proceeding at an adequate and balanced pace down the road
to 2010 or 2020.
The plans will be evolving documents over the 15-25 year period provided for
in Bogor and will be subject to a regular process of peer review. For this
reason, we will probably see in Subic Bay more detailed plans for
liberalisation in the early years, with greater definition of the later years as
plans evolve. What will not change, however, is the end goal already set by
leaders. For trade facilitation issues, where the most sensible way to make progress is
through collective action, I hope at Osaka we will set some clear targets and
dates. For example, adoption by 1996 of a common basis for tariff
classification, agreement to common APEC-wide standards for electronic
import clearance by 2000, or simplification and streamlining of business visas
by 1996.
Final agreement to a full program of collective action may not be possible at
Osaka and further work may be needed. But Osaka should make a good
start. The benefits of collective action in these areas should not be underestimated.
The regional coordination of electricity generating equipment specifications
alone could achieve savings in excess of $ 10 billion.
As agreed at Bogor, leaders at Osaka should also announce a package of
measures to accelerate our Uruguay Round commitments. This
' downpayment' on APEC liberalisation will demonstrate our commitment to
APEC and also represent tangible support for the multilateral trading system.
So by this mixture of individual action plans, collective action and concrete
downpayments we want Osaka to chart APEC's progress over coming years.
In this process Australia will need to be able to check that others are
matching our liberalisation and that there is balance across the board.
The Government will have to work out precisely what progress is required by
our key trading partners before we can determine how and when we will open
our market further.
We also need to know what a commercially relevant program of collective
action might look like. 
The survey work CEDA has done for this conference, identifying and
prioritising business views on impediments to trade and investment in the
region, provides essential information for this.
That work is also a powerful reminder of why APEC is important to Australian
business. We have already opened up our economy, and we have reaped the economic
benefits. This is a much more competitive and world-oriented economy than
it was a decade ago.
But, as your survey has shown, we still face serious barriers to some of the
markets around us.
We don't have the size and clout to force those barriers down unilaterally.
And there are few signs that the international community is ready for another
global round of negotiations through the WTO.
So APEC is the best means we have of addressing the problems of access
which Australian businesses face.
It is vital that as APEC develops, and as our national contribution to APEC
evolves, the voice of Australian business is heard clearly. For this reason the
SGovernment needs to establish a clear consultative channel of
communication with business.
The latest Pacific Business Forum report proposes the establishment of a
permanent APEC Business Council, comprising representatives from each
APEC economy, to directly advise leaders and deal with APEC working
groups on business issues. I strongly support this.
But I also think we need to establish a national mechanism to coordinate
Australian business views on APEC and provide input to me and the
Government on the business community's interests in APEC.
I have asked Imelda Roche and Philip Brass, as my PBF representatives, to
liaise with business people and business groups over the next few weeks and
to advise me before Osaka how such a representative national APEC
business body can be best set up.
You will no doubt be reading a good deal about APEC in the weeks ahead,
much of it confusing and some of it contradictory.
I am now very familiar with the pattern of public commentary on APEC. It
goes this way. 
First, we are told that our goals are too ambitious and that we are overreaching
ourselves. That was said about the original proposal for APEC,
about the likelihood of getting the ' three Chinas' in, about the prospects for
ever getting all the APEC leaders to meet, and about our chance of having
the Bogor declaration agreed.
The next stage goes " Well, of course you have done that, but the process
has obviously failed because all barriers to trade have not yet been
removed." In fact, of course, none of what we are doing is easy. And the closer we
come to implementing our action plans, the more energetically special
interests will fight. I said we will need to do a lot of thinking and a lot of work
we will also need a lot of determination and a lot of patience.
But bear in mind that APEC has come a long way in six years from a
tentative first meeting of ministers in Canberra in 1989 to the agreement by
the leaders of half the globe at Bogor last year to adopt the goal of regional
free trade and investment.
To put APEC's progress in context, although talk of a common European
market started soon after World War 11t, h e Treaty of Rome was not signed
until the mid fifties and it took until the single market exercise of the eighties
before European countries started addressing fully all the trade impediments
among them.
And more recently, with the Uruguay Round, the total period from the first
negotiations to the final implementation of all agreements will be about 23
years. Will we succeed at Osaka in sustaining APEC's forward momentum?
It is always hard to say, because leaders meet without officials present and
the dynamics are fluid and unpredictable.
The main outstanding issue at the moment looks like being the matter of
" comprehensiveness" that is whether APEC liberalisation will cover all
sectors of our economies and all trade barriers or not.
As you will have seen from newspaper reports, we are encountering
nervousness on the part of a few of the APEC economies surprisingly few I
might say about the coverage of agriculture.
Australia's position is clear. The Bogor declaration is unambiguous on the
question of comprehensive coverage. It refers to the goal of " free and open
trade and investment"; to promoting the " free movement of goods services
and capital"; and to ministers and officials addressing " all impediments to
achieving our goal". 
It does not say " free trade except for agriculture".
We all have sensitive sectors for Australia, these might include automobiles
and TCF. The effect of any APEC member excluding one sector from
coverage of the free trade commitment would be that others would also look
for exceptions. This would paralyse APEC.
And agriculture is a vital issue for Australia. We worked for forty three years
to have it addressed in any serious way in the GATT and some of the
language now being used to justify " differential treatment" is all too familiar to
us. The fact of the matter is that the 15 25 year time period leaders set in Bogor
for the achievement of the free and open trade and investment goal provides
ample scope for member economies to undertake any necessary
adjustments. I think, in the end, we will resolve this question successfully because the
overwhelming majority of APEC members strongly support Bogor's
unequivocal intentions on this point.
In this regard, the Osaka meeting in November will be a real test of Japan's
capacity to look beyond sectoral preoccupations and to give a lead to the
countries of this region.
* It has never had a better opportunity than it will have in Osaka, in this
year since the end of the Second World War, to show that it has the capacity
to provide genuine leadership and to help shape the region's future in ways
which will benefit its own people as well as the other economies of the region.
I am sure it will take the right decisions, and I have told Prime Minister
Murayama, MITI Minister Hashimoto and Foreign Minister Kono recently that
Australia is willing to help Japan work for a successful outcome.
A long road lies ahead of us with APEC.
But the benefits for the Australian economy, for Australian businesses and for
Australians now and in the future make it a road we must travel. 



7
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE ACTU CONGRESS, MELBOURNE,
27 SEPTEMBER 1995
AS DELIVERED
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, Martin, Jennie, Bill, Members of the Executive, friends one and all it
is great to be back and I mean that. I always look forward to coming to the
ACTU Congress.
One of the happiest memories I have of the 1993 election was the meeting
I had with the ACTU Executive a week or so later. That wilt always sit in my
-mind as a manifestation of what it was all about coming home to our real
friends. Now I have always stuck with the unions. I believe in union people because
I believe in the things that most of you people do. You spend your working
days and your working week looking after the interests of ordinary
Australians. And it is hard going and it has always been hard going, but we
have done many things together and the model we have put together is so
sophisticated, in certainly western world terms, but what pleases me greatly is
not only has it worked but you all know how it works and why it works and
why the consensus and the cooperation that we have had between us does
really mean something and that the trust that we have built up between us
does really matter.
And I couldn't think of a healthier thing than the trust between the
Government of the nation and the workforce of the nation, or the leadership of
that workforce. And if you are about building trust, about a cooperative
partnership, is there any greater basis than this? Well I wouldn't think so and
that is why I am here, pleased again, to be able to talk about it.
The other thing I am pleased about is Jennie George gave me a kiss when
I arrived. But she won't be giving John Howard one. 
And I have got to tell you how much pride it does fill me to find people like
Martin Ferguson, who has just given me a kind introduction, to know that after
having led the industrial movement, he will be going to the national
Parliament to carry on his life's work and to see that torch passed to another
great person in the labour movement Jennie George.
I congratulate Jennie on what is not simply a wonderful endorsement to be
the President-elect of the ACTU, a wonderful endorsement of a Labor person,
but a wonderful endorsement of a Labor woman. And I mean she has been
so good at it and I watched her in a few interviews recently. She has got
them coming and going, she knows all the angles and she is only limbering
up. When she really gets going and all the lines really start rolling through
her mind and, of course, I always find this in the election campaign for the
first week you are stumbling around, pulling the lines together, then you start
really refining them down and by the third week they're deadly. A punch in
every sentence and I am sure that is the way it will go here too.
But it does fill me full of pride to think that the trade unions in this country
have been able to elect a leadership group in this last decade that has meant
so much to Australia and so much to the labour movement. We will never
see it better than this. It doesn't matter how long we live, I don't think it has
ever been any better than this. There is no time when the Labor Party and
the industrial labour movement have had such shared objectives and have
done so much together and, again, in that relationship of trust. I
We have completely remodelled a middle-sized OECD economy from the
ground up its economy and its society and we have done it in the image of
labour, of industrial and political labour and we sit here today with 4 per cent
economic growth, 4 per cent employment growth, 2 1/ 2 per cent inflation and
one of the most fairest and decent wage and social policy systems in the
world and that is a tremendous achievement a great achievement.
And they are the things, I think, the values we have to inculcate in the
Australian community. That by cooperation you can do good things. If you
have, as I think we all have, faith in ourselves to do something good and
belief in our fellow Australians that with them something great can be
achieved, there are no boundaries to what can be done in this country.
I mean I wasn't surprised the other day when the World Bank came out and
said that on an asset basis we were the richest country per capita in the
world. And I said on an asset basis because that is not so on an income
basis. But you don't have to be an economist to know that the great wealth of
this continent, as large as it is spread over just 18 million people would
have to turn up a result something like that.
But this is the great opportunity we have been given just in four times our
lifetime there were no Europeans here and that the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders of this country had held this great continent in trust for us and
we have a remarkable opportunity to do something with it. 
You know from the history of the labour movement in the 19th and early
century of people going off looking for nirvana in South America to make the
sort of social paradise, to build the model they didn't think they could build
here with the forces of reaction. Well I am glad some of them stayed at home
because we are able to build now a model that very few countries can
emulate. And when we are looking at ourselves you look at Japan, it is growing at
1/ 2 per cent a year at the moment. Western Europe is growing at around
1 1/ 2 per cent to 2 per cent. The United States is growing at around
2 1/ 2 per cent. We are averaging around 4 per cent. We have been growing
as high as 6 per cent. That means we are creating twice as much wealth and
twice as much opportunity as we would otherwise were we in some
straight-jacketed model, some model which says " let's not cooperate
together', but rather " let's let the people take the best and the devil take the
hindmost, the strong take the best and the devil take the hindmost, and we
will see what happens after that."
Rather than that, we have gone a long a path which says that employment
matters and I think the thing that is lost on many people, it is certainly lost on
our friends in the Coalition, that the Accord has always been a very clear
trade-off of wage restraint for growth. And the growth is the thing that
delivers the employment and the employment goes to the people who are
either at the bottom end of the queue or starting in the workforce. So it has
always been, in a sense, an internal trade-off for the trade unions of this
country. In a sense, restraining the top-end power of the ACTU constituency
to deliver equity and fairness in the bottom and the middle ranges of the
income scales and to guarantee to those people employment, so that we can
run a quite fast, high growth, economy and we can run it with low inflation.
Now, of course, under the changes we have introduced, we have now come
to a productivity model. We have come away from the strictures of a
centralised system which wasn't able, while we could get aggregate wage
adjustments from it, national wage aggregate adjustments, we weren't able to
get the within sector flexibility we have always known we have needed. So
we needed the award restructuring to proceed that. We put that into place.
Amalgamation of unions. That has got into place and we are now into an
enterprise bargaining system, which gives us the capacity to lift the earnings
and productivity of businesses and share it between profits and wages.
As well as that, for those not able to access the system, we have got a safety
net. We probably have the nearest thing to a permanent wages system, we
have had certainly in the twelve years of the Accord because we had so many
various wage models to take us through those difficult years of transition from
the uncompetitive economy, industrial archaeology of the early 1980s,
through the big collapse in our terms of trade in 1985-86, to the big
deprecation of the exchange rate, at the same time then trying to pick it up, 
restrain the growth of the late 80s, to hold inflation down so that we knew we
wouldn't be back where we started in 1982-83.
Now we have come through all those wage systems. We have now got low
inflation and we all know it is much easier to run a wages system on low
inflation and, I think, we know that the system we now have together is a very
fair one. If you don't have enough bargaining power to get yourself an
enterprise bargain that increases your income, or at least where you would
get protection, real wage protection, you can fall back to the safety nets.
So it is, I think, a model, perhaps, in transition, but one getting very near to
the one that we are going to finish up with and that is one where enterprise
bargaining will be the order of the day. And, of course, one of the things
I said to you in 1993 and since and that is were we still hostage to the
centralised wage fixing system, how much easier it would be for a Coalition
Government to hop into Australian working people, to tear the hell out of it.
Whereas now we have developed a model that lives by itself and breaths by
itself, out there, in the industrial landscape in the workplaces of this country.
Because we can what the Liberals are about. They are always about the
same thing. It doesn't matter whether it is Stanley Melbourne Bruce in the
1920s, or the Earl Page's of this world, or any of the Labor renegades like
Joe Lyons, or Menzies, or Fraser, or any of them they are always about the
same thing: basically, cutting peoples' wages. And I don't quite know why
because the profit share is almost at an historic high. And you have got to
say well what do you want. Do you want the profit share beyond any historic
precedence and what is the point in that? Aren't the executives already
getting enough out of it? Are they milking the system as much as they can?
What do you want to cut the wages of working people for, other than spite
spitefulness, a sort of an ideological envy? But you see it with Jeff Kennett in
Victoria. You see it now in Western Australia. We have seen John Howard
endorse the Western Australian model.
Fortunately, with Labor in office, with the Federal legislation so many people
came back under the Federal award umbrellas. But, of course, with a
Coalition Government that option would still be there. But, in a sense, the
option would be to fall into their schemes so that they took a lot of these
protections away.
So, I think, that we have been able, through all of the vicissitudes and
difficulties of a re-modelled economy, to put an essentially fair wage system
into place. And, I think, that is the message that we have got to get to
Australians. That we have given Australians huge employment growth
2 million jobs since 1983. That our wage that we have adjusted the country
economically to low inflation, but we have done it fairly and decently. That we
have tried to protect the weak and the disadvantaged and, as a consequence
of all of this, we have a much more cohesive and united country and a much
more efficient economy. 
This is an -extremely great achievement and I am quite sure, -rot even in the
halcyon days of the labour movement in the earlier part of this century and
last, such cooperation never really existed to this level and so precise have
been our objectives to go and do it together. And we have kicked other
milestones that, I think, we mightn't have even have thought were possible
back there in 1983 and a couple of obvious ones come to mind
superannuation is perhaps the most obvious. Because for those of us who
have got a lot of our working lives behind us, it won't mean as much as for
those with their working lives ahead of them.
But, even today, with a couple in their mid-30s in the workforce there is going
to be a substantial increase in retirement incomes for those people above the
age pension. And for those, of course, starting work now, it will mean
essentially someone on average weekly earnings will, at the end of their
working life, retire on a retirement income of about the same around
average weekly earnings in today's dollars. And that is real progress
because it is not very many times that any Government, or a trade union
movement, get the opportunity to put such a thing into place. And to do it in
the way in which we have, adjusting the wage systems over the years, now
putting some tax cuts aside to go into superannuation accounts, a relatively
modest contribution on the part of employees, will get us to 15 per cent by the
year 2002. We will see a huge pool of savings built and a set of protections,
for Australian working men and women in retirement, we would never have
got by simply the public budgets, by legislation and, certainly, not from a
conservative Government.
We have been able to do things like that and maternity leave is the thing we
have just done most recently. There are others that spring to mind,
child care, support for women in the workplace, the changed status of women
both in the country at large and in the workplace. All of these things have
come from the Accord and come from the relationship of trust that we have
developed together.
Now the Liberals, they don't understand any of this because, basically, they
don't have any faith in people, they don't see you as fellow Australians, but
rather some sort of class enemy, some sort of political enemy. But their story
is starting to fall on deaf ears because the business community know that
industrial disputation now is at the lowest it has ever been since they have
been keeping the records. They know it is 1/ 6 of what it was when
John Howard was last Treasurer. They know that the profit share is up and
the stock market is running at about 2,150. The day I was sworn in as
Treasurer, the All Ordinaries Index was 451, from memory. There has been a
five-fold increase, a four to five-fold increase, in wealth in the stock market.
They know these things.
They know that there is flexibility in the workplace. They know that they are
able to drag productivity out of businesses and sensibly share it between
profits and wages. And you have got to wonder now, how many of them want
to turn it up because I am finding, as I go about, that the endorsements that 
one would formerly expect to see for the Liberal Party are just not there
anymore. That it has been on for too long now and it has worked and that
people have faith in it not just us, but the employers as well.
Now, Howard is out there doing what he normally does and, today, he is in a
difficult spot because he made a great mistake yesterday in saying that he
will open the cross runway at Sydney Airport, so as not to concentrate the
traffic on the two parallel runways. And you might say " well what has that got
to do with industrial relations". Well I will tell you it has got this to do with it.
This is a fellow who has been telling us for years that we are slack about the
micro-economy. He is going to be guy that cleans up the ports and wharves
and the rail system and all of the other things that we, he says, haven't been
able to do. You can say to them the turn-around time in the ports is the same
as European ports. You can tell them now that there are 18 people per ship
on the Austfalian coast when there used to be around 28. You can say these
things it cuts no ice with them because they say they are going to do the
tough things.
But the one major micro-economic reform to the airline system in the last
years, has been the opening of the third runway at Mascot. It is the
gateway to Australia. It is the key to Australian tourism. It is the linkages to
Melbourne and Brisbane and the other major ports in Australia. It is the
change which John Howard was out there arguing for, pressing us for, for
years and years and years, on the record.
Yesterday he said he now opposes it now that it is built, he wants to put a
cross wind runway across it which will mean that the safety margin falls to
pieces, that we would actually halve the traffic of the airport, and so the one
micro economic test, not even a test for him because we built it not him, for a
few votes in the seat of Bennelong, in his own seat, he is prepared to tip on
its head the one major micro economic change in civil aviation, yet have the
rest of Australia believe that he is going to be the guy that does it to wages,
the labour market, the waterfront, to shipping, to transport, to all the other key
areas of the micro economy in this country.
Not only has he said that, he has gone and said that he will down the asset
sales task force budget measure of selling the airports off by withdrawing
support for the sale of Kingsford-Smith airport while ever the government
doesn't exceed to his demand to have cross wind traffic. Now you know that
if you put a plane across two parallel lanes of traffic what you have got is a
recipe for disaster.
So, here he is telling the employers at the business lunches in Melbourne and
Sydney that he is the one to do the tough things. He is the one to make the
fundamental changes, but on a change where they are needling him in
Hunters Hill, where in that important headland for him between Lane Cove
and Woolwich in Sydney he thinks the pressure is getting too hot, what does
he say, he will tip the major civil aviation micro change on its head, he'll got 
back to an unsafe airport, he'll actually punch a $ 2 billion hole in the surplus
by vandalising the government's asset sales program.
I can tell you this, there is blood in the water, and in politics you have got to
have a nose for it. I watched him in the Parliament today, it came in, we had
the vote on it, but normally sitting opposite me in the chair all cocky with
inane little comments, but where was he? He was down in the back end of
the triangle of the Parliament, back into the back of the horseshoe talking to a
couple of backbench MPs while the votes were taking on. The psychology
was all wrong, all wrong. I said to them ' where's you little mate? He's down
the back here.' And, of course, they were on the back foot on the wages front
because they knew I was coming here today and I know you have seen some
of our advertisements this morning and so have they, which underlines the
fact, of course, that the award protections which are there now in overtime,
penalty rates, holiday leave loadings et cetera, would go without
compensation under their model and it would mean that for people in certain
circumstances, in certain occupations, I gave the figures during the week
transport workers losing nearly $ 5000 a year, nurses losing more than $ 5000
a year by losing penalty rates and these things, or losing overtime payments,
that this would be a material disadvantage, a large disadvantage for a very
large section of the work force. To which they say ' we'll be keeping the award
protections', but only for people who don't change jobs. But 1.7 million
Australians change jobs every year. In the last three years 43 per cent of the
work force have changed jobs. That is 43 per cent of people that don't have
the option of award protection. Like for instance, all the higher education
people. Students, who leave and graduate, who come into jobs and there are
600,000 of those a year, no award protection. For half the year 11 and 12
leavers, about 200,000, no award protection. For the women joining the work
force, no award protection.
We are gradually getting these points out and they don't like it because,
essentially, it is the same miserable policy they have always had. It is
Jobsback, just dressed up in another way and it is about those things
tearing down wages for ordinary men and women through the loss of such
conditions without compensation.
We say we have a no disadvantage test. That enterprise bargains have got
to be run past the test and that you can vary some of these conditions, but
there has to be no disadvantage overall. No remunerative disadvantage
overall. They would never agree to such a test. We are also saying some
community standards just shouldn't change, like sick leave for instance. You
just shouldn't trade it away even though there are many things that can be
traded away providing there is a remunerative benefit in return.
So, this is there difference and we are starting to get them out. They were
feeling the pinch today on industrial relations and they are feeling the pinch
on this very important, I think, icon issue. That is whether Howard has the
bottle, or, put in the vernacular, the guts, to do the big changes in this
country. Whether he can take on the big issues and do them co-operatively 
as we have done in places like the waterfront or in shipping and in transport
or in telecommunications or in civil aviation or in any of these areas.
Because when the first test has come, he has caved in for a few votes in
Bennelong because he has only got a three and a half per cent margin in
Bennelong. So, instead of walking along with confidence believing he might
win a national election, he is really worrying about whether he can hold the
seat of Bennelong and whether he can please the Gurghers of Hunters Hill.
He has not had a good day and, I think, this is a turning point in the dream
ride he has had to date. Many people have said well, the government has
been in office a long time, we want an alternative to be able to vote for and
the moment that Downer resigned Howard jumped straight in the polls, but of
course, with time the journalists have been saying to us ' is there an early
election on?' I've been saying no, no early election. I want plenty of time to
have a look at Howard. It is the same old Howard that we saw in the 1 980s
and the 1970s. He might be trying to airbrush himself and Andrew Robb
might be trying to airbrush him and wash away a few of his problems, but in
the end, when you peel it all off he is the same person. He wants to hop into
working people and when it comes to the big changes we called him in the
Parliament today " gunna Howard" he was gunna to float the dollar, but he
didn't. He was gunna deregulate the financial markets, but he didn't. He was
gunna knock over the tariff wall, but he didn't. He was gunna change the
micro economy, but he didn't. He was always gunna do these things and yet,
here he is, naked now coming up to a poll saying, for the shabbiest ot
reasons, let's cut back the capacity of our largest airport and let me vandalise
the budget surplus. All for a few votes in Bennelong.
I hope the public understand this, while at the same time he is saying he
endorses the Western Australian industrial legislation and he wants to see
these changes of the Western Australian variety in the Federal jurisdiction.
So, it is very clear what we are going to fight. It is very clear, I think, that we
can beat him because we'll beat him not just on these issues, but on the basic
issue that he has no faith in Australians and no real belief in Australia.
Howard is a person from that part of Australian history that has always seen
Australia as a derivative society. He doesn't even understand the
opportunities we now have. He doesn't see the imperative of our integration
in Asia. Four weeks ago he refused to see the General Secretary of the
Vietnamese Communist Party Mr Do Muoi, who the previous week had joined
ASEAN the Association of South East Asian Nations as a full member.
Who, two days after leaving Australia sat down in a meeting with the United
States Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but he wasn't good enough to
meet John Howard. And, all around the region now, we have got people
saying, ' What about the Federal Opposition in Australia if they are not
prepared to talk to the Vietnamese, will they talk to us?" I mean, what sort of
a relationship would the rest of ASEAN have with them? These are the sort
of obscurantist views, he is still fighting the Vietnam war or here he thinks
there may be a few votes in the Vietnamese community in western Sydney or
in Melbourne, just the same way as he thinks there might be a few votes over
at Bennelong with the airport. In just the same way at St Joseph's College in 
Hunters-Hill, eight weeks ago he told a group of high school students, yes, he
thought he should put a ban on uranium sales to France when he knew his
policy was the very opposite.
You see, there is no strength there and there is no purpose and there is no
understanding. To think that now here we are with a growth economy, a
productive economy, a stripped down one, one that can now engage itself in
Asia in the fastest growing part of the world, where we are making bilateral
relationships the likes of which we have never had with these old societies
like Indonesia and Vietnam and China and, of course, the great relationships
we have built up over the years with our biggest trading partners Japan and
Korea it is lost on him.
So, these are the reasons why I think the Australian community are not going
to take him. He is out of his age and he is out of his depth. Worst of all he is
weak and sneaky and they don't like sneaks.
I know you see most of these things in him that I see, but what I see in you is
the good things about Australia-the things that we have done together and
the things we do believe in together. The building blocks we have put into
place, where we have taken this country from an industrial backwater with old
derivative technology to a modem industrial country, which is still changing,
still evolving, where we have set up partnerships not simply between the
government and the industrial wing of the Labor movement, but also with the
farm organisations, also with industry, where product innovation is the order
of the day, where the education system is the thing that pumps our product
innovation along, that great liberator of education. These are the things that
have remade Australia and they are things we have done together and they
are not academic things, they are not esoteric things, they are real things that
have been put together because of trust between us and the faith we have in
our fellow Australians to make adjustments and to see a better way.
We in the Labor movement always think we do represent the best instincts of
Australians out there because the Labor Party is a collection of little branches
spread across the country, joined by people who have no other reason for
joining it, no ulterior motive but the advancement of the nation. You people
represent working Australians in trade unions, you do so simply for their
advancement. They are very decent and pure motives and it is why, I think,
at our grass roots we have been able to always produce good policies. And
you have had the leadership. You have had great leaders in these years and
leadership is everything in an organisation and in the ACTU you have had a
great clutch of leaders who have seen the opportunity and steered the boat
the right way, in their own right and in partnership with the government.
That is why I am pleased to be back today to say to you that you did keep the
faith for us last time. You did fight the unwinnable election. We did win it and
we have kicked into place since the industrial legislation, we have seen home
enterprise bargaining, we have stitched up superannuation now to 15 per
cent, we have put in the maternity allowance, the home child care allowance, 
the generalised child care rebate and we have seen since the election,
680,000 jobs created and fulfilment of the most solemn commitment we made
at the poll and we have seen the target we set in Accord Mark VII exceeded
in two and a quarter years. So, it was worth it. It was worth it to win that last
election just as it will be worth it to win the next one. Because the thing we
must remember, people talk about the golden age of Australia in the 1950s
and the 1960s and when you looked around it was a fairly ordinary world. It
was a bit golden for us because we were selling food to countries that
couldn't feed themselves. We were selling wool to people who couldn't clothe
themselves and we had a ray of sunshine shining on us, but there was a lot of
darkness around. This is not the world today. The world today, there is sun
all over the place east Asia is growing as never before, the Indian sub
continent is growing as never before, South America is growing as never
before there is a real light shining out there and Australia is now part of that
broader sunshine and we are not just sitting there with some sort of natural
endowment or benefit that gave us a 10 or 15 year benefit which then washed
away as these other great countries caught up and passed us like Japan and
Germany in the post war period or the United States or some of the countries
of east Asia. Now we are out there in our own terms in the broad sunlight of
world growth, of broadly spread world growth and opportunity and we are
earning our freight amongst the community of nations in the area in which we
live, not as some sort of European enclave, but as a part of the Asia-Pacific
region ourselves.
It has never been a better scenario for us and that is why it would be a
tragedy to see this scenario darkened by an obscurantist reactionary
government that doesn't understand where we are at all and has no capacity
to keep the co-operation of the kind we have going.
So, I ask you to keep the faith in the Labor Party. Keep the faith in this Labor
Government and know that the things we promised you, we have done, but
also know we have done it together and we can keep on doing it.
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HANDOVER OF THE EVALUATION OF THE NATIONAL HIV/ AIDS
STRATEGY, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA, 27 SEPTEMBER 1995
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
On your behalf, and on behalf of the Commonwealth, I would like to thank
Professor Feachem for the outstanding work he has done in preparing this
Evaluation of the National HIV/ AIDS Strategy.
Professor Feachem has been assisted in his work by dedicated officers of the
Commonwealth Department of Human Services and Health, who also
deserve our thanks.
After more than a decade of intensive policy-making, and the completion of
two national HIV/ AIDS strategies, it is very useful to have an expert and
knowledgeable outsider critically assess our achievements and our
shortcomings. An independent evaluation is vital if public confidence is to be maintained in
the essential principles of the national HIV/ AIDS policy. And as Chief Health
Adviser to the World Bank, Professor Feachem is well qualified to provide an
assessment. In preparing his Evaluation, Professor Feachem has travelled extensively and
consulted widely.
Many of the groups and organisations with whom Professor Feachem has
reviewed Australia's HIV/ AIDS policies are represented here today.
There are representatives of the State and Federal political parties, senior
State and Federal bureaucrats, health professionals, academics, indigenous
Australians, the State and Territory AIDS Councils and the Commonwealth's
formal HIV/ AIDS advisory bodies. 
Professor Feachem's report brings to the Government all your views. It
brings the views of the Haemophilia Foundation Australia, and the bodies
grouped around the Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations the
National Association of People Living With HIV/ AIDS, the Scarlet Alliance,
the Australian IV League.
The views of Australians living with HIV/ AIDS are perhaps the most important
of all because they are, in all senses, closest to the daily challenges of the
epidemic. Since 1982, their strong and distinctive voices of people have helped shape
our national HIV/ AIDS policies.
People living with HIV/ AIDS could be excused for concentrating solely on
personal and family concerns.
But they haven't. Over the past decade, people with HIV/ AIDS have
transcended their circumstances, and the daily burden of coping with the
virus, to make often outstanding contributions to our HIV/ AIDS policies not
to mention the general life of the nation.
We can learn something from their bravery. And even as we show our
support for them, we can derive strength from them.
As Professor Feachem has outlined this morning, Australia's response to
HIV/ AIDS is recognised as being amongst the best in the world.
A decade of hard and unremitting effort in this country has resulted in a
welcome reduction in the rates of incidence of both HIV and AIDS.
In per capita terms, we are in a much better position regarding HIV infection
than, for example, Canada, France, the United States, Spain and Switzerland.
And as we look to the future Australia also seems to have passed the peak
incidence of AIDS infection, while the United Kingdom and the United States
appear to be experiencing continuing increases.
So we can be quietly pleased to have done relatively well in the fight against
HIV/ AIDS.
However, while ever the virus is amongst us, there can be no room for selfsatisfaction
or complacency.
There are presently some 14,700 people living with HIV/ AIDS. And a much
larger number know people and love people afflicted with the virus.
People living with HIV/ AIDS are members of the Australian family. 
They are workers in factories and players in orchestras. They are teachers in
schools and students in universities; they are clerks and journalists and
artists and labourers and lawyers. They are fathers and sons and brothers.
We enjoy and profit from the things they create.
HIV/ AIDS affects us all in our families, our workplaces and our communities.
In a sense, we are all living with the virus.
HIV infection has cost Australia dearly and not only in human terms.
In one year alone, 1992-93, the cost of providing treatment and care was
$ 130 million.
In the same year, the total indirect cost from earnings lost because of
HIV/ AIDS illness and death was estimated at $ 313 million.
I am convinced the human and financial cost would have been even greater if
not for the partnership which has been forged between governments, the
medical, scientific and caring professions, and the affected communities.
Community involvement and consultation in decision-making has ensured
that our actions have generally been well-founded, well-directed and wellexecuted.
Where delicate balances have had to be struck, we have always engaged the
public in dialogue.
Some who were opposed to the shape of our policies claimed that, if the
treatment of HIV/ AIDS was to be met effectively, we had to choose to protect
either general, or individual, rights. They believed that the protection of the
community could only be ensured by imposing sanctions, controls and
ultimately isolation upon those most at risk of HIV infection.
Our experience so far has demonstrated the opposite the greater the
protection we afford to individual rights and responsibilities, the greater the
benefit to the entire Australian community.
At all times, the Commonwealth Government has acted in the firm belief that
our paramount consideration must be the health and well being of the
Australian people.
No sectional or political consideration has ever, or will ever, stand in the way
of the Government taking whatever steps are necessary to contain the spread
of H IV/ AIDS. 
However, our achievements to date as recorded in the Evaluation Report
demonstrate that the best results are achieved by consultation, not coercion.
Within the Federal Parliament, the spirit of bipartisanship will, I trust, continue
to guide the deliberations of the Parliamentary Liaison Group on AIDS.
This Group provides the best forum in which to resolve the differences that
inevitably arise during the preparation of public education campaigns which
involve the frank discussion of human behaviour.
Nevertheless, this Government will never shrink from the need to work with
and through the communities most affected by this virus.
We owe this duty of care to our fellow citizens, and to our children.
As we look ahead, there is little prospect of the early development and
distribution of effective vaccines or cures for HIV/ AIDS, despite the welcome
developments in combination treatments of HIV infection.
And there are some disturbing signs, including some in the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities.
And, of course, every year sees the emergence of a new group of young
Australians who may be exposed to risk of infection.
So we cannot lose our resolve, or drop our pace. It is clear to the
Government that there remains an overwhelming need for a national
HIV/ AIDS strategy.
I am pleased to announce that, as recommended by Professor Feachem, the
Commonwealth Government will support the establishment of a Third
National HIV/ AIDS Strategy, with dedicated, secure and adequate funding for
five years.
As Professor Feachem has reported, the four key elements of the Strategy
are: education and prevention;
treatment and care;
research; and
international assistance and cooperation. 
The detailed components of the Third National Strategy will be decided upon
after consideration of the recommendations contained within the Evaluation,
discussions between all governments, and consultation with non-government
organisations and the general public.
These processes must be conducted responsibly but also quickly.
The over-riding objectives of the Third National Strategy must be:
to care for those affected by HIV/ AIDS;
to conduct further research into the nature of the virus and its
transmission; to redouble efforts to prevent new infections within the national territory
of Australia; and
to assist in the international effort to contain the spread of the virus,
particularly within the Asia-Pacific region.
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is tragic to think of the people Australia has lost to HIV/ AIDS and with
those people, all of their energy and creativity and strength.
It is important to remember the lives we have lost.
But it is also important to remember the lives we have saved through
intelligent government policies and generous community cooperation.
I think Australians can derive some measure of pride from the way we have
fought this virus. In the best Australian tradition, we have shown our belief in
practical, constructive measures.
We have stuck together as Australians.
And in that spirit we should go forward.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
*** PLASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY'*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE ACTU CONGRESS
MELBOURNE, 27 SEPTEMBER 1995
It's a great pleasure to be here.
There is no more important partnership for the Government than our
partnership with the ACTU.
There is no more important partnership for us, and no more important
partnership for Australia.
The last dozen years have proved this.
It has been proved in an Accord which has provided us with the motor and
the means of essential change; and with low inflation, and industrial harmony
and cooperation, and much else that now characterises modem Australia and
distinguishes us from countries which have-gone down neo-conservative
paths meaning no consensus, no safety net, no accommodation of the
social imperatives as we confront the economic ones.
The Accord proves the value of the partnership, but it is proved in other ways
as well.
It is proved in the social programs. In programs for Australian families and
Australian women. In the Working Nation programs for employment and
training for young Australians and Australians coping with structural change.
It is proved in the social policies which together make Australia's social safety
net among the most comprehensive and sophisticated in the world.
The value of our partnership is proved in the egalitarian reforming character
of the Australian Government in both social and economic policy and,
beyond these realms, in policies for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, in
environment policies, in policies for the advancement of our nation and our
nationhood, including our progress towards a republic. 
The value of our partnership is proved in the continuation of a Labor
Government a Labor Government still charged with zeal for reform and still
aware that its responsibilities are forever to Australia's working men and
women and their families.
It is not the easiest partnership to maintain, especially in times of change.
But who can say now, after twelve years of the most thoroughgoing reform in
our country's history, that our interests cannot be reconciled not only
reconciled, but made a force for the nation's interests?
No one can say that.
And when we have doubts about each other, it is worth bearing this in mind.
It is worth reminding ourselves of what might have been if the Fraser
government had continued, or we had adopted Thatcherism through Howard
or Hewson.
Think what sort of country we would now live in. How would the opportunity
and wealth be spread in the New Right Australia of the old John Howard? Or
the Old Right Australia of the even older John Howard?
Never forget what our opponents have stood for in the past decade and a
half. Don't think for a moment that Hewson was an aberration. Hewson was
not an aberration. He was a Liberal.
Like John Howard. John Howard has been every kind of Liberal it is
possible to be old right and new right, Fraserite and Hewsonite, wet and dry,
hard and soft, honest by name and rank opportunist by nature. What kind of
Liberal John Howard is depends on which-way the Liberal Party thinks the
wind is blowing. And if they can't get a reading here, they take one in
America. But in the end there is only one John Howard and he is a deeply
conservative and reactionary chap. The most conservative Liberal leader, he
once said, in the party's history.
The man who believed in all the things that John Hewson believed in but now
wants Australians to believe he doesn't; the man with the airbrushed past; the
man without policies. The man who wants to keep the monarchy and abolish
the Accord.
The man who wants to be Prime Minister and lead Australia into the 21st
century. John Howard may want to keep his policies and his ideas hidden. He may in
fact not have any policies or ideas beyond this industrial relations policy of
his. But the next election whether he likes it or not will be about policies. 
The next election will be a referendum on ideas for Australia.
And one of those ideas is the Accord. The Accord has been a defining idea
in the past decade and only a fool would abandon it for the next.
That's the rub. That's what matters.
The partnership between us has achieved great things. But the most
important thing is yet to come. It always is.
The most important thing is what we do to see that Australia goes into the
21st century strong and secure, that the wealth and opportunity is shared,
that our kids have hope and faith in their future, and belief in Australia.
That we keep the great Australian democratic goals out in front, that we do
the things necessary for our economy to compete in the world, and the things
necessary to build a good and fair society and that we don't surrender the
power to do them.
I know it depends on trust and I know that trust is tested by events. I know
that there are people who ask if the reforms of the past decade have been
worth the pain: people who say the change is too rapid and too stressful and
that it is not giving us the economic and social results which we have a right
to expect.
But the fact is that the economic changes were essential, and they have
given us extraordinarily good results, kept us up with the international game
and set us up for the 21st century.
And if this intemrnationalisation of the economy has put pressures on our
communities and on our traditional social goals in Australia, we have resisted
the pressure with far more determination and far more success than most
other countries.
Worldwide technological change has increased wage inequality everywhere,
but our response has been to offset this trend through a sophisticated social
security system and a social wage.
Nowhere has there been more change in Australia than in our workplaces, in
the labour market and in industrial relations: change towards fewer and
larger unions, change to enterprise-based bargaining and a reduced role for
centralised wage setting practices, updates to and restructuring of awards.
The case is unarguable the changes had to be made and they have been
made well. We need to draw confidence from that experience and faith in
this partnership between us. 
We need this partnership because Australian industrial relations are once
more under threat and with that the well-being and security of Australia's
workers are under threat.
John Howard and the Liberals have so few ideas we probably should be
thankful for this one. Their industrial relations policy at least lets us all know
where they stand. And whatever they might do to cast a softer light on it, they
stand where they have always stood. Which is in direct opposition to Labor.
Nowhere is the difference between Labor and the Opposition more obvious.
The industrial relations policy debate we have recently entered highlights
three fundamental differences between us.
One, in the weight given to consensus and co-operation.
Two, in the value accorded to the basic needs and protections for working
men and women.
And three, in our implicit judgements concerning what it is that Australians
want in a Government.
I want to address each of these matters.
We shouldn't forget the antecedents of our reforms. Our predecessors in
office bequeathed to us a quite amazing set of doubles double-digit inflation
and double-digit unemployment. This was an achievement of no other
Government in our history, but which a John Howard government may well
match. These facts established a very obvious case for a different approach to wage
and employment matters.
And this was what the Accord was all about a simultaneous attack on
inflation and unemployment.
Over the rest of the 1980s the union movement and Australian working men
and women bargained for wages and conditions in a new spirit one which
was sensitive to the need to control inflation and reduce unemployment.
This was the restraint of mature and responsible Australians.
It delivered huge benefits to our economic reconstruction.
The Accords have delivered sustained productivity increases and decreases
in real unit labour costs. Since 1983, we have seen a 65 per cent fall in
working days lost in strikes. And at the same time we've seen the creation of
2 million jobs in Australia. 
The Accord has helped create the culture in which change can take place; in
which the imperatives of competitiveness have been recognised, in which
workers' superannuation is laying the foundations of a national savings
program and all of this in the context of real protections for those at risk of
disadvantage from reform.
Each employment target has been met, underlying inflation has been reduced
dramatically, and at the same time Australia has been opened up to
international trade and regional growth.
As I said at the National Press Club a month ago why would anyone ditch it?
And why, when in the last decade the union movement has been in the
vanguard of necessary economic change and social progress, are we
confronted with an Opposition that speaks the anti-union language of the
1970s? Could it be because they alone among Australians have not changed?
To say that Australia owes a lot to the behaviour of workers and unions in the
early years of the Accord, is to grossly understate the case.
It is not a small thing to forego wage increases for benefits that tend to accrue
to the economy at large and not necessarily to those making the sacrifice.
It is no small thing to change behaviour in fundamental ways for unseen
benefits. It was no small thing to put trust in an untried institution, especially one that
was treated with a good deal of scepticism, and even derision by some.
The 1980s Accord accomplishments have left us with an economic base that
ensures strength for the rest of the 1990s. Australian workers have delivered
underlying inflation of less than two and a half per cent for all of this recovery
even though jobs growth has been outstanding. Costs are under control and
now real wages and productivity are growing.
It is now understood that confrontation between employers and employees is
not inevitable, and that conflict in the workplace is not a quintessentially
Australian way of operating.
It is now known world-wide that we are about achieving efficient economic
reforms in an environment of co-operation, consultation and consensus.
The cost restraint of the 1980s and the overall jobs growth since 1983 have
meant that real disposable per capita household incomes easily the best
single measure of individual economic welfare has increased by a very
healthy 20 per cent. 
It is sobering to ask where we would be today if Australian workers and
unions had not acted with selflessness and maturity when it was most
needed. It is particularly sobering to ask what might happen in the future if the Accord
partnership is undone by our political opponents.
That is the first major difference between the Government and the Coalition.
For the Government the Accord is fundamental, for the Opposition it will be
the first thing to go.
Australian labour productivity growth has been more than twice that of New
Zealand since that country introduced its Employment Contracts Act the
Coalition's preferred model in 1991; the underlying rate of inflation is low;
industrial disputes are at an historic low; the profit share is something close
to an historic high and investment is booming but they want to abolish the
Accord. The motive can't be rational. It must be ideological. It must derive from some
loathing of unions and working people. Either that, or a loathing of common
sense. The same lack of reason appears to have infected their thinking on interest
rates. Just now they have been attempting to connect it to the level of foreign
debt, by means of an unreliable imported truck.
It is a very peculiar place to go looking for the problem or the solution. And
a very peculiar way to go. If they were being rational or honest they would
send out a truck which explained the link between the Accord and interest
rates. Because if you don't have the Accord to control inflation, you only have
interest rates to do it. If you haven't got an Accord and you want to take the
heat out of wage pressures the only medicine is interest rates.
The unarguable fact is that high interest rates always mean lower growth.
And increases in interest rates to combat inflation must mean higher
unemployment. I do not mean to imply that the Coalition wants higher interest rates and less
employment growth. I do not necessarily think that they are nasty although
there is some evidence of this. But I'm more inclined to think that they are
prey to primal prejudices particularly against unions and workers.
They see a productive partnership between governments and unions and
workers as some profane cabal. Some horrid thing. Some anathema. 
In fact, the Accord is a living, breathing and dynamic institution, responsive to
outside pressures, accommodating of world economic forces and flexible to
the contemporary circumstances of the Australian labour market. It has been
also a significant contributor to social equality through support for Medicare
and, most recently from Accord VIII, expansions to superannuation, and paid
maternity leave all on a means tested basis.
No one should forget that when wage restraint was most needed the Accord
delivered it.
When the adverse terms of trade change of 1985 caused a significant
devaluation of the currency it was through the Accord that the devaluation
was made effective and real. The partners supported a small real income cut
in order to ensure that employment growth would not be at risk.
When the extreme labour market pressures of the late 1980s emerged it was
the Accord processes which kept a lid on inflation when almost no outside
economic commentator thinking of similar pressures from the past believed
it was possible.
And when it became clear that some movement towards productivity-based
wage adjustments was necessary to ensure competitiveness, again it was
through the Accord that this was institutionalised and became a reality.
Today the Accord continues to support enterprise-based identification of
workplace-specific needs and this is highlighted and emphasised in the 1993
Industrial Relations Act.
The Accord is thus clearly an institution motivated by and sensitive to
contemporary economic imperatives.
But through all this one thing has never changed, and never will.
It is that the Accord and the Government's industrial relations policy will
always reflect the value we give to protecting the disadvantaged in the
workplace. Nowhere is this more clearly evident than in the concept of the Government's
" no disadvantage" test to workplace reform.
The Government does not pussyfoot around with this issue: " no
disadvantage" in agreements means exactly that.
Some awards can be taken away in a workplace bargain, and over the course
of time and because of the particular imperatives of workplaces, some
employment conditions should and will be changed.
But award conditions can only be varied if the total package of remuneration
is not diminished through this process. 
Put simply, no worker can be made worse off, by law, from the signing of a
workplace agreement.
This is the difference between the Government's approach and that of the
Opposition. The Opposition in government will have legislation that guarantees that some
conditions can be lost, and lost without compensation.
That is, workers' overall incomes are clearly in jeopardy.
This is a crucial development in the policy debate.
It is clear this is true from listening to what Peter Reith and John Howard
have said about their planned reforms.
They have said that they support the current Western Australian State Award
legislation. They have never backed away from the essential lack of a true
no disadvantage test in Jobs back!
Both the Western Australian and Jobsback! approaches allow agreements
which do not include some basic conditions; for example, overtime pay,
penalty rates and holiday leave loadings.
And most significantly, these reflections of what their industrial relations
system would look like do not offer compensation for the loss of conditions.
Does it really matter for the incomes of working Australians? Yes.
Some examples are instructive.
Nurses. There are over 150,000 registered nurses in Australia. A typical
nurse works enough nightshifts and weekends to increase his gr her pay
above the base rate by an average of 22 per cent a year. This is worth about
$ 5000 a year.
Unskilled labourers. For unskilled labourers who work overtime the number
of hours accorded the higher pay rate is about 10 per week. If these hours
were paid at the base rate approximately one million Australian labourers
would experience an income cut of about $ 5000 a year.
Of Australia's 360,000 drivers who work just 8 hours of overtime, reducing the
rate to that of base pay would cost them about $ 6000 a year.
Bar attendants at this week's AFL Grand Final would see their wages
reduced by at least $ 40 for their day's work if the penalty is removed. And if
this is regular weekend work for Australia's 50,000 bar attendants, it amounts
to an annual income loss of over $ 2000. 
The Opposition call it a scare campaign. Let me tell them for the one and a
half million Australians I have mentioned and that's just a start the scare
campaign is coming from the Opposition. Quite simply the Opposition who
like to talk about families, have a policy to take money from breadwinners.
The facts speak for themselves: in a world in which there is no compensation
for traded-in conditions, a great many working Australians must be at risk of
losing considerable income.
The Coalition's recent responses to these criticisms have themselves been
instructive. Again, they do not seem to comprehend the basic realities of the Australian
labour market.
John Howard insists that " no worker will be forced off awards if they don't
want to be".
In other words, there isn't a problem. The Coalition just wants to introduce
more choice for workers. There is either profound ignorance at the root of
this, or profound disingenuousness. Whatever the cause, it is false.
What will happen when employers say as many are sure to " take the
contract or take the sack". Who has the power here? What real choices will
such workers have?
What happens to workers who sign a good agreement but later want to return
to the award because their employer demands that they accept a new
agreement with lower wages. How can workers possibly get back what they
have lost?
And what happens to the extraordinarily high number of workers each year
who face a new employer?
No political party which says that workers can choose an award if they want
to really understands the extraordinary flows in the Australian labour market.
Or, if they do understand, they just don't care about it.
The huge number of Australians who face a new employer every year would
not have an effective choice about keeping overtime or penalty rates. They
would not be in a position to sustain award incomes if such conditions are
traded away under the Coalition's approach.
In 1994 1,731,500 Australians more than 20 per cent of the workforce
faced a new employer for a wage and salary job. Currently over 42 per cent
of the workforce has been in their current job for less than 3 years. 
They are surely a significant part of this debate; because they are the people
who will be confronted with the injunction take the contract or forget the job.
In other words, under a Coalition government federal award system, and
adding those under conservative state awards, millions of working Australians
could lose valuable conditions and pay.
The numbers are not difficult to believe. After all, there are around 600,000
higher education students today and most of them will face a new employer in
the next 3 years.
Of the 400,000 or so year 11 and 12 students currently enrolled in school, at
least half will be in this position.
Every year several hundred thousand married women re-enter the labour
force in search of new jobs.
And in 1994, 600,000 employed people chose to change jobs.
The argument is clear. The Coalition can radically and quickly put at risk the
hard won wages of a very large number of Australians.
This is already happening under the Western Australian legislation. Howard
and Reith say their approach is " softly softly", but Howard and Reith know
that the forces in the labour market make a mockery of this.
Australians know the value of change, and recognise the need for efficiency
and competitiveness in our economy. But they also know the equation is
more complex than the Coalition would have us believe. They know, I am
sure, that the Accord is the expression the civilised expression of that
equation. And I don't believe they'll let it go.
If I am right in saying that Australians prefer cooperation to conflict and
continue to value our traditions of equity and fairness, they will reject the
Opposition's industrial relations policy. They may well be glad to see that
they have a policy but they will not be impressed by the nature of it.
They believe, I think, that equality and fairness are fundamental to Australia's
way of life, and they know that workplace arrangements and award
protections are an important means of delivering them.
If labour productivity growth were low, and the Coalition model was a proven
way of raising it, it would be understandable. But Australian labor
productivity growth is twice that of the place where their model is employed
New Zealand. 
If there is no efficiency case for change, Australians have cause to wonder
why it is that they should risk hard won workplace incomes. Why it is that our
fundamental identification with a fair go and social and economic equality
should be put at risk?
The Australia we have created through the Accord mechanisms is a place to
be proud of. Robert Reich, the United States Secretary of Labor has recently
lamented that in his country, while employment growth is healthy, they have
created vast numbers of working poor.
On the other side of the Atlantic, while there are sophisticated safety nets, the
countries of Western Europe have poor jobs growth records. They envy the
US for this, while Reich envies these countries their relatively low levels of
poverty. In Australia we have the best of both worlds. It is clearly to a significant
extent because of the Accord processes.
I take you back to my theme. Our success in this partnership springs from
the belief we share that the incomes of all working Australians must be
protected. I wish you well in this Congress, and trust that I will be able to address you at
your next one by which time I hope that collectively we have put to rest for
all time the aspirations of those who seek to put Australia on the path to
conflict, inequality and social injustice.
Watch this space, we won't let you down. 


TEL ELO: c2t 95PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPADDRESS TO THE NSW ALP CONFERENCE, SYDNEY TOWN HALLSEPTEMBER 1995E&amp; OE PROOF COPYWell, thanks very much for a very enthusiastic welcome I appreciate It. Ithink it's our about 106th Conference, and we do keep keeping on here wedo keep keeping on. But Terry, Chris, Della, Anthony, my Parliamentarycolleagues and friends one and all. I am very pleased to be back here Istarted my political life here all those years ago at a Conference in the early1960s. And 30 years later we are still running Australia we have a nationalGovernment, and a Labor Government in NSW. And this Parliament, these 3years, arguably, have been our most valuable. When we won In 1993, andwe stuck itto the Tories in the sweetest victory of all, we opened up anopportunity for ourselves and for Australia that consolidated the work and thegains and the imagination of the 1980s. We have consolidated the recoveryto now the longest growth phase in Australia's post-War history. The nextnational accounts will be the 17th consecutive quarter of growth a nationalrecord. We have returned the economy to strong job growth we have had,since the election, 680,000 jobs. And I said recently it took us from 1788 to1983 to get to 6 million, and we have added 10% to that in 2 1/ 2 years. It'sway beyond our commitment of half a million we reached that, in fact, after 21/ 4 years. And in this process of consolidated growth, and strong job growth,we have consolidated low inflation we have an inflation rate around 2 3%,after the Tories, of course, couldn't' get it under double digits. So we havefulfilled, I think, the most solemn pledge we made at that election, which wasall about growth and employment. And that pledge was to get the economyback to growth, to pull dlown unemployment to not leave the unemployedbehind. They were the solemn commitments the hardest to meet, and theyare the ones we have met the most. As I say, we have done it all by breakingthe back of that pernicious disease Australian inflation and done it in away, also, which now has the current account deficit trending down.Three months ago, of course, it was turning at $ 3 billion, and we had all thehand-wringing, and the Liberals with their debt truck and the rest yesterdayit came in at $ 1.5 billion, half of what it was 2 months ago, and below the: 20 No. 001 P. 01/ 16
TEL 2figure of just over $ 2 billion the previous month. So, we have got it trendingdown. Not in 12 years have we faced a better scenario 4% GDP growth, 4%employment growth, 2-3% inflation, the Current Account trending down, andexports booming. And we have been given the time for the transition to anew labour market. In these 3 years, Laurie Brereton Introduced the new IRlegislation, and we have made that change from the most centralised of wagefixing systems, to, now, an organic one where the only place out there in themarket place the only place where our unions will survive, the only placewhere they will have the opportunity to go and do the things they need to doto represent their members, and not be held hostage to some ConservativeGovernment of the future at whatever time it wants to put a knife through theheart of the centralised wage fixing system. We have built a labour marketthat keeps our competitiveness, keeps the jobs coming, keeps inflation low.And while we have been doing all of that, we have moved the Budget back tosurplus, we dramatically expanded superannuation so that all of us will havea better standard of living in retirement. By the year 2002 which is just 7years away every Australian person will have 15% minimum savings insuperannuation, which will dramatically increase their benefits In retirement,and while doing it, produce a huge pool of national savings which willunderpin a much higher level of investment in Australia, and lower ourreliance upon overseas savings and overseas debt.And to underline these achievements to cap them off, to finish them off, topolish them off we have strengthened our identity in our culture. We haverighted the wrong of terra nulus with our indigenes, we have given themback that part of the remaining land that was always theirs, we built arelationship of quality and trust with the countries of the region, and arelationship which is without precedent In Australia, between Australia andthese places. We have threaded together the most ambitious free-tradeundertaking in the world, which is APEC, and we have laid down the blueprintfor an Australian republic. And we have done all of these things in 3 yearsin less than 3 years. We have made Australia a country we can be proud ofwe have made Australia the fairest Anglo-Saxon country in the world. Andthis is what Labor Governments are all about: fairness, equity, imagination,belief, faith. Faith in our fellow Australians, compassion for their lot in life,belief in Australia. But now, at the brink of the century, there is one messageto come from that great achievement, and it is this: we can't go back.Now we have got such momentum, we can't go back. Now we have madeAustralia competitive and stronger, we can't go back. Now we have built asocial democracy and a social wage with equity, we can't go back. Now wehave got a Native Title Act, we can't go back. Now we have built a future inAsia, we can't go back. Now we have mapped the path to the republic, wecan't go back. We can't go back to the Iniquity, or our pastuncompetitiveness, we can't go back the conflict, we can't go back to thecontinental insularity, to the mono-culture, to the denial of truth about ourindigenes, to the monarchy. In short, we can't go back to the old Australia.We can't go back to John Howard's Australia conservative Australia, theLiberal's Australia. 2 Oct 95TEL: g. 2o No. U .~ t0 01 R .02/ 16
TEL: 2 ct 3: 201 N JO. CC1 F . u33Now, this week was an interesting week in Australian public life. This week,the real John Howard stood up. He didn't stand up voluntarily, and he didn'tstand up very straight. But he stood up just enough for Australians to seehim for the first time since he became leader again. And what did they see?They saw the old John Howard the one we all know. The man who hasopposed every wage rise, bar one since 1978. The man who opposesprogressive legislation instinctively. Who opposed the Racial DiscriminationAct, who opposed sanctions on South Africa, who opposed the South PacificNuclear Free Zone, who said in 1987 " Medicare is one of the great disastersof this Government we will be proposing changes to Medicare that amountsto its de facto dismantling". The man, who in the same year, wanted to reintroduceracial discrimination into Australia's immigration policy. Privately,Honest John says he wants a labour market with downward flexibility.Publicly, Honest John says he just wants a flexible labour market. Yet, at thesame time he champions his other article of faith the family. " I'm pro-family",he says as if the rest of us, of course, were anti-family. But he's pro-family,and anti-overtime rates. Pro-family, and anti-penalty rates. Pro-family, andanti-award. Pro-family, and anti-breadwinner. Pro-family, and pro-take-the--contract-or-take-the-sack. Pro-family, and pro-knocking tens of billions out ofGovernment programs which go to support Australian families. John Howardis pro-family, and anti-family support. He is pro-family, and anti-fairness.John Howard has a curious concept of choice we noticed it this week withindustrial relations. The downward flexibility he favours, he wants us toconstrue as choice. And in fact, the choice he talks about will prove to be adenial of choice, as it is already happening under legislation in Victoria, andin legislation in Western Australia. There was the case this week of alibrarian in Melbourne, under the old Victorian state award. After years ofcommuting, she saw a job advertised closer to home. She phoned theemployer, and found that the work is identical to her current position. Thenshe discovered the difference in the salary her current salary was $ 35,000.The salary for the new position because the old state award had beenabolished by Jeff Kennett was $ 19,000. So, she was forced to stay whereshe was. That's the choice that John Howard talks about. And in that choice,of course, it makes very clear that person is going to be stuck there is notgoing to be mobility or flexibility, but stuck and not able to make the moveaway. Now, he has never done the right thing, and he has never done the hardthings. In the 80s he let himself be buffered around by the heavies of theNew Right. He picked up their rhetoric, after formerly trying to make himselfup as some sort of cuddly person in the moderate parts of the Liberal Party.But he ended up with the heavies of the New Right, and trying to buy voteswith a discriminatory immigration policy. He has always been weak he cansound forcible, but he is never strong, and he is never principled. Now, letme just give you a couple of quotes this week about Mascot airport, becauseit is not so much the issue of the airport it's what it means In terms of wherehe would lead Australia. He says all the time the greatest priority that facesthe Government at the present time in the national economy in the nationalinterests is to " re-ignite the process of micro-economic reform". He says,
EL: . Oct , Z 1' 1 U'Ouii P .0j4/ i4" the Coalition Government will revitalise the micro-economic process. Itmight be boring to many, but any Government Interested in this country'seconomic future and jobs for its people must get on with the task of improvingits efficiency. The better we are, the better off we will be", he says. As one ofits first tasks, he says he will have a Productivity Commission, which will carryout a stock-take on the progress of micro-economic reform. There will beparticular areas of emphasis which will impact on Australia's internationalcompetitiveness, as well as a timetable for decision-making andimplementation. In other words, he is the one he says will crack all the toughnuts that Labor, he says, won't touch. Such as the waterfront, such as thelabour market, such as shipping and transport, such as these things.But when it comes to the biggest micro-economic change in air transport inAustralia that is the third runway at Mascot airport, he is now slipping backsaying he wants to cut its capacity by 35%, and he wants to make ininherently unsafe. But this is after he said these things about it he said thisin a press release, which I have from 1989: " in the interests of safety, airportfacilities should be upgraded immediately, including the construction of athird runway. The Government is playing carelessly with a situation thatcould too easily result in a major tragedy this risk must be averted." This ison his press release. And it goes on in that vein. He said this In a number ofother places he has made it clear across the way. And when asked on radioin the same year, he said this talking about noise: " Many people get lessbecause you will have the north-south pattern. I think the case for it, ongeneral interest grounds, is absolutely overwhelming. Our policy is to build it,that's been our policy for the past 6 1/ 2 years". In other words, he says it willbe better, it will be safer for the airport to be configured this way it will lift itscapacity, and it is a major micro-economic change. But now, the same microreformerthat has urged Labor to do another hard thing as we have done onthe waterfront, in shipping, in telecommunications, in deregulating the airlinesystem, in infrastructure such as the third runway he now says for a fewmiserable votes in Bennelong, he will move backwards. He will movebackwards. He will move backwards away from the task that he knows has tocontinue. Whether it's in ports and wharves, or electricity, or gas, or water, orany of the things that will determine our competitiveness, he is moving back.But listen to this for humbug, and he said this in the Parliament in 1981, " whatmakes what this Government has done so criminally irresponsible", and he Istalking here about the runway, about Mascot, " as criminally irresponsible in apolitical sense, is that all along it has known the right thing to do. It's onething to be invincibly ignorant about the correct economic prescription, It's aninfinitely more culpable thing to know what the right thing is, and toconscientiously pursue that course of action in the name of politicalexpediency and political opportunism". In other words, he is doing the verything now that he was upbraiding other people alleging that other peopledid then. Yet this is the person who is going to run the new Australianagenda. The person who is going to be the hard man, who breaks the microeconomiclog-jam. First bit of pressure, and he goes to water. And where'sthe pressure? In a seat he has held for 20 years. He has got a margin of3.5% 1 he is running for Prime Minister, but he thinks he mightn't hold his seat.Oh; he's got a big ticker a big ticker. And he said oh no, look, it's all about
[ ELL O. Ct 5 3: 2U No . Cj01 F. 05,-16Lowe. But, of course, the noise in Lowe comes across the back end of theelectorate he knows it's all about Bennelong. And here he is, he's out theresaying I can lead you to a better Australia, I can break the log-jams, I canbring the new age in, but I had better shore up my own seat. I had better getaround. But, of course, the other thing, can I say he is completely at odds with theinterests of the people from rural NSW. And just let me give you a couple ofinstincts about this. If we force Mascot back by 35%, there's no way all of thecommuter aircraft can come to Sydney. They will have to hub somewhere,and then come they will have to hub into bigger planes. We won't have 8-seaters, and 12-seaters and 20-seaters they will have to hub into bigplanes. So, if I give you an example: from Dubbo, it now takes 55 minuteson Hazelton Airlines. If they have to hub through Orange, it will take 1 hourminutes. It costs $ 3.36 now, it will cost $ 436. From Parkes, it takesminutes. If they have to hub through Orange, it will take 1 hour andminutes. And let me give the example of Port Macquarie Port Macquariedirect now is 55 minutes, hubbing through Newcastle on Eastern Airlines, Itwill take 1 hour and 50 minutes. It now costs $ 348, it will cost $ 470. Alburyon Kendall Airlines takes 1 hour 10 minutes now. Hubbing through Canberrait will take 2 hours and 15 minutes it's now $ 432, it will be $ 528. AndNarrandera which comes via Hazelton is 1 hour 20 minutes. Hubbingthrough Wagga will take 2 hours and 5 minutes. It's now $ 396, it will be$ 490. 1 mean, that's what he is doing to country NSW he is going to punishit, he is going to remove their access to our capital city, he is going to do It allin the name of a bit of sly politics for a change which he has always himselfsupported all those years ago, for all those many years.Now, this is the John Howard who believes that he can dupe the public, thathe can explain to people see, he is from the John Carrick school of politics.That is, say a thing often enough, say it with meaning, look serious, keeprepeating the lie, and you have got a good chance of getting away with it.Let me say a few things more about his industrial relations policies. He saysthat people will be able to stay on their awards. But this belies anunderstanding about the labour market, that 1.7 million take new jobs orchange jobs every year. That in a 3 year life of an Australian Parliament 3years 43% of jobs change. Every time they change, those people lose theaward protections. All the young people coming out of universities into thelabour market for the first time, lose the award protections. The womenjoining the workforce won't have the award protection. Migrants joining theworkforce won't have the award protections. So much so, all of those thingswill change. And then he says that he will have some sort of disadvantagetest, but not the no-disadvantage test. Not the one that says you can trade inor cash-out overtime, penalty rates or holiday leave loading, but you must getsomething for it. You can trade them away to make the enterprise moreflexible, to make the work hours more flexible, but the total package must notbe a disadvantage for the employee, and there is a test which is appliedthrough our federalised institutions. He won't do that. Nor will he say thatthere is some community standards like sick leave and maternity leave etc
TEL: 2 UCt u Iio 001 F'. U6 It!6which won't be traded away, and shouldn't be traded away. He wants, ofcourse, flexibility downwards, and there will be no disadvantage tests. Nowwhat this means to the people in the workforce like, for instance nurses whowould lose about 22% a year by losing overtime and penalty rates, about$ 5000 a year, truck-drivers who would probably lose the better part of about$ 6000 a year on the same basis you can find all categories of people In thislabour market of ours who, basically, will be much worse off, without thesystems we have in place. And this Is the nearest we have ever got to apermanent wages system. And the enterprise bargaining system wherepeople can go out, with the productivity of the business, split it betweenprofits and wages, and make themself better off, and make the companystronger, and make the business stronger and for those who haven't got thatstrength, or that negotiation power, or that negotiating position, we have gotto say to you we have got a safety net, with safety net adjustments whichmaintain their purchasing power, and give them increases in income. That'sthe system we have in place it's the system he wants to junk.But this is the man who will basically do anything to see this view of his thisreligious view he has had about pushing wages down. The same fellow, ofcourse, who doesn't want an Australian as the Head of State. The same guyas I said earlier who is opposed to the Native Title Bill. The same personwho, months ago, wouldn't see the political leader of Vietnam. Who hatesthe Accord, but wants to keep the monarchy. Who wants to strip away thoseaward protections from the lowest paid, and create an army of working poorto give us the American model for Australia. The failed Treasurer, the failedLeader of the Opposition, the Liberal Party's third choice In this parliament.The man who wants to be Prime Minister of Australia. The thing is we can'tgo back.This week, we saw the real John Howard the vaccillator, the opportunist,that man without principles, the man without policies. The man who hasHonest John etched on the shingle out the front, and under it, " we tradeanything". Anything for a few votes. The national interest on aviation, andmicro-economic reform sold for a few votes in Bennelong. The nationalinterests in a relationship with Vietnam sold for a few votes in Marrickville.And by the way, this week when he was sustaining his losses on Kingsford-Smith airport, he went up around the press gallery he is now beaveringaway in the press gallery and he told them that his Private Member's Bill ofKingsford-Smith Airport was just a clever stunt a means of getting industrialrelations off the front page. Well, I thought an interesting example of tacticsdevised after the battle yes, I have lost a leg, but you know, I meant to. Itwas part of the strategy. But the more interesting point is why would hewant to move industrial relations off the front page? If he Is running aroundtelling journalists that he has moved his stunt Private Members Bill onKingsford-Smith, why would he want to remove industrial relations off thefront page? And the answer is easy and that is, because everyone knowsthat on industrial relations, John Howard has never changed that it will stilldefine him, that he is determined to got his way and to cut wages back.
TEL: 2. Oct. 95 3: 20j No. 001 PF. 07.167So, we have seen him trading votes, and trading policies all week. Theprinciple and integrity of the institution of the Royal Commission which hasmeant so much to Australia in years past, which we can see working herenow with the Police Royal Commission in NSW was sold for the votes thatCarmen Lawrence might win, and the Liberals might lose as they fail apart inWestern Australia. All of these things have always been his way. He hasnever done the hard things, or the good things, he has only done things tobuy votes.On the other hand, Labor sees our ( tape break)... replete with opportunities.We have come a long way in the past decade, and a very long way in 3years. But none of us believe that we have gone as far as we might, that thejob is over, or that the dream is fulfilled, but we are still doing things. And letme just give you a few examples. On the environment this week on theenvironment, we have got the largest process we have ever had under theNational Forest Policy Statement, the agreement between the Commonwealthand the States we are now looking at deferred forest areas which will be putaway for 2 3 years for development of Regional Forest Agreements. ThoseRegional Forest Agreements will have representative stands of treesrepresentative reserve systems, so we won't be arguing coupe by coupe,compartment by compartment, logging company by logging company for eachgroup of trees that are taken from the forests. So, in other words, we willhave a mature system. And what is our standard? 15% of the native forestswhich existed before European settlement that is about twice as much asany comparable developed country has. Twice as much as the UnitedStates, much more than Europe higher than any comparable country. Andwe are now getting the cooperation of the State Departments of Forestry weare bringing the States in partly because we told them last Christmas that ifthey didn't, we would cut woodchips back by 20% a year to nothing. And sothey have come to the party Tasmania has signed up. You know ourGovernment in NSW didn't need signing up they are going to put a goodpolicy into place with the Commonwealth. And we are about to now, embarkupon a process where for 3 weeks we have left a draft in the market place forthe green groups, the environment movement and for the forest and paperindustries to look over, and to come back to the Cabinet, and where theCabinet will then settle on deferred forest areas. We will put them away, andin the next 2 or 3 years we will have Regional Forest Agreements, and thenwe can go on with a decent plantation and pulpwood industry taking regrowthand some things from the native forests, but knowing that those greatforests of Australia will be protected, and the representative stands andspecies will be there forever. Now, that's what we're doing. No Governmenthas ever attempted it that's what we are doing now.But I noticed in today's Australian, someone had some wise words to sayabout this process I'll just read you a couple if these things. It says indemanding Federal and State Governments protect ever-Increasing areas ofold-growth forests, the environment movement may sacrifice its credibility,and reinforce the image that it is insatiable. Without even glimpslng at thedraft proposals for the deferred forest areas yesterday, the environmentalalliance prepared a statement that condemned the outcome as diabolical. It
TEL: 2 Oct .95 3 : 20 NO 01 F 08/ 16claimed forests such as East Gippsland in Victoria were going to bedestroyed that the situation in Victoria was catastrophic, only 2 catchmentareas would be protected. None of this is true. Years of campaigning haswon the movement far more than it is prepared to admit. In Victoria, wheresome of the most detailed assessments have been carried out, the size ofnational parks and reserves means additions of protected forests are likely tobe small". It goes on to say, " reserves in the Wombat State Forest will beenlarged by 50%. Of box ironbark forests, spread throughout Victoria, anextra 90,000 hectares is required to meet the Federal Government'sbenchmarks. There will be 150,000 hectares available. in East Gippsland.the State's 3 year plan allows 18,000 hectares to be logged, leaving 640,000still untouched and available for inclusion in a reserve system that will havebeen long-finalised by then. Interim protection has also been given to 2 iconareas the Betka River, and Ellery Creek catchment area. This is notcatastrophic, nor the destruction of East Gippsland". And it finished with thispunch line " if the environment movement wants to be taken seriously, it willneed to drop the exaggeration, and use the next 3 weeks to make the most ofCanberra's offer of genuine consultation of what is still, after all, a draft".Now, let me endorse those comments.Only Labor has ever protected the environment. We are the only ones whocare about it. And if you take the last 15 months, we have put away InQueensland, Shoalwater Bay that beautiful area that has been within theDefence Department for all these years. we have put it away forever. Wehave saved Jervis Bay. We have dlone things in various locations alongEastern Australia particularly. And not only that, we have just reinstatedanother plan on the Barrier Reef Laurie Brereton has, again, beenprotecting the Reef through the carriage of vessels through it, andparticularly, dle-ballasting. We have done all of these things and, at the sametime, we have told the forest industries you are going to be cut by 20% a yearto nothing, unless you get into Regional Forest Agreements. You either addvalue, and get into Regional Forest Agreements, or you're in for the chop.Except the chop is not the tree the chop is you. In all of this, we have nowestablished a process where not like last year, where we were arguingabout 100 or so coupes but we are now looking at the forests of the countryas I say, for the largest representative system in the developed world,minimum of that which existed before European settlement. And, of course,we are doing more than that. On the land, we have got the Landcaremovement working. Only Labor cares about the land, and the way it hasbeen abused and lost. And we have got the Land Management Task Forceabout to report, and it is going to report about how we have got whole of farmplanning how we rationalise farms in regions. How we give structuralassistance to move farms into rational and economic units. How we got offmarginal land. How we deal with salinity. How we see water resourcesbrought to the right places, at the right prices, in ways that will not encouragesalinity. How we improve our principal river system, the Murray Darling. Allof these things are things which are only on the agenda of one political partythe Australian Labor Party.
TEL: 2.0ct. 95 3 : 20 No .001 F. 09/ 1E9And can I say, while I am at that, in these things that we are doing theseideas we have we are also underwriting now the future of Australianagriculture. We are trying to drought-proof Australia. We are putting apremium on the family farm. And isn't it a great irony, as always I suppose,that it has got to be a Labor Government that goes out and defends thebackbone of rural Australia the family farm, It's a Labor Government whichhas now removed, in the drought, of course the asset test for income socialsecurity income. Over 11,000 farm families are now getting income supportwe have paid $ 88 million in exceptional drought relief in NSW, and we havepaid $ 600 million overall $ 600 million. And that has kept rural Australiatogether given them hope, given them heart until the rains make clear, orenough rain comes, to see that the drought is broken.For regional Australia that the Liberals have never cared about, that theNational Party has never cared about we are saying regions are importantto Australia. Regions is where the fastest growth is it's not in the capitalcities any more, its in some of the regions. We want to make the regionswork better. We want to see them become part of the national economy. Wewant to see them have a role and a future for themselves, and make theircontribution. And we are developing Regional Economic DevelopmentOrganisations, we're funding the capacity of people to think about thelrregions. We are saying that the regions which are led at a community levelby business, by unions, by local government, by community groups they arethe regions that kick along. They are the regions that are part of the Laborview of Australia the ones that will be part and central to where we go as afuture. They are some of the things that we are thinking about. And I tell you thosethings to make this point that the coming election is going to be areferendum of ideas, a referendum on policy. A choice between those withideas, with imagination and with policy, and those without them. The bigideas growth, jobs, cooperation, fairness, the environment, the region,APEC, the republic. I mean, these are the big ideas of Australia. The bigideas of Labor. The big things we stand for. And there is going to be norunning and hiding in the referendum of ideas. John Howard might run, buthe can't hide. And I can assure you I will trace him down every policy blackhole, through every shonky press statement, through every glib phrase,through every broken promise, through every paltry manoeuvre he will beaccountable. Because they have no policy ideas the dogs are barking it intheir staff and around Parliament House. There is no inventory of ideas andpolicies about to come out for the election, for the Liberal Party. They don'thave any. They want to make the election campaign about us. I say goodwe are the leaders of Australia. We are the enlargers we are not thepunishers and the straiteners. We are the people who dream the big dreamsand do the big things.Imagine if they had our agenda imagine if now John Hewsori had won theelection, and he was sitting with our work 4% growth, 4% employmentgrowth, 2-3% inflation, the Current Account trending down, exports booming,a cooperative labour market, and Accord where the unions endorsed the
TEL: 2 .0c t -6 : 2u No Uul F. 1uw' it,Reserve Banks inflation target, a fair social wage, Medicare, theenvironment, the forests, the sea, the water, the land, the region, the country,APEC, the Pacific Rim, the republic. Imagine if they had that agenda. Butwhat have they got? Miserable, out-dated rubbish from the 1950s and the1960s. The politics of envy. The mono-culture. They reject it all. About ayear or so ago in Canberra I saw John Olsen getting a prize. He said, " lookthere's only 2 sorts of Australians the lovers and others, and we know whatto think of the others, don't Now, we are part of the lovers. We arepart of the believers. We are the enlargers. And Australia has always gonefor enlargement it has always gone for the big ideas for equity, fairness,justice and a future. Now, that's what we have got. We are going to fight thiselection as hard as we fought any election ever. The thing we have gotagainst us, is that we have been in office for 12 years. But the public knowsthat against that longevity of office, there is this huge pile of achievements.That we have genuinely given Australia a future, that we have ideas about it.We feel for the place we know about its role in the region, we have regardfor one another they know these things. In my view, they are not going toturn that out, and take the third choice of the Liberal Party. A person who hasnever put any of the big policy changes into place, and someone who justthis week has proven again how hollow he is. It's going to be a great fight.And you have often heard from this lectern in other circumstances the phrasethings worth fighting for. But these things are worth fighting for. We have gota Labor Government in NSW we have got a great Labor leader In Bob Carr.We have got a Labor Government in Queensland, and we control the greatbulk of the resources in Eastern Australia the landscape, the territory wecan do things together. And I can even drag a few of the recalcitrantPremiers to the party on occasions. So the future is ours. What we have gotto do now is go out there and hang on to it grab it, seize it, and run with it.And when we do, we will have the reward we have had on 5 occasions. Whatwe now want it now is for our 6th, and I am telling you this we will get it.Thank you.ends.


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTERS THE HON P. J. KEATING MPRESOLUTION AGAINST FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING, NSW ALPCONFERENCE, SYDNEY, 30 SEPTEMBER 1995E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Mr President, I thought I would take this opportunity of the Conference to say&nbsp;something declaratory, to move a proposal which I urge the Conference to&nbsp;adopt. It is about the role of the French in the Pacific and the shameful&nbsp;decision by France to test nuclear weapons there. It says this:
Conference condemns the continuing program of dangerous and&nbsp;environmentally irresponsible nuclear testing being conducted by France in&nbsp;the South Pacific.
Conference notes the destabilising adverse effects of the program on&nbsp;the region and the infringement of the rights of the indigenous people of the&nbsp;South Pacific. Conference expresses its outrage that France's nuclear testing&nbsp;program seriously impedes progress on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty&nbsp;and Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and the efforts to create a nuclear free&nbsp;world. Conference expresses its total opposition to all nuclear testing by all&nbsp;states in all environments.
Conference calls on the Federal Government to continue its campaignto employ all practical measures at Australias disposal to halt the Frenchnuclear testing program, including through diplomatic efforts includingresolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and other multilateralorganisations and regional bodies such as the South Pacific Forum;, taking&nbsp;every appropriate step in international law to secure the end of the testingprogram; encourage individual campaigns of protest by Australians.Conference states that no new contracts for Australian uranium salesto France be signed or approved until France signs the CTBT.Conference calls on the Australian Government to take all actions inrespect of existing contracts for uranium sales to ensure that such sales&nbsp;make no direct or indirect contribution to the French nuclear weaponsprogram. Mr President, the Australian Labor Party and this Government has had a longand honourable history on arms control and disarmament issues. Rightthrough the 1 980s and the 1970s we urged the world to adopt a South Pacific&nbsp;nuclear free zone to support the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and we&nbsp;have also supported and developed the groundbreaking Chemical Weapons&nbsp;Convention. Our objection to what is being done now is at a time when there should be a&nbsp;premium on non-prolIife ration, at a time when the world believed the cold war&nbsp;had ended. A democracy. Not a totalitarian regime, but a democracy hascome out and said that in its view, the nuclear weapons game is not over.That the premium on non-proliferation will be lowered and it has basicallysaid it is competent for it and others to go out and test nuclear weapons, torefine them further or to develop them in a primary sense.Now by President Chirac overturning President Mitterand's decision for a&nbsp;cessation of testing of nuclear weapons at Mururoa Atoll, what we have seen&nbsp;there is a nuclear weapon state telling all the would be proliferators that It is&nbsp;basically okay to test weapons. The Irans, the lraqs, the Pakistans and all of&nbsp;the others who are out there mucking around with nuclear weapons, France&nbsp;is out there saying it is okay. That is our objection.
Our second objection is that because it is a democracy it ought to haverespect for the people in the area in which it is testing. That is, it is nottesting these weapons in its own territory, its own metropolitan territory, it istesting them in an area of the Pacific it calls its own. And in debating this withone French newspaper, the editor upbraided me, he said this is Frenchterritory, this is France. I said yes I know, there are Polynesians all the waydown the Loire Valley and Carcassonne and Aix-en-Province, popping outbehind the trees, down in the Dordogne, they are all over the place. The factis, what France has done is call into question the legitimacy of its connectionsin the Pacific for its contempt and betrayal of the values that democracieshave. The belief that other democrats around the world have had in Franceand its values and the betrayal of the people of the Pacific area. These aretheir points of objection.
The biggest problem that we face in the post cold war world is a cessation oftesting of nuclear weapons and Australia will be at the forefront of thedevelopment of a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. If some good comes fromthis we hope to pin France into it and it said it would support a zero thresholdwhich would mean that we may have a treaty of substance. But beyond thetreaty and the Non-proliferation Treaty, of course, we still have the greatstock pile of weapons out there, decaying weapon inventories. I think whatFrance has done is remind the world, remind everybody, that there are50,000 nuclear warheads laying around the place, that we do have rottingsubmarines sitting in Vladivostok, that their reactors are overheating and theyare being kept cool by pumps on the wharves and all of the other bits andpieces of industrial junk which has been appendages of that old desire to see&nbsp;a big Soviet maritime force. It is true still, unfortunately, that there are 14&nbsp;reactors the same as Chernobyl, that they have the same inherent design&nbsp;faults, that they are sitting in the Ukraine and Belarus? and these otherplaces around northern Europe, that they threaten continental Europe, thatthey have to be replaced and that the premium has to be upon nonproliferationon the disposal of these weapon stocks and on making theseelectricity programs safe.This is what France should be interested in and it is engagement with theseissues which will bring security to France. Not some notion that it should bedeveloping a weapons program itself and one which in someway willguarantee its security in the past. This is all a throwback to 1940 and 1941.This is all about Hitler going down the Champs Elysees. It is all about Chiracsaying never again. Well, of course, we all know never again and anyonethat owns nuclear weapons can say never again, but why must they refinetheir weapons and why must they add to the inventory and why can't they jointhe rest of us in cleaning the world up. This is what we want them to do.Mr President, the good thing about this is we are having an impact on theFrench people themselves. I have placed articles in LeMonde, in Liberationand with other newspapers, we are winning the battle in France itself andPresident Chirac has just taken an enormous tumble in the opinion polls froman approval rating in the 50s I think 58 down to 32 per cent and adisapproval rating which has gone from 20 odd per cent to something likeper cent. It has been a complete reversal of his fortunes and that of hisgovernment. Now, we have got 71 per cent of the opposition in the Europeanparliament, France's European allies 71 per cent opposition to testingamongst the French people and, of course, general support for the policiesand processes that we have articulated and enunciated.So, he is losing the battle in Europe, he is losing it at home, he is losing it inGermany which is a country that matters most to France in terms of publicopinion, he is losing it, I think, all around the world.We want to make clear that our opposition is not an opposition to Franceitself. France has given the world so much in its history with the FrenchRevolution, with democracy, with Its culture, so our opposition is not anopposition to France or the French people, it is an opposition to the FrenchPresident's decision and the French government. We object to thisunprincipled decision, to this betrayal of the interests of the rest of us andthose in the Pacific by a democracy.We have worked with France in the past to do things. I had the pleasure in1988 of meeting Prime Minister Michel Rocard and proposing to him that wenot sign the minerals convention and that we make Antarctica a wildernesspark and that is where the movement towards the 50 year wildernessdeclaration for Antarctica came from. Bob Brown was chewing on a mueslibar at the time, I think. But, Mr President, the fact is the Matignon Accords inNew Caledonia, those Accords which are about basically the peacefulresolution and transition of that place were things Australia joined France on.
So, we are not against France or the French people, but we are against this&nbsp;decision. We want it reversed. We want to see no more tests. We want the&nbsp;French to clean up their act. We want them to apologise and we want them&nbsp;to join the rest of us in cleaning the world of these dreadful weapons. That is&nbsp;what we want.
President Chirac says I am anti-French, this you know Mr President, Isn't&nbsp;true. All those antique dealers down the Rue de Bac and the Rue Madeleine&nbsp;and the Rue de St Honore know it is not true too. But what is true is that we&nbsp;are going to keep on his wheel until he lets off. What is true is I'll keep after&nbsp;him until he gives it up and I know the Australian people are going to keep&nbsp;after him as well. That we are not going to relent. That we do have good&nbsp;values and we do get indignant about these things and we did think the cold&nbsp;war was over and there was no more need for it.
The other thing is, of course, just from a point of view of sheer self interest. If&nbsp;you are a weapon state, I should imagine the thing to do is not let the bloke&nbsp;next door be a weapon state. So, France had a vested interest in the Nonproliferation&nbsp;treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as has the United&nbsp;States and Great Britain. If they have got them, their policy should be to let&nbsp;no one else have them. But they are not even that smart. They are out thereletting the Iran's and the Iraq's and all the others muck around with them and&nbsp;saying good on you, go for your life. That is what we object to and we are not&nbsp;having it and we are going to protect the people of the South Pacific and we&nbsp;are going to argue their case for them.
At the South Pacific Forum there was unanimity of opinion against this. I&nbsp;heard a speech there from President Kabua from the Marshall Islands talking&nbsp;about the nuclear program in his country over the years and the wasting&nbsp;stock piles, leaking nuclear stock piles in that country and the proposals he&nbsp;has had put to them by nuclear weapon states to put more there. They have&nbsp;always been at it with these lovely little places scattered throughout the&nbsp;Pacific, taken communities that have been essentially taken down, used and&nbsp;abused, absolutely used and abused for development of these huge testing&nbsp;programs. It has been a shameful record by most of the democracies in the&nbsp;Pacific, but It shouldn't continue.
&nbsp;So, Mr President, I urge conference support for the resolution. I know there&nbsp;is a fair bit of bipartisan support for this. I welcome this, but I assure you the&nbsp;Government will fight this right to the end. Gareth Evans Is In New York at&nbsp;the moment, where we are now putting together the support at the United&nbsp;Nations for a resolution which is condemning this testing and process and&nbsp;calling it into question and seeking a cessation of it. We will be using all of &nbsp;the forums we can to keep this pressure on and I know with the support of the&nbsp;Labor Party and the community of this country we can have a very big impact.
Thank you very much.ends



PRIME MINISTER
*** PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE NAB ETHNIC BUSINESS AWARDS, MELBOURNE
4 OCTOBER 1995
Recently the World Bank measured our vast natural resources against our
small population and declared that Australians are the richest people on
Earth. I think we were all a bit startled by this, even though I also think that in some
ways we are even wealthier than the World Bank knows.
But we shouldn't read their report too literally. Wealth can be measured in a
number of ways, and this way points as much to the potential as the reality.
I think we should read it as a reminder that the potential is there to make
Australia one of the truly prosperous and fair societies of the 21st century.
It reminds us that reaching our potential depends on us on the Australian
people. On what we do with this continent and its wealth, its environment, its
culture and heritage, its place in what has become the most dynamic region
on earth.
And tonight is also a reminder of that.
No policy adopted by Australian government since Federation has done more
to fulfil our potential than the post-war migration programs.
We very often talk about our cultural diversity as if it were purely cultural as
if it were primarily a matter of food and festivals.
Yet, whether they were British and Irish migrants in the 19th century, or
central and southern European migrants in the last half of the 20th, the real
measure of their contribution is in their energy and vision in their industry
and entrepreneurship. 
And in the affection and loyalty they developed for this country.
Australia's cultural diversity is indeed one of the great advantages of being a
contemporary Australian. Our social cohesion is one of our great assets.
And no less are we served by the ambition, dedication and skills of migrant
businessmen and women. Think of some of the great businesses of post-war
Australia and a lot of non-Anglo Saxon names come to mind people who
came here from their devastated homelands, who cut the painter with their
past, and made this the home of their hopes and ambitions.
And we have all profited from their efforts.
Tonight we pay tribute to the people who are continuing this tradition. People
who are making their lives here, investing their energy in Australia.
These awards recognise the role that our cultural diversity can play in our
economic future.
We have with us tonight people from all over the world who live and run
businesses in Australia.
Who all pursue their personal ambitions and serve the Australian national
enterprise. That's the key the key to multiculturalism, and the key to Australia's future.
Individual enterprise, collective spirit. Different cultures, one nation.
Let me thank all those responsible for organising this evening especially the
National Australia Bank.
Let me congratulate the business people who are receiving tonight's awards
and those countless others who every day pursue their hopes and ambitions
in Australia and serve their country well. 



\ I
I TA] l
INEI KING POINTS THE HON P J KEATING MP AUSTRALIANRMAN
ASSOCIATION, ' PARTNERSHIP 2000' TRADE AND
rESTMENT CONFERENCE, THURSDAY 5 OCTOBER 1995
It is a great pleasure to join you for this conference and to welcome this
senior German business group to Australia and particularly. to welcome the
German Posts and Telecommunications Minister Dr Boetsch as its leader.
S I promised'Chancellor Kohl when we met in March that I would come
personally to this conference as a means of underlining the importance I
attach to building stronger tics between Germany and Australia business
and investment ties, of course, but not only those. Earlier this week I was in
Sbuth Australia, which has a long historical link with Germany and German
culture. I was there in part for the re-opening of the magnificent Palm
House at the Botanic Garden, designed by Gustav Runge and manufactured
S in Bremen listening to the Stuttgart Chamber Philharmonic and reflecting
on all the things Australia has drawn from Germany. I am glad the cultural
flow is not all one way. The Sydney Symphony Orchestra has just completed
a very successful tour of Germany. My wife Annita had the opportunity to
be with them, including at a concert given to a very large and enthusiastic
audience at Christian Georgi's Bremer WoUlkammerei.
1 I 1
i
i~ In Germany earlier this year I hadtwo particular messages I wanted to get
across and I want to repeat them today,
S First, is my conviction that Australian business people need to do more in
Europe, and that if we are to. maximise the opportunities available to us there,
we have to look beyond the English Channel this is not to downplay our
economic links with Britain, but to recognise that there is much more to
Europe than is covered by the route map of the London Underground: and,
above all, that means Germany, which accounts for almost one quarter of
European GDP, is the world's third largest economy and its second largest
xporter and importer.
, There is no doubt that our trade and investment relationship with Germany
falls short of its potential. Germany is our seventh largest trading partner,
with two-way trade around $ 6 billion, but only our 15th largest export
madka. andoor exports have been falling so there is clearly much more for
Aintahin innss to do on that front and I hope thi conlr e helps
PRIME MINISTER 
2
The investment relationship is in better shape. Germany is our 9th larpst
source of foreign investment, and more than 200 subsidiaries of German
companies operate in Australia. They represent some of our most respected
companies. In the other direction, Australian companies like Boral, Pioneer,
Brambles, TNT, ANIand AMCOR are active in Germany but here again
you can't help feeling that there is more of mutual benefit to squeeze from the
relationship than we have yet managed.
I hope our German visitors will have the opportunity to see some of the gicat
economic, and social strengths of this country a highly skilled Workforce,
with a strong emphasis on training, lessons we have drawn directly from
Germany's experience a deep pure research base an economy which puts
a. premium on growth, and which has now delivered growth for 16
consecutive quarters, and which is becoming more international ( exports
havec nearly doubled as a share of GDP since the early 1980s) and more
competitive ( international competitiveness increased by 36 between 1983
4nd 1995)
9. 9 The other major point I want to get'across is that there is no contradiction or
tension between the Australian Government's determination to integrate
Australia more deeply into the Asia Pacific and our desire to strengthen our
tics with countries like Germany -: in fact, the reverse is true: Australia's
engagement with Asia makes us much-more, not less, relevant to Europe a
prosperous Australian economy which is integrated into the region around us,
using all the resources of our multicultural society, has much more to offer to
Germany and other European countries, as a direct trade and investment
partner, as an investment base into Asia, and in cooperative activities in third
markets we have already seen successful German Australian investment
" partnershipsi n Asia like the Leighton-AEG venture to construct the Hong
on~ n~~ ai.-
" t is very good, to have Dr Boetsc, hleading this mission because
telecommunications and information technology offer huge potential for this
sort of co-operation telecommunications equipment is already one of the
fastest growing components of our bilateral trade and in the wider Asia
. Ptcific region, expenditure on-telecommunications services and equipment is
expected to reach nearly $ 300 billion by' 2010.
. m The reason for the timing of my visit to Germany earlier this year was to
attend CeBIT, in which Australia had been invited to participate as a partner
country. This. was an honour for us, but it was a reflection of what has been
happening in Australia in this area our long history of technological
S. excellence in telecommunications broad band networks expanding across
the country world's heaviest per capita users of the Internet and second
highest per capita users of personal computers.
K
I. I a S'S 
3
So this area, again, offers great opportunities for both Of us hope Australian
if and telecommunications companies will -use the success of CeBIT this
year as a base to build on at, next year% exhibition.
Congratulations to the Australian-Germani Association especially -Mr
Tretbowan and Dr Rohkamm, President of the German counterpart
organisation, on their work to set up this conferece I wish you every
success with it. 


PRIME MINISTER1ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER," THE HON P J KEATING MPAUSTRALIANSKILL OLYMPICS TEAM FAREWELLSYDNEY, 6 OCTOBER 1995
I'm very happy to be in Sydney today to farewell the Australian team for the&nbsp;33rd International Skill Olympics. More than 6000 young people from across the&nbsp;continent competed for positions on the team, so you should feel extremely proud of&nbsp;your selection.
Of course, you won't get as much media coverage as those more glamorous&nbsp;Olympians who are going to Atlanta next year. But your efforts in Lyon will be no&nbsp;less significant, the message you bear at least as profound.In fact, from a national perspective, Lyon is the main game. In Lyon the mettle ofAustralian industry will in no small way be tested.Lyon is the main game because, increasingly, education and training matters likenothing else.The world is changing visibly, quickly, inexorably.Trade walls are falling over, capital markets arc shaking themselves free ofregulation, transport and telecommunications developments are outstripping eachother, countries are at once more interlinked and interdependent and morecompetitive. And the story of work is being rewritten.The US commentator, Peter Drucker, has written that at the end of the twentiethcentury, a new society is emerig the knowledge society. It is a society where thekey resource is not capital or labour, but knowledge.The forces driving this transformation are bigger than all of us. If we adapt to thechanges we will prosper if we don't, we'll founder.We can catch the wave in to the shore, or we can let it wash over us and leave usbehind.
In a knowledge society, Australia has to own the knowledge Australians have toearn it. And to do that, we have to invest in education and training.We have to invest in formal education, and not just because formal educationdelivers formal knowledge. Formal education teaches people how to learn. It begetsthe capacity to acquire skills on the job.And having formal education and informal skills demonstrably helps individuals and,in turn, companies and countries, to adopt and adapt to new technologies. Which isthe essential prerequisite, of economic growth and wealth acquisition in the modernworld. Education and skills are essential in the challenge of the new technologies and newinformation. They are the essential means of coping with the uncertainty of changcand turning it to our advantage.We shouldnt forget that education is not just about economic efficiency: educationlinked to informal on the job training is the kcy to individual prosperity and wellbeing. Government involvement in education is like it always has been the best kind ofintervention to create individual opportunity where inherited economiccircumstances would otherwise deny it.iEducation and skills development have a profound social dimension as well as aneconomic one they are essential to our success in the world economy and essentialto our becoming a fairer and genuinely more democratic society.Pursuing an education is the most important thing a young person can do. A goodeducation is the best guarantee of an interesting job. It holds the most promise for aprosperous life.Nothing is more important to Australia and Australians than education, and cansafely say that nothing is more important to the Australian Government. We have niogreater responsibility.Over the last decade we have done a lot towards renovating Australia's educationand tmining sectors.Since 1990, we have doubled spending on vocational education: from $ 344 millionin 1990 to S779 million in 1995.We have established the National Employment and Training Taskforce( NETTFORCE) to increase industry's commitment to traineeships and last year,apprentice and traineeship commencements as a proportion of the 15-19 year oldpopulation were higher than that achieved in any of the previous three decades.
We have increased participation in universities from 340,000 students in 1982 to600,000 today and greatly improved school retention rates from 36% in 1982 toin 1994.We are on our way to ensuring that by the year 2001, 95% of 19 year olds will havecompleted Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification or are participating informal education and training.The last decade has witnessed a sea change in the Australian education and trainingsector. You can sense the change when you talk to people, when you visit theirworkplaces, when you see the things they make and the services they provide.Australia is a livelier place now, more alert and energetic with a much largerfuture. So we have come a long way.
But we have not come far enough.
We must provide better education to more Australians. And we must provide&nbsp;them with coninusous education because the knowledge they will need to survive&nbsp;is always changing.
The sector which has seen the greatest amount of change and the greatest rate of&nbsp;change is the communications sector.The development of the new information technologies offers new opportunities forAustralians but only for Australians with the right training.There will be new industries to develop, and new economies in which to work. Butif we are to maximise the benefits we derive from the new information age if weare to suck out all the value and all the jobs then we have to ensure that our youngpeople understand the new technologies.
That's why the Government is investing in a comprehensive education network&nbsp;service, called EdNA, to ensure all students and teachers arc equipped for the&nbsp;information society.
That's also why I'm glad to see that WorkSkill Australia has played an important role&nbsp;in the inclusion of a Global Multimedia Challenge as part of this years Skill&nbsp;Olympics. In this and other ways, WorkSkill Australia has done a superb job in co-ordinating&nbsp;Australia's effort for the Skill Olympics. Over the years, the organisation, led so&nbsp;energetically by lack Dusseldorp, has enabled nearly 30,000 young Australians to&nbsp;test their skills in qualifying events for the Olympic team.
Last year's inaugural Australian Training Awards recognised the great contribution&nbsp;made by WorkSkill Australia to vocational education and training.
Congratulations to the people at WorkSkill Australia. And I must not let pass the&nbsp;opportunity to congratulate Jack Dusscldorp on his nomination for the Presidency of&nbsp;the International Organisation for the Promotion of Vocational Training and&nbsp;International Youth Skill Olympics.
Most importantly, I want to congratulate the competitors we are farcwelling today.&nbsp;
Good luck to you all. We will be watching your progress keenly, and willing you on&nbsp;to victory for yourselves and your families, but also for Australia.


"* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*
9 OCTOBER 1995
Thank you for the invitation. It's a great pleasure to be with the CFMEU for its&nbsp;Biennial National Conference. As Prime Minister I trust you'll ask me to the next.&nbsp;
I am keenly aware of the importance of the CFMEU's political support for the&nbsp;Government in the past, as you should be aware of the many values and&nbsp;perspectives that we share.
Not least, we abhor the implications for Australian workers of the Coalition's&nbsp;industrial relations policy.
We also share an understanding of the importance of the Accord for the wider&nbsp;economic and social good of Australia.
The Accord has meant that we have achieved great reforms without industrial&nbsp;mayhem.
And these goals have all been reached with continued protection of both the jobs&nbsp;and social well-being of the least advantaged.
If the Government could ask one thing only from the CFMEU it would be this:that the union and its members re-affirm their support for the Accord processes.We all know that at various times over the period of the Accord that some of themore powerful in the union movement could have got more for themselves if theychose. It is a testimony to the maturity of strong unions that they recognised theinterest of the broader community and chose not to exploit their strength.
The social benefits have included considerable real expansions to socialsecurity and the social wage, and to the development of a comprehensivesuperannuation scheme that our opponents would never have had theimagination or capacity to implement.
The benefits also have included industrial peace, which has seen strike activityfall to well under half the average of the Howard/ Fraser years. Last yearAustralia had the lowest number of disputes since 1940, and the number ofworking days lost was around 70 per 1000 workers, compared to 590 per yearunder Howard.
The figure is worth repeating. 70 compared to 590. One eighth of what it was.And we are living through not five minutes of economic sunshine but a recordperiod of economic growth, the longest sustained period since records werekept. Some people may have forgotten, but economic growth once used to gohand in hand with strikes.
Could we just pause and reflect on what Australia might look like with theCoalition's anti-worker industrial relations policy, without an Accord?Imagine the types of consensual policies that would be delivered by PeterCostello as Treasurer.
Imagine the sort of intelligent industrial relations solutions that would emergewith Peter Reith as Minister.
Imagine John Howard leading workers and firms through some of theinnovations of the past 12 years, such as BHP's Steel Plan, or the Toyota Plantdevelopments indeed, imagine John Howard simply understanding why theAccord has been so important.
Few things are certain in political life but these things are:There would be no consensus under a Coalition government.Co-operation and understanding would be diminishing commodities.Conflict would increase.
Perhaps the most important benefit from the Accord is that there has been aneffective extra mechanism to control inflation: having wage outcomes consistentwith low increases in unit labour costs.
Increasingly these have taken the form of bargains showing sensitivity to thecircumstances of particular enterprises, and increasingly there has been anappreciation of the need for trade-offs and productivity offsets.We hope and trust that the maturity in pay arrangements that has been such akey characteristic of the Accord will be with us for a long time to come.In all good partnerships reaffirmation of the essentials matters.
Without our joint understanding of the links between costs and employment, andwhat this has meant for social justice and progress towards economic efficiency,we would only have interest rates to control inflation and manage the economy.We would have Peter Costello using the threat and the actuality of higherinterest rates to keep price pressures down. And even he knows that this worksonly through the creation of higher unemployment.
This is the Coalition's recipe for economic management Peter Costello, PeterReith, John Howard and no Accord.On the topic of economic management it is opportune to put to rest a large fibthat Honest John has been putting about.The oft-repeated fib indeed, Andrew Robb used it on the Sunday program threetimes last week is that real wages have declined under the Accord. As if theAccord has been bad for workers.It is demonstrably false.It is true that real wages fell slightly in the 1980s when the Government and theunion movement together had to address-the appalling mess left to us in 1983 ofdouble-digit inflation and unemployment. It wasn't an accident that there waswage restraint over the 1980s. This was a necessity.It was through this wage restraint that employment grew so quickly and inflationfell. And this meant a 20 per cent increase in real household disposableincomes per head by June 1995.But since the beginning of the 1990s there has also been an important increasein real wages, as measured by the best indicator, real full-time total earnings.The recovery has meant that in the whole period since 1983 the increase in realwages has been 7.2 per cent.
7.2 per cent. Real. Not a fall. The Liberals say there has been a fall. It is a lie.And that's not to mention the myriad of tax cuts under the Accord or the likes ofsupplementary payments or FAS.But I'll get back to the Coalition in a few minutes.Before doing so I want to raise a few issues of particular concern to the CFMEU.We will all recall that after the Builder's Labourers' Federation was deregistered,its assets and property were placed in the hands of a custodian.But after the amalgamations that resulted in the formation of the CFMIEU it wasappropriate that this control be transferred to the CFMIEU, and indeed, this was ajudgement made by the Industrial Relations court in August. It is a decision thatthe Government supports.Well, Jeff Kennett has appealed against this finding.The Federal Government finds it unacceptable that the CFMEU does not havecontrol over these assets, and today I can tell you that we will intervene in theappeal and offer you support.We are on your side here. Kennett never knows when not to push his luck. He'smanic about belting unions.irAnd I cannot let the opportunity pass without acknowledging the untiring effortsof Stan Sharkey.The CFMEU has also been encouraging the Government to support the&nbsp;ratification of the new ILO Convention concerning Occupational Health and&nbsp;Safety. Australia takes its ILO obligations and the ILO standards very seriously,&nbsp;and has now ratified 57 ILO conventions.
As a major mining country, Australia made a strong commitment to the&nbsp;development of the new ILO standards on safety and health in mines which were&nbsp;adopted at the 1995 international labour conference.
Mining is obviously an area where these matters are of particular significance.We do not want a repeat of last years Moura Mines Disaster in Queensland.I should mention here the very important international role played by the JointNational President of the CFMEU, Mr John Maitland, who was the Chairman ofthe workers' group in the committee which developed these important standards.
Australia will be considering the new convention as a priority with a view to itsearly ratification. Again, we won't be letting the CFMEU down.Australia also actively supports the current efforts of the ILO to improve itseffectiveness and promote observance of its standards, especially the humanrights labour standards. As part of its current activities the ILO is identifyingobstacles to ratification in countries which have not endorsed core human rightslabour standards.We will be examining ways in which the promotion and observance of ILOstandards can be encouraged in the Asia-Pacific region. This will be the subjectof recommendations by a tripartite working party which, under the Chairmanshipof Michael Duffy is considering the matter and will report to the Government laterthis year.The CFMIEU has expressed a concern which has been shared by theGovernment for some time. It relates to the contracting-out arrangements thatplace people outside of the PAYE system.It was perhaps a mild curiosity in the past, but it is now clear that it has becomeendemic in the building trades.It is an activity that robs the Government of tax revenue.It is an activity that undermines the award system.Tr~ It is an activity that puts in jeopardy the rights of those who were previouslyprotected as employees.It is also an unethical activity. The two words that come to mind are rorts andscams. The CFMEU understands this well..In saying that we need also to acknowledge that this is a difficult area. But it isan area in which reform has to take place.In the Budget the Government announced that it would be amending the PAYEprovisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act to ensure that they coverpayments for labour which were always intended to be covered. In the past ourattempts to fix this problem have not been sufficient.We know it is hard, but I want to reaffirm today that the Government has madeprogress and legislative change will be announced shortly.
It is also relevant for me to acknowledge to this group that we are currently goingthrough a necessary but possibly apprehensive period for workers involved inthe forestry industry. Obviously we all need to wait to see how the currentconsultations develop, but several things can be said with some confidence.They are that the government does not resile from wanting to have a world classforest reserve system in place for the longer term. But we similarly recognise theimportance of having a wood products industry with sustained and significantemployment, and with an increasing emphasis on domestic value adding.We must make sure that in this industry, as in others, we use the rich resourcebase that we have to create jobs for Australian workers, in a way that alsoprovides for the highest standards of environmental protection.Over the ensuing weeks these issues will be vigorously debated and I lookforward to a full contribution from those of you with a direct stake in the issue offorest policy.I want to spend what time remains to answering a few broader questions ofinterest for the CFMIEU. Naturally this must bring me back to the Coalition,because the industrial relations debate is the real policy question for Australianworkers. It is here that the essential issue of take-home pay will be decided.Its already clear that the Coalition does not understand the value of the Accord.And given the clear benefits of the Accord, this says something about theCoalition's capacity to understand and judge policy.Oh, they say, so the Accord reduced strikes and conflict, helped expand socialprotection for the disadvantaged, allowed a threshold cut in inflation, facilitatedthe introduction of a comprehensive superannuation scheme, and allowed us tomake the significant industrial reforms essential to our internationalcompetitiveness? " Is that all?", they say. Well, we better throw the Accord out.Somehow it says it all about them: ditch the Accord and keep the Britishmonarchy.You have to ask, why?They say that the most important possible reform to Australia will be in the areaof industrial relations.
John Howard said last Friday that: essential elements of our industrialrelations policy will remain".He has many times recently said that Jobsback! in which there were only fourminimum conditions for workers is the correct approach.He has consistently supported the Western Australian state legislation in whichthere are also four minimum conditions only.He looks enviously at New Zealand which abolished awards in 1991. He wantsus to be like them.And we should never forget what goes on in the minds of that Shadow Cabinet oftheirs. It is the same Shadow Cabinet that wanted to scarify workers at the lastelection. And they have not changed.The big issue which will come back to haunt John Howard, Peter Reith and PeterCostello and the rest is very simple: they don't guarantee workers' pay.It's as simple as that. If workers sign workplace agreements that remove someof their award conditions there will be no compensation to ensure that the valueof the package is maintained.The Government guarantees that pay can't be cut. If workers trade-in someaward conditions, they will see increases in pay to cover it.In other words, we have a true no disadvantage test. The Coalition does not.Workers will lose under the Coalition.And workers will lose big under the Coalition.And when workers lose, families lose the families of so-called battlers withwhom our opponents claim to have so much in common.And when the low paid become lower paid, and less secure, the fabric of societybegins to change. You can't knock the low paid about without knocking Australiaabout you can't do it.Remember that Peter Reith's July speech set out the minimum conditions thatwould provide the basis for the Coalition's approach. It did not include penaltyrates, overtime wage rates, or holiday leave loadings, to name a few.And don't hold your breath for travel allowances or tool allowances they justwon't be on if the big goal is " flexibility".
Watch this word " flexibility" from the Coalition.It means pay cuts. For " flexibility" read " pay cut".It's not as long as " incentivation", but it is much more pernicious.Flexibility. Whenever Howard or Reith say this, ask: why doesn't he admit hewants the pay of the least powerful to fall?Well, what will the Coalition's policy of flexibility mean for some typical CFMEUworkers? Let me show you.Take an ' Operator Level 3' miner, who receives an area allowance of $ 8.11 perday, a service increment of $ 1.77 per day, and who works a fairly typical 6 hoursof overtime a week.If the overtime is paid at the base rate instead of at time-and-a-half for the firsttwo hours and double-time after that, the loss will be $ 69.30 a week.Assuming the holiday leave loading of 17 per cent goes too, this worker will losea total annual amount of $ 7,100.60. This is a cut of 18.8 per cent for one of theCoalition's " battlers".What about a " Log Band Sawyer'? A typical person in this job might work 8Shours a week overtime, and at the moment they receive the annual leave loadingof 17.5 per cent. Working the same number of hours under the Coalition policy,the log band sawyer stands to lose at least $ 2684.85 a year, or a real cut ofabout 10 per cent.How about a typical ' Leading Hand Linesman'?Today they receive industry, tool, leading hand and special allowances worth$ 55.60 per week. If they work 8 hours of overtime a week which is fairly typicalthey stand to lose just from this being paid at the normal rate a total of $ 65.70 aweek. Taking away the holiday leave loading which is worth $ 317.50, the total loss forthe year for the linesman would be $ 6139.90, a 20 per cent cut.This is flexibility, Howard-style. Flexibility downwards.And somehow we don't think that Mr Costello will find it in his heart tocompensate these CFMEU workers through the social security system.
He and Mr Howard say they are pro family, but they're anti family incomesupport. Pro family and anti overtime rates. Pro family and anti penalty rates.Pro family and pro " take the contract or take the sack".But, what does the Coalition say about the examples I have given?It can't happen, they say, because no one will be forced off an award if they don'twant to be. That is, if you like your current arrangements that's fine, you canhave them. There will just be a lot more choice. What a great system no-onecan lose!Now I can only say to this one simple thing: Mr Howard and Mr Reith are eithervery ignorant about how labour markets work, or they are trying to fool everyone.What sort of choice is there for workers asked to sign an agreement or risklosing their jobs?And we know that this is already happening under the Western Australianlegislation. Ask Jeff Allen who was sacked in WA for refusing to sign a " flexible"workplace agreement.It should be no surprise that the Coalition seems to have the lowest support inVictoria and Western Australia where workers are having first hand experienceswith these realities.We also don't know what will happen to workers on workplace agreements thatbecome whittled away from inflation. Why won't the Coalition explain more tovoters about how they can expect to maintain their conditions? They are thesame voters they are crying crocodile tears over.The other large bit of ignorance or dishonesty on the part of the Coalition hereconcerns job mobility.How can those applying for a job hope to get the award conditions if they wantthe position? How does " choice" work here?John Howard should take a long hard look at the data. In 1994, for example,1,731,500 people took a new wage and salary position. That's about 20 per centof the paid workforce.Over 1.1 million of these came from outside the paid labour force from school,from tertiary education, from being at home looking after children, as newimmigrants.
Let's put it differently: 42 per cent of workers have been in their jobs for lessthan three years. Thus under a Coalition's first term, at least 3.6 million workerswill be facing a new employer and thus will not have the effective choice ofstaying on the award.This is a key point for the debate.It's a key point for Australian workers.And it's a big point for the CFMEU.A very large proportion of CFMEU workers are quite mobile, and thus withouteffective choice about keeping the award.For example, in 1994, 43,733 building tradespersons, including 18,492carpenters and 7,445 plumbers, took a new job. That is, over 30 per cent of thetotal in those occupations in just one year.And so did 36,603 construction and mining labourers over 40 per cent of thetotal. This a lot of people to be given " flexibility".Forty per cent cut off awards and made to " fend for yourself'. Let me get it right:" choice" to fend for yourself.When Mr Howard and Mr Reith say that anyone who wants to stay on the awardcan do so, we hope they will be explaining to the 1.73 million taking new jobshow they will do this.We hope they will be writing to the 120,000 CFMEU members and describinghow the awards will be protected for the quarter or so of those who will face anew employer in the next year.And we hope they will be explaining to all those people who are currentlythinking of leaving their current jobs how to make sure that they keep the level ofpay. As we all know, there can be any number of reasons for leaving a job it is oneof our most basic freedoms. But if leaving the job means losing the Award, thatfreedom will be seriously eroded.And the labour market will start to lose mobility. It will become more rigid.
This point came up with a friend of one of my office staff just the other day. Sheis currently on a reasonable wage working as a librarian, but wanted to transferto essentially the same job under the Victorian Award. She was told that the paywould be about 30 per cent lower, and is now not going to move.There are a great many possible losers from this approach, and it's hard to seethe overall benefits.It is possible that I'm being a bit hard on the Coalition, and that there might be agood reason for undermining workers' pay and conditions. There might be someterrific purpose to all this.So I thought I'd end by going through every possible reason for the Coalitionwanting to do this to see if it's good policy.Perhaps they want to put the system at risk because profits are too low. Havethey checked the profit figures lately?. They are very healthy, so that can't be it.It's not about profits.Could it be because employment growth is too weak! But in the last two and ahalf years we've created 680,000 jobs, and we have seen record falls in theunemployment rate, so that can't be it.It's not about jobs.It must be to influence industrial disputes, you might say. But remember, wehave the lowest level of strikes since the figures were first collected, so unlessthey want to increase strikes, why would this be the reason?It's not about industrial action.Maybe it's about labour costs. But they have fallen by 10 per cent over the life ofthe Government, at the same time that real wages have risen. And theextraordinary increase in real household disposable incomes of 20 per cent can'tbe it either.It's not about costs.There is only one thing left: it's to increase the growth in labour productivity wewant to be like New Zealand, don't we?
But this doesn't work either because since the Employment Contracts Act MrHoward's preferred model was introduced in New Zealand the rate of growth oflabour productivity has been only 1 per cent per year, while ours has beenaccording to the OECD.So it's not about productivity.In short, it's not about policy.I'll tell you what it is.It's ideology and spite.Ideology and a complete lack of understanding of the needs and concerns ofAustralian working people.Ideology and an appalling lack of sympathy for those with weak bargainingpositions. Ideology and disregard for the living standards of the great many who needcurrent award protections to survive the people they have the gall tocondescend to and pretend to understand and care for. The people they callbatters. The only possible reason for jeopardising the current arrangements, for doingaway with the real no disadvantage test, for undermining a fair system isideological a mind-set against awards, against the safety net and against tradeunions. They don't like working people and they never have.The Coalition's approach must damage the social fabric and inevitably broadensignificantly the divide between the advantaged and the disadvantaged.It must take us towards the kinds of labour markets they have always admiredthe dog eat dog labour markets and the lands of the working poor.If the election is going to be fought on policy, if it is to be a referendum on ideas,if it is to be a test of imagination and understanding of what this country needsand wants, stay well clear of the Coalition.John Howard will not rip away at working people without a fight. I'm going togive him the fight of his yet undistinguished life. And I know the CFMVEU willenjoy every minute of it.



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN NURSES FEDERATION
PERTH, 10 OCTOBER 1995
** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
It is a great pleasure to be here today: it is one of the privileges of this job of
mine to meet people who do the essential things in our society. In your case,
people who help to make this a compassionate society, and therefore a good
society. If societies are truly compassionate they are also more efficient the goals are
not opposed.
0
It is important to make care more efficient it is a poor kind of care which is not
efficient. But the fundamentals of care are not negotiable in the market place the core of
education and health and human services resides in the public sphere. They
are the responsibility of communities and governments.
And it follows that governments have a responsibility to look after those who
provide the care.
I said it is a privilege to speak to people like yourselves on whom we all depend.
It is also one of my privileges as the leader of a Labor government to be in a
position to support you.
That is what I want to assure you of today. I want to assure you that the Federal
Government supports your claims for wage justice and will provide you with
whatever protection we can. 
Some people are saying that we are engaged in a scare campaign about what
Federal Coalition government would do with Australians' wages and conditions
of employment.
But we are not talking about phantoms. We are not talking about maybes. We
are talking about an approach to industrial relations, an approach to lower paid
workers, which you are actually experiencing.
In fact, in Western Australia we are seeing the prototype of what would be a
national regime if the Coalition were elected. You don't have to take my word for
it read the transcript of Mr Howard's remarks last night. No one could mistake
the meaning of them he cannot conceive of capitalism without low wages and
less security at the bottom end.
He remains what he has always been a believer in primitive capitalism,
capitalism moderated not by consensus about common social goals, not by an
Accord between workers and governments, not by a social safety net to protect
the weak and a social wage to support the families of the lower paid, but by what
he calls an " ethic", by a sense of responsibility to the business community.
Well I'm all in favour of a sense of responsibility: but I do not believe the welfare
of Australian wage earners should depend on it. I think we are a bit more
sophisticated than that.
Now, the nurses and teachers of Western Australia are in centre of this d
debate. What has happened to you, under the direction of Mr Keirath, is being
watched by Australian workers and their families everywhere:
I can tell you today that what they will see is Federal government support for
you. While WA nurses are on a Federal award their access to the safety net is
at the discretion of the WA government.
But the WA government has resisted the two $ 8 a week safety net
adjustments This has meant that the real purchasing power of the wages of WA nurses
is falling.
The case is now going to the Industrial Relations Commission. We have
supported it going to the Commission and we will support you in the
Commission. We supported it going there through the Accord. 
I might say this about the Accord.
The Accord has delivered to Australia low inflation, high economic growth, high
employment growth, a record low in industrial disputes, an industrial
environment of consensus and cooperation, vastly increased flexibility in
workplace arrangements and a broad sophisticated social safety net for the low
paid and disadvantaged
There is a lie being put around about the Accord just now.
The lie is that the Accord has not helped Australian workers and Australian
families, Part of the lie is the claim that Australian workers have suffered real wage cuts in
the past decade. This is an attempt to give birth to a myth.
The fact as opposed to the lie is that wages have increased, not fallen: over
the twelve years since 1983 there has been a 7.2% increase in real wages.
And a twenty per cent increase in per capita incomes after the tax and social
security changes.
The lie about wages and incomes is compounded by hypocrisy not just by the
curious fact that John Howard has opposed every wage increase bar one since
1978. Its compounded by what has been done in Western Australia by a Liberal
Government particularly by what has been done to the nurses of WA and
what will be done nationally by a Federal Liberal government.
When we talk about nurses, of course we talk about more than nurses.
We talk about parents. We talk about the children they have to support. We
talk about families.
The same can be said about teachers teachers who in this state have been
similarly abused.
The fact is that every time we talk about workers blue collar or white we talk
about Australians who fulfil a range of essential roles and responsibilities.
The next time the Coalition talks about families ask them about wages
including youth wages. In WA they are offering $ 4.00 per hour for youth wages. 
Nothing supports a family more effectively than a decent wage.
And after the decent wage comes employment security.
Under the current arrangements nurses are all covered by the Federal Awards.
This protects some of the basic conditions of nurses' pay penalty rates,
overtime pay, holiday leave.
You know what penalty rates and overtime are worth to you. You know the effect
if you lose them.
During a normal year, most nurses work on weekends. Most work night shift.
You all get holiday leave loadings. And out of this work you support yourselves
and very often your families.
Under a Coalition government, as we have seen under Mr Keirath, these
protections and supplements are not guaranteed even though they may
account for more than 25 per cent of an individual's income.
Let me give you an example:
Take away the penalty rates, and nurses who work just weekends lose 38% of
their annual pay.
Or take the example of full time registered nurses who work some weekends and
some nightshifts throughout the year if they work the same hours without the
penalty and overtime rates they will lose 22% of their income.
About $ 100 a week.
Now the Opposition says that this won't happen because only those who want to
go off the Award system will go off.
But this is not how labour market operates!
In 1994 1.73 million Australians faced a new employer.
39,400 nurses were among them.
Many have just graduated. A large proportion are returning to work after having
children. Some are people who have recently moved from the country to the
city, from one state another.
The Opposition says they will have a choice. But they won't. 
What choice will these people have if the employer says the job doesn't come
with penalties and overtime?
Say a nurse's husband's job obliges him to move to Albany, or your wife wants to
move east to be with her parents, say you want a change of climate, or you want
to have a child you need to leave, and in leaving you leave the present Award.
Under a Federal Coalition government thousands of nurses will not be able to
change jobs without losing pay a lot of pay.
Someone told me the other day of a friend of theirs a librarian in Victoria who is
earning $ 35,000 a year. She wanted to work closer to home and she saw an
advertisement for a position which was identical to the one she presently holds
identical in all respects bar one, the salary. Leaving the job meant leaving the
benefits she had inherited from the award, and negotiating a whole new deal.
The whole new deal in her case meant a salary of $ 19,000 a little more than
half of what she was earning.
So she had to stay where she was.
The Coalition calls this choice.
But she had no choice no choice, but to stay.
You can think of this as a scare campaign if you like, but what I am really about
is warning Australians that the Opposition's attitude to the labour market is one
of the big differences between us.
The Coalition's position on industrial relations reflects a view of the world in
which employers have a pool of working poor to call on in an ultra competitive
market place.
It reflects deep seated beliefs and prejudices prejudices against trade unions,
prejudices in favour of that 19th century philosophy which boils down to every
man for himself and every woman for herself prejudice against the idea of an
egalitarian and inclusive Australian ethic and ideal.
The next time you hear the Coalition talking about " battlers" I think you should
recognise it for the rampant hypocrisy it is these are the battlers whose wages
will be cut and whose security will be undermined in the interests of cutting costs
for business.
The media are saying that industrial relations will be a major election issue. In
this case, the media are right. 
But I suspect what is generally understood by industrial relations is too narrow.
Industrial relations go to the heart of the basic social relationship the
relationship between workers and their employers.
It goes to the heart of economic competitiveness and efficiency objectives, I
might say, Labor has pursued like no other government.
But what goes under the name " industrial relations", goes much further than this.
It goes to the fundamental tenets of what Australians have always meant by a
good society that is a fair society, a society in which the effort is always made
to extend the realm of opportunity and bring into it those who have drifted onto
the margins.
Our industrial relations, determined not just our efficiency but our ability to meet
these traditional social goals. They determine our whole social fabric including
the strength of our families and the opportunities we can extend to our children.
Our industrial relations are a measure of how much we actually believe in the
ties that bind us all as Australians, or how much we merely pay lip service to
them. So when people say that industrial relations will be a major issue in the next
election campaign, in fact they understate the case because what we think
about industrial relations defines our ideas about Australia, about what sort of
people we are, what sort of society we should become.
The way you are treated here in Western Australia impinges directly on these
questions. The Commonwealth Government will support you because you
deserve support, and because it is in the interests of Australia that you receive
justice. ends. 



7
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE EAST PERTH REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT
CLAISEBROOK COVE, PERTH 10 OCTOBER 1995
( CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY)
We all tend to take our urban environments for granted, and as they change,
we bend our minds to accommodate them.
It is not usual for Governments to encourage protest and opposition to the
status quo.
But when it comes to the environments in which we live, we have a duty to
stand up and be counted a duty and a perfect right.
Just as Australians have grown fiercely protective of the natural environment,
they must protect the best of the urban environment and insist on having a
say in the direction of development.
" Protect and direct" might not be a bad slogan. We have done some awful
things to our cities and we are still doing them. We are doing them to our
suburbs and to country towns.
We live in an era in which protection of the natural environment is paramount
in almost every Australian mind. I think we need to marry that with a concern
for what we build on it, for what will reflect the sense of place which by now
we have developed.
I think the time has come to recognise that what we build on this landscape,
what we build-forother-Australians-to live in and look upon is an essential
measure of our care and responsibility, a measure of how we feel about
Australia and the sort of country we want it to be.
I think it is vital that we preserve our built heritage. Vital that we build living
and working environments which are functional, aesthetically pleasing and
compatible with the Australian natural habitat. 
Environments which will last and age gracefully. Environments not only for
now, but for future generations of Australians.
And I think this is the responsibility of every government, every city and
municipal council, every authority with a say in urban development and town
planning, and of course every developer and every architect.
And as I said, it is up to every one of us to demand it.
That is why we began the Better Cities program and why I am so happy to be
here today and to open the Claisebrook Cove Development.
It's a pleasure to be here today to open the Claisebrook Cove development
perhaps the most scenic element of the East Perth Better Cities Area
Strategy. Not so long ago, the Claisebrook inlet was unsightly, unused and unloved.
I'm told this was pretty much Perth's main drain contaminated and fairly
unpleasant.
Today, of course, it's an urban waterway on a Venetian scale one of Perth's
most important public spaces. The inlet and cove has been reconstructed,
power lines and fibre optic cables placed underground, a new pedestrian and
cycle bridge built and the whole area landscaped.
It hasn't looked this nice for a century or more. Some very attractive housing
has already begun on Constitution Hill which will eventually flow down to the
rim of the Cove. This is now an area of Perth crying out to be displayed
rather than one demanding to be hidden.
Through the East Perth Better Cities Area Strategy, this part of inner Perth
next to the Swan is being rejuvenated. The Federal Government has
invested $ 32 million of Better Cities funds to transform East Perth from
disused industrial land into a lively urban village.
The Strategy includes the rehabilitation of the old gas works, the
establishment of several parks and the Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Centre, the building of a new railway station and river jetties, and the
construction of medium density housing and a commercial district.
.1 am. especial ly-plIeased . to . confirm. that-this. redevelopment project will be
accessible to Australians of varying incomes. The Commonwealth Minister
for Housing and Urban Development Brian Howe, and the State Minister for
Planning Richard Lewis, are finalising the Heads of Agreement on ' Affordable
Housing'. Significant public funds have gone into East Perth and it would be
unfair if lower income Australians were excluded from living here.
Claisebrook Cove and East Perth are good examples of what is being
achieved around Australia under the rubric of the Better Cities program. 
Better Cities was initially an $ 816 million scheme and with the extra funds
from the last Budget, the Federal Government investment is more than $ 1
billion. The Government has allocated $ 78 million for Better Cities in Western
Australia to projects in Bunbury, Stirling, Fremantle and throughout Perth.
Better Cities is about regenerating urban areas unlocking them and making
them more pleasant, livable and efficient. The quality of Australia's cities is
one of our great comparative advantages. It feeds into our international
competitiveness as well as the happiness of our people.
The Federal Government believes that investing in our people and the cities
in which they live is a good idea. I am very pleased that all governments
have had the wit to work together to renovate East Perth and I congratulate
everyone involved.
I'm very happy to open Claisebrook Cove. 


PRIME MINISTERSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPTENTH ANNIVERSARY DINNER OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHINESE FORUM OFNSW, SYDNEY, 12 OCTOBER 1995I'm delighted to be here for the tenth annual dinner of the Australian Chinese Forumof NSW.I know that many Labor leaders have participated in the activities of the Forum, andit's a tradition that I'm pleased to continue.The Forum's activities in raising the profile of Australian Chinese and encouragingthem to participate fully in our national life are very worthwhile.Can I also commend the Forum's efforts in raising the political awareness of theChinese community. I think it's vital that all elements of society engage in thedemocratic life of Australia.Your Forum is playing a valuable role within the Chinese community.That the Forum is one of several similar organisations in Sydney is a mark of thecommunity's health and maturity.Australian Chinese are one of our oldest and most respected communities.By some accounts the first Chinese mariners made landfall on our northern coastscenturies before European settlement. Since the gold rushes of the mid nineteenthcentury you have lived the Australian story with us.You have brought your ambition and energy. The lives you have built for yourselveshave also built Australia.You have built some of Australia's most successful businesses and provided thelabour and acumen on which many others were built. You have played key roles inAustralia's public life, and continued the admirable Chinese philanthropic tradition.You have enriched the culture in myriad ways.
I think it should also be said that you were trail blazers of modern Australianmulticultural ism. You saw through that long era of xenophobia and prejudice yousurvived discrimination and violence. You have undergone traumas in our historywhich other groups have never known.I think it is safe to say that Australia is now a much more tolerant and worldly place.If this is so then in no small way we have the Chinese to thank for it and no groupof Australians is more entitled to enjoy its benefits.At the same time we all continue to benefit from Chinese culture and Chineseenterprise. We are now very much aware that cultural diversity is a major nationalasset, especially coupled with the social cohesion we enjoy.We are a more enterprising people, equipped with more languages and talents andinternational, and especially regional, contacts.Australian Chinese are succeeding brilliantly in an extraordinary range of activity inbusiness and industry, in medicine and science, in academia, in music and the arts,in sport. When a Chee Quee is scoring runs for New South Wales, you know you'remaking progress.Societies are generally less than perfect but Australia's way of living and workingtogether works better than most.No government decree makes it work. I think the success of multicultural ism derivesprincipally from the country's democratic ethos coupled to a fundamentalpragmatism. The last two generations of Australians have seen the necessity ofimmigration and learning to live with cultural difference and in due course theexperience has taught us to see the great advantages.Governments can't legislate for a cohesive society. But there are some thingsgovernments can do.Rather than requiring newcomers to Australia to shed their cultural identity, we haveencouraged them to retain their links with their parent cultures. We have asked onlythat immigrants respect our basic democratic values and traditions, and that allAustralians reserve their primary loyalty for Australia.We have set ourselves the task of creating an inclusive society: we try to draw in allthose who drift to the margins: we maintain a sophisticated social safety net toprotect the low paid and those who fall on hard times; we provide health care, socialsecurity, education and community services. We take the view that the mostsuccessful countries in the world in the last half of this century are those which haveadopted this kind of social democratic model.We think that a country like Australia can run a dynamic globally integrated economymaintaining high rates of growth, without the creation of an economic underclass.
We take the view that such an underclass whether it is based on economic, ethnicor any other factor is ultimately damaging to the social fabric, to the way of life weaspire to and to our national ambitions.This attitude has much in common, I think, with the decision taken a quarter of acentury ago to finally reject the notion that ethnic origin should ever be a criterion forthe selection of immigrants to Australia.It is of a kind with the bill brought before the Commonwealth Parliament tounreservedly declare that racism is wrong and that racial vilification and incitementto racial violence is illegal.I have said in the past that I look forward to the day when Australians willinstinctively count among the great advantages of being an Australian thedemocracy and tolerance we enjoy here: who also recognise these things as beingessential to our social cohesion and our national identity and who see them asinviolable tenets of Australian life.I believe we are coming rapidly to this conclusion. And I also believe that as apeople we have come a long way very quickly towards recognising both the realityand the great potential of our engagement with Asia.These days, most people are believers. But the story still needs telling.Around two-thirds of all Australia's exports already go to East Asia.Our merchandise exports to East Asia grew by more than seven per cent last yearand are now worth $ 41 billion.And more than one million Australian jobs have been created by those exports.By as soon as next year when our exports to Indonesia and Malaysia will eachexceed our exports to the United Kingdom Australia's top ten export markets will allbe APEC members.At current rates, our exports to the region will almost double in value by 2000. All thesigns are that our economic links with Asia will continue to strengthen.But I want to emphasise as strongly as I can that this Government's commitment tocloser relations with Asia is not the result of some crude economic determinism. It isnot simply a matter of following the markets.Asia is not a target of convenience for us. It is no fad, fashion or political gimmick.The Leader of the Opposition may " blow hot and cold on Asia" as a commentator inthe Singapore Business Times described it this week.I
I do not think it was Mr Howard's intention, as the same article observed, to " stokeup a little paranoia about Australia's immediate northern neighbours", because MrHoward would know better than anyone how dangerous and unpopular this ploy is.What worries me is that the defence speech which inspired these comments inSingapore seemed to reflect a continuing ambivalence about Australia in the region.Often with Mr Howard one gets the feeling that while the words are there, thecommitment is not.Yet Asia is emphatically where this country's security and prosperity lie.It is where an increasing number of our people come from.And unambiguously and wholeheartedly it is where we want to be.In an increasing globalised world it is true, of course, that Australia has importantinterests outside Asia.It is also true that Australia has been involved in Asia over many years.For the most part, our record of engagement is long and honourable, from oursupport for Indonesian independence, through the establishment of the ColomboPlan, to the development of our great trading links with Japan and Korea.But it is also true, in a quite different way from the past a deeper, more urgent andmore intense way that Australia's economic, strategic and political interests nowcoalesce in the region around us.As I have said before, the simple fact is, if we do not succeed in the Asia-Pacific, wesucceed nowhere.In recent years, Australia has taken great strides into our own region. Our regionalrelationships have developed new depth and weight.These advances haven't occurred by themselves. Our progress has required theefforts of this government and many other Australians.It's a result of the choices we have made.During the 1960s, Australia came perilously close to marginalising ourselves in theworld. The White Australia policy and the protective and regulatory barriers behind whichour industry and financial institutions slumbered were all of a piece. They were allthe product of a defensive and inward-looking cast of mind.Just in time, we saw the need to open ourselves out to the world and to breakthrough the protective walls which held our economy and our minds in check.
Just in time, we reformed our economy and faced it towards our own region.We have transformed both the way we live and the way we relate to the outsideworld. Foreign and domestic policy have come together driven by the same imperatives,and towards the same ends.Success at home and abroad are inextricably linked each dependent on the other.Australia's domestic prosperity in part relies on our management of our externalrelations. And international success requires we implement domestic policies whichincrease Australia's competitiveness and ensure that we make the best use of all ourpeople. Our efforts on regional free trade, multicultural ism and education and training are allpart of the same strategy.It's a strategy to cope with and capitalise on change profound and unrelentingchange. The international system which has been our lot since the Europeansettlement of Australia is being remade by technological revolutions and the globaleconomy.This transition provides Australia and its political and business leaders withunprecedented opportunities and heavy responsibilities.And more choices.We now have a chance to take part in crafting the new institutions and frameworkswhich will take the world into the next century. But opportunities like this are neveraround for long. Very quickly, new organisations will emerge and new patterns ofinternational contact will fall into place and, once that happens, further changebecomes very difficult to achieve.I want to ensure that Australia helps to shape the new regional framework and thatthe changes which are introduced serve our interests as well as those of the widerregion. That is why I have been working hard at building institutions like APEC which willhelp cement Australia's integration into the region over the long term. My opponentshave recently taken to saying that I have laid claim to founding APEC. Of course Ihave done no such thing. What we have done over the past four years is lift APECto a new plane through the institution of Leaders' Meetings. This is what has givenAPEC its recent impetus.In recent years Australia has been one of the moving forces behind the ASEANRegional Forum which deals with security issues. We are building linkages betweenthe ASEAN Free Trade Area and the Australia/ New Zealand CER arrangement.
We have also matched our efforts to build regional institutions with new bilateralstructures established over the past four years. Bodies like the Austral ia-I ndonesiaMinisterial Forum, the Australia-Korea Joint Economic Committee, the Thailand-Australia Ministerial Commission and the Singapore-Australia Business AllianceForum are playing their part in multiplying and diversifying the strands of contactbetween Australia and the region.And we are developing new areas of co-operation with countries like Vietnam, whichhas joined ASEAN and is beginning to participate fully in regional affairs.China, of course, remains a very significant country for us. It is our sixth largesttrading partner, and China has more foreign investment in Australia than in any othercountry a mark of the deep complementarity in our relationship.The growing weight of China in the region and the world is obvious and inevitable.Australia has nothing to fear from this. We have been a firm supporter of China's fullintegration into world and regional institutions. We regard it as essential to engageChina productively in the global economy.That is one reason why we think APEC offers such promise.It has taken time for people in the region to accept how greatly Australia haschanged. But over the past twelve months or so, I believe we have begun to see asignificant change in regional perceptions of Australia which matches the changes inAustralian views of Asia.In a way which has never been true in the past, our friends and neighbours haverecognised that Australia with our talented people, our rich continent, our securedemocracy and strong diverse society represents a substantial asset to the regionas a whole. A substantial asset and a valuable partner.This fresh view of Australia is well summarised in the joint statement about theAustralia-Japan relationship which Prime Minister Murayama and I issued in May.Japan, it said, " welcomes Australia's decision to create its future in the region andreaffirms that Australia is an indispensable partner in regional affairs."That same acceptance of Australia's position as a regional partner is widely reflectedthroughout the region.One of the reasons behind this, I am sure, is the recognition by our neighbours thatthis Government has committed itself to the cause of engagement with Asia like noother government before.Asia is not a rather exotic optional extra on top of our foreign policies. Asia standsat the very core.This Government has chosen to engage the region and not to shrink from it.
We look for the promise and not only the dangers.We work at our relationships with our neighbours and not just our old and powerfulfriends as important as those old friends remain to us.And, might I say, I choose to meet my responsibility and meet those regional leaderswho visit Australia.I'm confident this is the right mindset to bring to the formulation of foreign policiesthe right mindset for Australia.It's a departure from the approach which characterised Australia's externalrelationships for most of our history and which still dominates the view of a fewAustralians. According to that school, Australia is a European enclave in an alien part of theworld. It assumes that we are only uneasy occupants of this continent that we havenever really been at home here and that our survival depends on great andpowerful friends from outside the region.It is an approach which regards our region, at base, as a threat to be resisted.I can understand this attitude. In the past it made sense. The European populationof this continent was isolated. Threats, like that we faced from Japan during theSecond World War, wer genuine and it did require assistance from a great ally,whose security links with the region are unambiguously good.But the world has changed a great deal in the past fifty years. What is needed nowas our region develops and changes and as Australia becomes more integrated intothe region economically and politically is a second approach strategicrelationships which will give us security in Asia rather than security from Asia.That was why the defence policy which the Opposition Leader announced last weekwas so deeply disappointing. It levelled one clear criticism of Government policy: inMr Howard's words, Australia's " security policy needs rebalancing to see if we havegot the mix right between defence of Australia's concerns and the need to enhanceregional engagement."Mr Howard said there were " unresolved tensions between the Government's focuson defence partnership with the region versus the region as the potential source ofthreats." This is code for Mr Howard's defining belief: that the threat to Australia is from ourneighbours, that the big red arrows on the maps from the 1960s are still pointingsouth.That what we need are better, closer, cosier relations with a distant paternalprotector so that we can put off forever the task of coming to a full engagement withour region.
This is not what Australia needs. And I am convinced it is not what Australia wants.By the turn of the century, by the centenary of our nationhood, I hope that Australiawill be a country:in which our business people are a familiar and a valued part of thecommercial landscape of the Asia-Pacificin which our defence and strategic links with the countries around us aredeeper than everin which more and more Australians speak the languages of our neighboursin which we are making full use of the great resource of the growing numberof Australians of Asian background especially Australian Chinesein which our national identity is clearer to us and our neighbours through theappointment of an Australian as our head of statein which our national culture is shaped by, and helps to shape, the culturesaround usWe cannot go back to the old ways of dealing with our region. We cannot let thepressure die. We cannot let the momentum wane.It is vital that Australians and especially Australian political leaders be at easewith our geography.But that's an injunction I needn't deliver to this audience.I don't have to lecture Australian Chinese about having a proper sense of place.You have been in this country for a very long time. While you continue to drawstrength from two cultures from two wells your efforts continue to be part ofAustralia's national story and an increasingly major element of the nationalenterprise. Australia welcomes all your efforts in business, politics, the arts and sport. Theyadd up to a great part of the national enterprise.Thank you.


** PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"
OPENING OF THE ACOSS CONGRESS, SYDNEY12 OCTOBER 1995
1 am pleased to be back at an ACOSS Conference. So regular are my&nbsp;appearances here I imagine you could be persuaded that we share your&nbsp;concerns and respect the good you do.
I was, of course, interested by the theme this year " Fact, Fiction and the&nbsp;Future". It is not easy to sort out fact from the fiction at the best of times; when it&nbsp;comes to social policy, or the shape our society is taking, it is very difficult&nbsp;indeed. But it is also essential. We can't formulate policy on the basis of phantoms,&nbsp;we cannot Improve the kind of sophisticated social security services we now&nbsp;have unless we have an accurate understanding of realities.
It Is not easy but I thought today I would try.
And while I'm at It, I also thought I would talk to you a little about the future&nbsp;about how we can. continue to shape up Australian society, make it more&nbsp;equitable, more prosperous and richer in opportunity.
The future, of course, Is a word laden with meaning. It bears somerelationship to what has become known as " the vision thing".I happen to prefer the " future thing", if only because it is generally the peoplewho wax most lyrical about their visions who wane most visibly when It comesto doing something about it.The future has more reality.
The great purpose of governments is not so much to have a vision as tocreate a future. We need to anticipate it, plan for it and, above all, carve itout shape It the way we want it shaped.We always know this much about the future it is where our efforts will bejudged. It Is where It will be decided whether or not we failed or provided forour country and our children.And so long as Labor Is in office, we know this as well we will keep movingtowards an Australian social democracy in which fairness and equity are theguiding principles, in which the effort is constantly to share the wealth as wellas to create it, In which opportunities are open to all and the safety net iswide enough and strong enough to catch those who fall.My measure of the past is how much progress we have made towards thisgoal. My measure of the future is how much more progress we can make.As you know, our ambition over the past 12 years has been to make thefastest possible progress down two parallel paths.Down the economic path, we sought to secure Australia's prosperity byimproving our competitiveness, increasing our exports and the range of them,increasing productivity, and restructuring our economy in ways which woulddeliver us a place in the markets of the world, set us up In the region anddeliver long term low Inflation growth.We did these things and we are still doing them. And fof one reason tocreate and distribute wealth and opportunity for Australians now and in thefuture. And because nothing creates and distributes wealth like jobs, and nothingcreates opportunity like jobs and nothing denies it like the lack of themabove all, we have been determined to create jobs.We created 1.6 million of them in the 1 980s. We have created 670,000 ofthem since March 1993.Down the social path, we pursued that model I have described; we expandededucation, health care, child care, social security. We developed a socialwage and a social security system with few equals in the world.And in the last 18 months, we have taken it further with, among other things,Working Nation and its extensive programs for young Australians and thelong term unemployed.I would like to pause for a moment on this subject.Last night your National President took issue with remarks I made yesterdayabout youth unemployment.
3Let me repeat those remarks which, you may recall, were made In reply toRupert Murdoch who had said the day before that 34 per cent of youngpeople in Adelaide were unemployed.The issue Is an interesting example of your ' lact and fiction" theme.This is what I said yesterday in reply to a question from a journalist:Well someone has told him that, and told him wrongly, because youthunemployment In Australia Is 9 per cent and it Is nine per cent becausethis Government has lifted the completion rate in secondary schools tojust about 8 in 10 young people.Now, it can be said that the rate of youth unemployment in Australia is 27 percent because 27 per cent of the 30 per cent of 15-19 year olds who areactually not in education are also not in work. That is what I said yesterday" The 27 per cent is for those who are out there in the labour market". Thatis a fact.It Is true that measured as a percentage of those in the labour market, 27 percent of Australia's youth is unemployed and that is the way the ABSmeasures them.But It Is not true as many people believe because they are led to believe itthat 27 per cent of all our young people are unemployed. 70 per cent of themare in the best possible place they could be in education and training.18 per cent of them are In jobs. And 9 per cent of them are unemployed.That is a fact. They are all facts.And it Is also a fact that 70 per cent of young Australians are in educationbecause it is deliberate government policy; that every government with a careabout its future Is doing its utmost to keep young people In education andtraining; that to let them drift into the labour market without education andtraining will greatly inhibit their opportunities and greatly increase the risk oftheir falling Into long term unemployment.These are facts. Just as much as the 9 per cent I quoted is a fact. Just asmuch as the 27 per cent of 30 per cent is a fact.And what matters as much as these facts is what we do about them. As I saidyesterday, 9 per cent of 100 per cent Is too high. 27 per cent of 30 per centis too high. The exceptional rates in some suburbs and regions aroundAustralia is too high.Just as the rate of 8.2 per cent unemployment overall is too high.
But the whole thrust of government policy since the election of 1993 has beento get these numbers down, to get young Australians educated and trainedand thus largely insulated against long term unemployment.That is what the Youth Training Initiative Is about. It is what the Job Compactis about. It is what the expansion of the TAFE system is about.And it is why we have had in the past couple of years the largest fall inunemployment In our history, and why youth unemployment now stands at91,000 and not a figure in the region of 158,000 which is what it was in 1983.It Is why long term unemployment has fallen by more than 30 per cent in thelast two and a half years.We don't think the job is done. We don't think it will be a simple thing toconsistently maintain the momentum towards the 5 per cent target we haveset ourselves.But no one should ignore the progress that we are making, or put about thestory that progress is not being made or pretend that 670,000 jobs meannothing, that a 31 per cent fall in long term unemployment means nothing.No one should pretend that. And no one should pretend that more cannot bedone. The Government Will do more. It will do more through Working Nation andthrough regional development and other programs. In the policyannouncements we will make over the next few months you will see theemphasis on jobs and training maintained.No doubt your own organisations will also do more. We have always saidthat while government has the principal responsibility, getting theunemployment numbers down is a task for the whole country. It is everyone'sresponsibility. I am sure the private sector will do more and who knows, with yesterday'sfree advertisement for traineeships, new companies will join the nationaleffort. If Rupert Murdoch has given our progress an inadvertent fillip, I will bedelighted. But I do not believe that emphasising only the negative, orchoosing only those figures which paint the gloomiest picture, will help us atall, Deliberately misleading people will certainly not help.
My political opponents say that real wages have fallen in the past decade,when In fact they have risen by They say that household incomeshave fallen when In fact they have risen by more than 20 per cent. They say,as Peter Reith has often said, that a two parent, two child family on averageearnings of about $ 38,000 is $ 26 a week worse off in real terms than theywere in 1983. That Is a fiction. The fact is such families are better off In realterms than they were in 1983.They say, as Peter Reith has also said, that low income families are worseoff. In fact a two parent, two child family on two thirds of male averageearnings Is $ 71 a week better off than they were in 1983.They say that the economy Is in awful shape and the sky is about to fall in,until the statistics prove the opposite and the sky stays where it has alwaysbeen and the sun stays out and then they say, as Mr Howard said'yesterday, " but that is not how it feels to people".In other words when you're caught out telling fibs which have been designedto distort people's perspective, quote the perspective.I don't think painting the gloomy picture necessarily helps us help those whogenuinely have reason for gloom. The Chicken Little routine engaged in byour opponents for most of this year, certainly didn't help the economy and itcertainly didn't help the unemployed. Nor did it do a single thing for theAustralians they suddenly discovered and with them a new word In theirlexicon the battlers.Nothing they have said this year has helped the battlers. Nothing they areever likely to do will help them but that's another story. What has helpedthese Australians Is the 78 per cent increase in family payments for lowIncome families. The social wage whose average value to a family with twochildren is $ 195 a week has helped them. The 70 per cent increase in thereal value of the social wage has helped them. They fared rather worseunder Mr Fraser and Mr Howard of course the social wage fell by 17 percent and the value of payments for the most needy families fell by 4 per cent.That did not help them.The Opposition fictions are really just try-ans thrown there In the hope thatsome of the lie would stick.Of a more substantial nature was the appearance of claims that Incomeinequality has greatly widened since the early eighties. This has come notmerely from the Opposition, but from respectable commentators.it is a matter of great concern to the Government. And I must say a matter ofsurprise, because we have been conscientious in our efforts to avoid thesame social traps which other reforming economies created for their people.
To find out what has happened to income distribution over the eighties andnineties the Government commissioned research from the University ofMelbourne. The study, called Trends in the Distribution of cash income and non cashbenefits, covers the period between 1981-82 and 1993-94, and examines theeffect of wages and salaries, the tax system, the social wage and cashtransfers on income distribution.It will provide the most up-to-date and comprehensive analysis of trends inincome distribution in Australia yet undertaken. That's important, becausemost of the stories around at the moment are only about bits of the picture.They might tell us about what has happened in parts of our cities, or aboutthe overall shape of things in a particular year, or the distribution of earnedincome alone. But you need a comprehensive map of what's happened overtime if you genuinely want to evaluate the effectiveness of policy andeffectively shape the agenda for the future.Today I'd just like to tell you about a few of the key findings of the Melbournestudy. They are preliminary results at this stage, but they are consistent withthe pieces of the puzzle that you can find in other studies.And when you put together the picture, the authors find that the distribution ofdisposable income that Is, private income plus government cash transfersless income tax became more egual over the period of the LaborGovernment. Moreover, the share of disposable income received by thebottom 40 per cent of income units increased that is, the poor became betterOff. The study did find that, in common with other countries, there appears to be awidening of wages dispersion.In Australia, though, this trend has impacted much less on those at thebottom than in many other countries. For example, the increase in earningsInequality In Australia during the 1 980s was less than a quarter of that of theUS and less than a third of the UK.In this country we have chosen to protect the wages and conditions ofworkers through the industrial relations system.The question of income distribution cannot been seen in isolation from thecurrent industrial relations debate. After all, the largest component of incomefor the majority of adult Australians comes from wages and salaries from ajob. Thus the quickest and most effective way to widen income distribution wouldbe to initiate, labour market reforms that led to lower pay for those in theweakest bargaining positions, and higher pay for those in the most powerful.
This Is precisely what the reforms envisaged by the Coalition would achieve.How can this be? Isn't the Coalition's industrial relations reform agendadesigned only for flexibility? Won't it lead to higher wages through higherproductivity? Won't there just be more choice?As Is usual in the area of Industrial relations, the real information lies in thedetail. It is here that the facts are hidden, and the fiction becomes plain.The Coalition will Introduce industrial relations reforms that allow agreementsbetween firms and workers with only a few minimum entitlements writtendown. We don't know what they will be, but from other lists they haveproduced for example, in Jobsback!, or from some of Peter Reith'sspeeches we certainly know what will not be in them.What will not be in them will be overtime and penalty pay rates, tool and otherallowances, and holiday leave loadings. Because with these there wouldn'tbe enough flexibility.It's important to understand how their approach differs from current policy,because differ it does and the chasm is broad and deep.Current workplace arrangements allow agreements without overtime andpenalty rates, tool allowances, and holiday leave loadings. But only if basepay is Increased so that workers are not made worse off. Let me repeat thisfact agreements are only now possible if workers -current overall pay isprotected. And here is the essential difference between the Government and theCoalition in industrial relations; the Government guarantees that workers arenot made worse off through signing an agreement, the Coalition does not.Under the Coalition, workers in poor bargaining positions will have their paycut they will lose overtime and penalty rates, and holiday leave loadings,and they won't be compensated for this.How much can workers lose from this? The answer is, a lot. Some examplesmight be useful.How about a typical ' Leading Hand Linesman', who earns about $ 30,700 ayear? Today they receive Industry, tool, leading hand and special allowances worth$ 55.60 per week, If they work 8 hours of overtime a week which is fairlytypical they stand to lose just from this being paid at the normal rate a totalof $ 65.70 a week.
Taking away the holiday leave loading which Is worth $ 317.50, the total lossfor the year for the linesman would be $ 6139.90, a 20 per cent cut.Or take a labourer in the building industry, with an annual income today of$ 32,900.Say 10 hours of overtime are worked 1 hour each day and 5 hours onSaturdays. The additional income from the overtime rate is $ 84 a week.Without this overtime rate the worker would lose $ 4,032 each year, and stillbe working the extra 10 hours. If the Industry, special, tool, and transportallowances and holiday leave loadings are also lost, a further $ 2,788 goes.In total, then, the pay reduction would be $ 6820, or about 21 per cent. Thereare over 1 million labourers in situations just like this.Consider full-time nurses who work the typical amount of night shifts andweekends each year, and currently earn $ 24,600.If penalty and overtime rates were reduced to the normal day rate, and they-still worked the same hours, their income would be reduced by $ 5,412 22per cent to $ 19,188. There are over 150,000 registered nurses in Australia.But, what does the Coalition say about the examples I have given?It can't happen, they say, because no one will be forced off an award if theydon't want to be. That is, if you like your current arrangements that's fine, youcan have them. There will just be a lot more choice.This is fiction.Mr Howard and Mr Reith are either very Ignorant about how labour marketswork, or they are trying to fool people.What sort of choice is there for workers asked to sign an agreement or risklosing their jobs?How can those applying for a job hope to get the award conditions if theywant the position? How does " choice" work here?Here is a fact for the debate: in 1994 1,731,500 people took a new wage andsalary position. That's about 20 per cent of the paid workforce.Over 1.1 million of these came from outside the paid labour force fromschool, from tertiary education, from being at home looking after children, asnew immigrants.
Let's put it differently with the addition of another fact: the fact that 42 percent of workers have been In their jobs for less than three years. Thus undera Coalition's first term, at least 3.6 million workers will be facing a newemployer and will not have the choice of staying on the award.So considerable change is not just inevitable, but it could also be very quick.And with dramatic consequences for the workers and families affected. Withdramatic consequences for our social fabric.It also will have two clear economic outcomes. The obvious one, and the onethat groups such as ACOSS will care about profoundly, is that the Coalition'sindustrial relations policy must widen the distribution of income.No academic labour economist would doubt this.No community worker will be surprised to see large increases in the numbersof poorer workers seeking assistance.There is a very different group who will find themselves worried about thispossibility, It is the Liberal Party's natural constituency, who will hope andtrust that a Coalition government will be reducing outlays.But how can social security payments not increase automatically if theincomes of the poorest workers are being cut?For example, take the case of the labourer in the building industry outlinedabove, and let's assume he has three children.If the labourers pay is reduced from $ 32,900 to $ 26,080, the family willreceive an increase of $ 3,675 a year in family payments from the Departmentof Social Security.Here then Is the issue for the Coalition. The Coalition will need to find manymillions of dollars to support the new wage systemThis is a predictable result of moving some aspects of income distributionaway from the wage system and into the social security system: not only willIncome distribution, become less equal, but government spending has to goup. If government spending Is not to go up, the current social security rules willhave to be made less generous. That is, rates of payment will fall, or thetaper will be increased, or indexation will be discontinued.Either way, two quite different groups must view these possibilities with greatconcern as must every Australian who values our best traditions and our wayof life.You really have to ask why?
And you really have to conclude that governments make a difference.Ideology makes a difference. Policy makes a difference. And if parties don'treveal their policies, you have to ask why.Government policies really do matter. And they have certainly mattered overthe past dozen years not feast in the realm of income distribution.Although the University of Melbourne study found that private or marketincome has become more unequal between 1981-82 and 1993-94, theGovernment's policies have more than offset this trend.Ann Harding's work shows that the gap between the top 20% of incomes andthe bottom, based on private income alone, is around 13 to 1. But when youadd in the effect of cash transfers, the gap between the rich and poor isreduced to 5 to 1. The effect of Australia's progressive income tax systemfurther reduces the gap to 4 to 1, and when expenditure on social wage istaken into account the gap between rich and poor falls to 3 in 1.Furthermore, the University of Melbourne research found that both the cashtransfer system and social wage expenditures had a greater equalising effectin 1993-94 than in 1981-82. That is, the Government's significant increase inspending on social security and the social wage has reduced inequality morestrongly In the 1990s than comparable expenditure did in the early 1980s.Wages do not and cannot take into account the costs associated with familyresponsibilities. This is where there is a legitimate role for Governmentpolicy. Over the period of the Labor Government, our priority has been tosupport low income families. To take just one example, a single incomefamily with two children on two-thirds of average weekly earnings receivesabout $ 120 a week in cash transfers.We have also dramatically increased the value of payments to people whodon't get any wages or salary.During Labor's period in office the real value of unemployment benefits hasincreased for single adults by 25 percent, or nearly $ 30 a week. Sole parentfamilies with two children are around $ 62 dollars a week better off in realterms now than they were in 1983 and those renting in the private market aremore than $ 80 a week better off. You might find it illuminating to comparethis with real income loss of nearly $ 15 a week borne by the unemployedwhen John Howard was Treasurer, or the $ 5 a week cut borne by soleparents during the same period.We also need to take into account the impact of the tax system on incomedistribution. Another of the current fictions is that our tax system doesn'thelp. The facts are different.
Under Labor, the tax base has been broadened to include capital gains andfringe benefits. We do have a progressive income tax system. A tax systemthat contributes to reducing the spread of incomes in our society. Income taxreduces the gap between the rich and the poor.Although it Is often overlooked in an examination of income distribution, thesocial wage which Includes spending on health, education, child care andhousing is one of the key features of the Australian social landscape.Government spending on services such as Medicare and pharmaceuticalsmeans that families can spend their hard earned cash on other things. Andit's not a small amount of money. NATSEM have estimated that healthbenefits alone are worth $ 70 a week for a couple with children.When you add in education and housing it goes up to about $ 200 a week fora family. And that's before you think about some of the other directassistance government provides like child care.Take away the expenditure by Government, and we would all be worse off.Under Labor, the value of the social wage per person has increased in realterms by 73 per cent.And the social wage is about more than just paying for services you wouldotherwise have to pay for yourself. It's also about providing a quality service.Our health system is the best example of this. All Australians are entitled to ahigh quality health system that enables everyone to get the medical attentionthey need.We will not have a society where the poor can't have the operation they needbecause they can't afford medical insurance.Just as importantly, we will not have a society where the poor get a secondbes3t health service.The social wage expands people's opportunities, it changes people's lives.Government spending on education is an investment in the future for ourchildren. We all know that the more education you have, the less likely youare to be unemployed. We all know that a better education is the key to abetter job. The fact Is that educational attainment is one of the most accuratepredictors of socio-economic status.And we know that early school leavers have significant labour marketdisadvantages, and that those disadvantages stem almost entirely from thegroup's lack of qualifications rather than from the economic -status of theirfamilies, disabilities or other external factors.
That is why the Government is committed to ensuring that by the year 2001,of 19 year aids will have completed Year 12 or an initial post-schoolqualification or are participating in formal education and training.That is why the Commonwealth has committed $ 1.5 bilflion in growth fundingto the vocational education and training system from 1993 to 1997, andcontributed to the creation of about 35., 000 extra places each year.That is why Commonwealth funding available to higher education has risenfrom $ 3 billion in 1983 to $ 4.8 billion in 1995 an increase of almost 61Why we have massively expanded the Australian higher education system sothat it now enrols more than 30% of all 17 to 22 year olds.Education is one of the key factors behind Australia's high degree of socialmobility. A recent study of second generation non English speakingmigrants, for example, shows extraordinary upward mobility in onegeneration. For example, 4% of Greek male migrants were professionallyemployed in 1991, but 19% of their sons were.These kinds of effects of the social wage cannot easily be captured by simplemeasures of income distribution. But they are important to our sense of a fairsociety as well as to the reality of it,A story about an increase in income equality is not a story the media oftentell. Sometimes you would think Australia was one of the most unequalcountries In the world.I am not sure whether we are the richest, as the World Bank says, but I don'tthink it matters as much as being the best country the best place forordinary people to live and work and raise families and lead tolerably happy,fulfilling and secure lives.Wherever we may rank on the scale of riches, I think there is no question thatno more than half a dozen countries can compete with us on that score.And therein lies our ambition for the future. Richer certainly, bigger andstronger for sure but as a means to an end, which is to be a better country,no better in the world.We should have no doubt about our capacity to do this. Look back for amoment and you can see how far we've come.As a nation, it is true, we have been blessed with a great many naturaladvantages; but the basis of this good society has been constructed by anact of will, by a conscious effort.
Understandably given that they are such a part of the national psyche, wetend to number the natural elements among the greatest of the blessings ofbeing Australian. And no one would dispute that they constitute a marvellousinheritance. But surely we should count Australian democracy even more highly.And we might easily add the legacy of social idealism and reform which goesback at least a century. I include in that the traditions of egalitarianism whichthe last twelve years have shown to be as strong as ever.Some people here will dispute this, I'm sure. But, whatever the imperfectionsof our society and our social services, I think the last 12 years have shownthat in Australia the " fair go" lives and they have shown that the Australianpeople will not vote for anyone who strays from the principle.We have not yet created the perfect Australian social democracy. I am notsure that social democracy admits of perfection. But it is without doubt thephilosophy which has worked best in the world and it sits easily with thatblend of egalitarianism and pragmatism which has for so long beencharacteristic of Australia and Australians.In the last decade we have rejected the regressive " primitive capitalism" ofthe New Right, the anti-social onslaughts of Thatcherism and Reaganism andall the reactionary variants in between.Sometimes we only just managed to do it.Had we failed in 1993, or 1987, or at any of the other elections, we wouldnow be living in a very different country. I think everyone here knows howdifferent. Remember if you put your arm out for the unemployed they woulddrag you down. Remember Gordon Gecko.If anyone has forgotten, I can only suggest they read Fightback or refer toJohn Howard's election platform in 1987.And then,* I suggest, you remind yourself that this is the same John Howard.And this is pretty much the same shadow cabinet as John Hewson's 16 outof 19 remain.These are the same people who put their hands up for knockingunemployment benefits off the unemployed after 9 months, for abolishingMedicare and for slashing the social wage.We have had a lot of trouble extracting policies from Mr Howard, but everyskerrick we have got suggests the same old story. Particularly the industrialrelations policy look at this policy and you will see the image of the same oldideololy. Industrial relations is the wash in which their true colours run.
And that policy alone would profoundly change the structure and fabric ofAustralian society.When John Hewson addressed ACOSS three years ago at least he said whathe would do where he would go.When John Howard addresses you tomorrow, you will get platitudes at best,or untruths at worst. What you won't get are the details of his $ 10 billion ofcuts to government spending.You won't hear his rancour for the low paid or the disadvantaged whom heholds in complete contempt.But there Is something else the last 12 years have demonstrated; and that isthe need for people of good will who know what thie realities are, who candistinguish between fact and fiction, who know that our success depends onour social cohesion and our social cohesion depends on fair and equitablesocial policies we need all these people on the one side.If I may be forgiven another brief foray into the future, I like to think that whenthe next generation counts their blessings as Australians they'll count thesefirst. I like to think that when they are asked what is so good about being anAustralian in 2010, they'll say well you get a fair go here. It's a birthright likethe beaches and the bush and the wide open spaces.


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPSPEECH FOR THE OPENING OF THE BLACKTOWN BUS/ RAILINTERCHANGE, BLACKTOWN, 14 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPYIt's a great pleasure to be here it's great being in the West again. I used to&nbsp;come out to Blacktown on my pushbike. Today, I came out on the train, and it&nbsp;was a good ride too nice and quick, and smooth. And I think the thing that&nbsp;we celebrate here today is we always as Australians tend to value&nbsp;community things. We like to do things together. We appreciate doing&nbsp;things as a community. And this is a big community effort this is something&nbsp;done between the Government of the Commonwealth, and the State of NSW&nbsp;$ 25 million for, as the Mayor and Brian Langton said, the largestInterchange in the CityRail system. Now, you know, I'm sure sometimesBlacktown feels the squeeze between Penrith on one side and Parramatta onthe other well, one thing is for sure you have got the biggest railwaystation. And you have got that and not only that, a modern one, and youhave it because it does serve the community and you need it. And we knowthat given the fact that these days in a big metropolis like Sydney, you havegot to be able to move around it to find work, and to find enjoyment, and it'snot easy in any city these days moving on the roads you get a better rideand a faster one, and a cheaper one by going on the rail system withCityRail. And so, this is why we have built it. We have tried to make your lifebetter and easier and more comnfortable by developing this Interchange sothat you can make the link easier from the railway station to the bus, so youcan get home, and you don't have to be sitting up in the car sweltering on theway out with the western sun belting you in the chest all the way home, andthe sun belting you in the eyes all the way in. I used to a bit of that a fewyears ago, and that's why I decided to take the train for a long time too. Butin those days, it was the red rattlers, of course one had to fight for a placeon them.
I'm very pleased that the Better Cities program of the Commonwealth couldbe arraigned here, and used here we're spending $ 1 billion in trying todevelop facilities such as this and re-develop some others. And, of course,we have got the Y-section rail link just back down the line, we have got he re-construction of Parramatta station, and of those of you who go to the city and&nbsp;go past the old railway workshops, we're re-building that as a place for living,&nbsp;as a place for medium-density development. And of course, Ultimo-Pyrmontwe have got money there seeking to do that, as we also have in Newcastle.So, this program is, I think, an important one, and one where we can use theCommonwealth with the States to create really good things. And we havebeen able to do this with NSW in a place like this in Western Sydney.Now, I know a lot of people in Western Sydney think that the Governmentresources won't be committed to them. But, let me tell you this LaborGovernments always stick with the people in working areas because theyknow that the social wage and community values are the things which make adifference to their life. We're just now in our fifth year of economic growthwe have just completed 16 quarters of economic growth. The economy hasbeen growing at about 4-5% a year, we have had 610,000 jobs since the lastelection, and if you live in the Western Suburbs of Sydney, the thing thatmatters most to you is the strength of that economy. Because most of us liveoff the ebb and flow of the economy if it's doing well, you do well. If it'sdoing poorly, most people feel the effects, or they feel the unemployment.And we have been getting people back to work at a record rate, as we have arecord number of people joining the labour market from school and frommigration, and women who are coming into the labour market as they haven'tcome before. And as a consequence, getting that economy growing mattersa great deal.
Then, of course, there's all of the other things that hel p the social programs&nbsp;like the Family Allowance, or the Family Allowance Supplement, or Additional&nbsp;Family Payment as we call it today. Or Rent Assistance, or of course, that&nbsp;big foundation stone Medicare, which its under our health system. These&nbsp;are all the things that buttress the sort of life that you have. And then of&nbsp;course, education. Just a decade ago, only 3 kids in 10 completed&nbsp;secondary school this year, it's 8 in 10. And you know where the big gainsare? They are in the Western Suburbs of Sydney, and places like it -in thebig areas where working people live, so that we can see the children ofworking parents do well in secondary school and in universities. This is thegreat liberating force in Australian life -you jump the boundaries byeducation. And that's where our mobility comes from so the kids of workingclass parents get their break in the education system. And if they get sick,they get looked after by Medicare. And if mum and dad have got a modestincome, they get support in the Family Allowance Supplement. They getsupport with Rent Assistance. They get support with childcare. They getsupport with these sorts of things, and they get support with facilities like this.Now these are the things that Labor Governments do, and LaborGovernments believe in. By the way, my little mate Johhny Howard was outthere talking to ACOSS yesterday that's the Australian Council of SocialServices. And he was saying he has had a big Paulian conversion on theroad to Damascus, or so he would have you believe. Three years ago, theywere going to kick working people to death with their policies, in terms ofthrowing people off unemployment benefits after 9 months, scrapping Medicare, making you pay the full freight for health insurance, knocking down&nbsp;all the Social Security payments, they want to cut $ 10,000 million out of&nbsp;Government spending, but of course now he says he won't touch any of theseprograms. Well, the thing is I'll give you a bit of good advice: don't believehim. Don't believe him. He will go for you again just as he was going to go&nbsp;for you through John Hewson 3 years ago 16 members of the 19 membersof the front bench [ of the Opposition] are still the same people that put&nbsp;Fightback together. So, they have all had this it's been like group therapy&nbsp;they have all had the Paulian conversion on the road to Damascus theyhave all seen the light in 3 years. Now, you would have to give John Howard&nbsp;the Gregory's to get out to Blacktown. He would need an army map to get out&nbsp;there I reckon I could get my old pushbike and it would get out here by itself.
But, be that as it may, the fact of the matter is again, let me return to this&nbsp;theme: what matters are the things we do as a community. Now, whenAustralia Remembers was on just 2 months ago, the reason a nation felt&nbsp;proud of it, that we felt part of it, is because we fought that war together as a&nbsp;community. And Australians rejoice in community things because it is notjust private wealth and private reward that's all right for the individuals. But&nbsp;it's not right for everybody. We want to keep the egalitarian values ofcommunity spirit and a fair go, and inclusion, that we are all in this together,&nbsp;These are the values that we want to keep going. And this is very much what&nbsp;inspires projects such as this to say if you live in Western Sydney, you're as&nbsp;entitled to good transport as if you live in the ritzy parts of Sydney. And that&nbsp;t Government is not going to forget about you it's going to put thesefacilities in place, it's going to see that they're safe. And this thing has got, Ibelieve, 37 Closed Circuit Television cameras, it's all open so people can see&nbsp;through it, there's going to be safe areas of a night which are going to bepoliced so your kids can come home on the train, and they can go to a placewhere you know they are not going to be accosted, or worse. These are the&nbsp;things that matter to the security, to our peace of mind, and to the way weJive. At any rate, I'm glad to be here today, back in Blacktown with mycolleagues Russ Gorman and Roger Price, who have, of course, represented&nbsp;this area fervently and well over a long period of time, and to be here with theLabor Minister for Transport, Brian Langton, in opening this great facility. It'sa great thing for Sydney, for the rail system, but a good thing for Blacktownand the environs, and I am very pleased and proud to be here to officiallyopen it.
Thank you very much, indeed.


TEL: 15. Oct 95 0: 30 No. 005 PL PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPSPEECH AT THE SYDNEY THEATRE COMPANY FUN DRAISER, SYDNEY14 OCTOBER 1995E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed. What you can do with a tram shed. It just&nbsp;shows you what a little imagination and flair can do, and to Rachel [ Ward]&nbsp;and Anne [ Schofield], and alt the people in the arts and costume and the&nbsp;decorative departments of the company, and all those other people who put&nbsp;their backs into this it's got a wonderful ambience, and a wonderful feel.And if the Foundation goes anything like as well as this night has gone, it's&nbsp;going to be a great success.&nbsp;
A few electric candelabra, a bit of smoke, an elephant, Andrew Denton, and&nbsp;there you are one explosive mixture. It's very nice to be associated with the&nbsp;-Sydney Theatre Company, and to be asked to speak at this the launch of&nbsp;the Foundation. Because it is not an old Company 18 years is not so old,&nbsp;but it's had such an impact upon the life of this country, and theatre, and Ithink that we should count our blessings that we have developed a Companysuch as this, and needs things to support it. Now, there is a rumour goingaround at the moment that it's pretty scratchy, the arts at the moment prettyscratchy. And there's a bit of a debate going around that there's too muchpublic money in It. But, there should be State sponsorship of the arts, and I'mdetermined for one to maintain it. It takes a long time to develop an artisticinheritance it takes a long time to develop an arts culture. But, we all knowall of us in this room that the arts define any nation, and the arts more thananything else have defined Australia. All the politicians think they definedAustralia, but I think most of them defined it after the artists defined it first.And that's why our playwrights, and the ones that have been associated withthis Company, like David Williamson, and Louis Nowra and Nick Enright, andKaren Mainwaring people such as that, are the people who chronicle the lifeof this country put it down in the most interesting ways, tell it to us and showit to us in a way we might not otherwise understand, and burn it into ourconsciousness. These are the things that theatre can do.
And we need to continue what has happened, and what has occurred to us at&nbsp;this time, and this is the point of the Foundation to try and bring someprivate money to the arts. Other than that, it comes from the Government.rhis year, I think the Commonwealth provided about $ 1 million to theCompany, and I think the State of NSW about the same, and the rest of itcomes, of course, commercially. But, this is about opening up the pockets ofthose that have got more than they need, and who can drop and sprinklesome of their funds and money around in the places where it will do a lot ofgood. And if a show like this doesn't get some money out of them, wellnothing else will.
Of course, the people who have most of the money never come to things like&nbsp;this. You know, if we could get Kerry or Rupert here, and spend a bit ofmoney on the theatre instead of just the football we got those heart-starters&nbsp;out of Kerry of course, when he took a bit of a jolt years ago. And he's akinder fella than that he's done a lot of other things the rest of us don't knowabout, but there's more he could do, and the same goes for Rupert. Now, the&nbsp;thing about the big-hitters is that they are always giving money to charitiesand you say to them what charities? " Well, you know, charities" [ they reply].Which charities? " Charities". It's always done with such feeling suchcommitment. But if they just decided what they could do by taking an interestin organisations, like some of you are taking in this Company a personalinterest in the way it runs, who manages it, its commerciality, its problems, itsartistic development all of the things that we know make a business like thiswork a Company like this work, then they could be so powerful. Now,maybe there's a cheque in the mail I don't know. But, most of them havestill got their play lunch money most of them, not all of them, but most ofthem. But, there's a lot of money around these days I mean, LaborGovernments are good for employment, they're good for battlers, but they arealso good for the wealthy. When I became Treasurer all of those years ago,the All Ordinaries Index was 453, and today it is 2150 there's a lot of moneyin between, and we only want a little bit of it here just a little bit, just atrickle. But I don't know why it is that we have so many scrooges in Australia, and wecan never get any philanthropic interest from them in supporting the arts.Now, it's always left to Governments, and Governments do their best, and wehave bodies that help us we have now got a thing called a MajorOrganisations Board, and I know you are pleased that the Sydney TheatreCompany is one of the star turns with the Major Organisations Board. And,we have got the Australia Council, and Michael Lynch is here tonightbecause he has had great association with this company, and Hillary McPheebattling away to get the right money in the right places for the arts. And it'shard going. But this is where the bulk of it comes from we still need thatState sponsorship of the arts, but we need not just the money privately, butthe interest that comes with it, and getting people interested. I always thinkthat once you have had an emotional connection with the arts, you can neverleave it off, because it makes very clear what your future with it will be, A lotof people have never had an emotional connection with the arts, they havenever had the thump to the chest, and they think it is something just up in the&nbsp;ether. They don't realise that it is something that actually feeds the soul, liftsIyour consciousness, defines the country and does all those things they thinkit is something, some superficial thing.
At any rate, this is a valiant attempt to get a private Foundation together, to&nbsp;put money back into development of young people, artists, actors, people&nbsp;who design the sets all of the things that a company like this needs to bring&nbsp;young people along, and to encourage them, and to see the Company growwith even stronger roots and foundations than it has today. That's the eointof the Foundation to try and get that sort of commitment from private'Osponsorship. Now, the Americans have done it so well for so long, and I don'tquite know why it works in America but not here maybe simply becausethere is more money around. But there's a lot of money around here now,and what we have got to do is get people to make the commitment. At anySrate, I would like to congratulate Rachel [ Ward] and Anne [ Schofield] forobviously the huge effort that has gone into this to make a statement. Tomake a statement about the arts, and to make the effort to make it count.Can I say for the Governments part, we have tried to keep that strongsponsorship of the arts in Creative Nation we have now got nearly $ 100million of those funds expended this year, we have developed this multimediacorporation, because we think multi-media will be a strong outlet forthe arts, just as film was all those years ago. And, of course, we are stillsupporting through the Major Organisations Board, the major Companies,and of course the film industry. Now, there has been some controversy aboutRupert and the Showground, but we have only ever had one film that's madethe big box-office earnings, and that is Crocodile Dundee, although, ofcourse, we have had many great films produced in this countrA And I think itis a good thing that we can get Fox, and get that belief internationally inAustralian films, films made here, and Bob Carr and I have committedourselves to getting that business up and running, and I don't think we willhave any problems, either, with Rupert Murdoch I think he is very committedto it. He sees a good thing to be done here, and I hope you feel that too.Because when we develop the film industry further, we are developing thewhole profession further because so many people move between the stage&nbsp;and film.&nbsp;
So, could I conclude my remarks again by thanking you very much for the&nbsp;invitation you have done me proud in asking me. It's a great.. . the ambience&nbsp;tonight was fantastic when I walked in, there was a lot of smoke and dust&nbsp;about, and it had all of the feel of a medieval place I thought I could havebrought John Howard along and he would have got a few progressive Ideas.I think he's just moving out of the 14th Century Into the 15th now. But, I thinkhe's not quite on this wavelength. Anyway, it's been a lovely night and agreat show I loved the Celtic dancers: a bit like the Tap Dogs. The lastshow I saw at the Sydney Theatre Company was the Tap Dogs, and theyhave done so well internationally, too so there you are, they started here.All the way from Newcastle to Sydney, and after Sydney, the world. So,thanks very much for having me along I wish the Foundation well, I will dowhat I can to support it, Burrows and Ted will keep me up to the mark if we&nbsp;slip back. But it is about private sponsorship, and I think it is a chance to lift&nbsp;that awareness of people the consciousness of people that more can be&nbsp;done for the arts, and if they have got some loose change to play with, they&nbsp;could put it into something good because as we all know, giving money&nbsp;away is a lot harder than making it. It takes a bit of style to give money away,&nbsp;and what we will do tonight is try and develop a bit of style for those people&nbsp;who haven't had to this point a lot of it. Thank you.
ends.&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DELIVERED BY THE MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES AND HEALTH,
THE HON CARMEN LAWRENCE, MP
PRIME MINISTER'S EMPLOYER OF THE YEAR AWARDS, CANBERRA,
18 OCTOBER 1995
I am very pleased to be here today to present the Prime Minister's Employer
of the Year Awards and to recognise employers who have given job
opportunities to Australians with a disability.
The Awards are in their sixth year and in 1995 attracted almost 400
nominations. I must say that past presentation ceremonies number amongst the most
uplifting functions I have attended.
The Awards always tell a good story and, I think, a very Australian story.
In Australia we move forward as a group. In Australia, we care about each
other we help each other out and we stick together. Australians have, I
believe, a fundamental and very deeply-held belief in fairness.
There is a consensus in this country and it's not found in all countries, or
even most countries a consensus that everyone should contribute to and
share in the common wealth.
That's one of the best things about living in Australia. And it's one of the best
reasons for loving Australia.
These awards are a practical expression of the Australian consensus. They
are a good example of government, business and unions all pitching in and
working together in the common interest.
There are many things that a government can do to create an inclusive
society and to maintain a strong social net. 
Governments can provide health care and social security and education and
community services to all. Not all governments do this but the best do.
And there is much that governments can do for people with a disability.
For the past decade, this Government has assisted people with disabilities
through the Disability Services Program and in light of the Baume Report,
we will redouble our efforts to increase opportunities, especially in
employment, education and training.
In 1991 the Government introduced the Disability Reform Package to coordinate
Commonwealth services and enable people with disabilities to
participate more fully in the life of the community. The Disabilities
Discrimination Act of 1993 declared that discrimination on the grounds of
disability is unlawful.
These are valuable things and the Government will keep doing them, and
building on them.
But what governments cannot easily provide to people with disabilities
unlike businesses are jobs.
A job is the most important element of the Australian inheritance.
Ilt is the best guarantee of an interesting and prosperous life.
It's the best builder of confidence and self-esteem, and the best antidote for
depression and self-doubt.
As a way of bringing people in from the margins of society, nothing else
comes close.
Businesses should employ people with disabilities because they share
along with the rest of us a responsibility to society.
They should do it because it will provide their employees with new skills and
a better future.
But they should also do it because hiring people with disabilities is good
business practice. With proper training and support and in the right job, a
person with a disability can do as well as any worker. And the experience of
these Awards tells us they bring an extra measure of enthusiasm and
commitment to the workplace.
Of course, many businesses have already seen the light. People with
disabilities are working with great flair and success in shops and offices and
schools; in councils, timber companies and computer companies; in
universities and banks and hotels and airlines. 
And all of them are very much a part of the national enterprise.
Let me offer my congratulations to everyone involved with the Employer of
the Year Awards the organisers, the sponsors and the very hard-working
selection panels.
Thank you especially to the ACTU, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and Business Review Weekly.
Congratulations to those employers in both the private and public sectors
who have given people with disabilities a chance, and who have been
nominated this year.
Most importantly, congratulations to those people with a disability who take
their place in Australia's work force, whose courage is equal to their
employers' vision.
Australia is a stronger nation for these Awards. And because of the
generosity and intelligence of the employers we recognise today, Australia is
a better country in which to live.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO ALP DINNER, GREEK CLUB, BRISBANE,
OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed. Thanks very much Bob Gibbs ( QLD Party
President), Wayne and Roisin, members from the State Cabinet, my Deputy
Kim Beazley, members of our Federal Cabinet, Lord Mayor Jim and Mary,
Mike Kaiser and Maree and friends one and all.
Well, it is always good to be back at the Greek Club, always a marvellous
audience, always a marvellous Labor audience and it should be because
Queensland is a Labor State. I am particularly proud to be here with Wayne.
I was here with him three years ago when we did and said all those things
then at the start of that election and I am delighted to see his Government
back in office because you can see what a difference it makes in Western
Australia this week what a difference a Labor government makes. I thank
him for his uplifting speech and for the uplifting sentiments.
This is a Labor State. We lost it for a very-long period of time until he won it
back and we always remember, of course, that the Labor Party was born in
Queensland and every time I come here I am reminded what a remarkable
Party it is, more than 100 years old and it has seen the transformation of the
country, seen all the history, made a large part of it and has gone on adapting
itself and adapting Australia. One hundred years later our Party is still useful
to Australia, still cutting the mustard, still making the way, still puffing our
stamp upon this country and we are stronger now than we have ever been
and we will win the next election.
We will win the next election because Australians will not want to squander
all the hard work of this last decade. They won't want to make the
commitments they have made to build a new modem, efficient, outward
looking country and squander it. They will always choose to go forward.
Australians always choose to go forward, they will never go back. I don't
think Queenslanders are any different than their fellow Australians. They
have always cherished in this State our best traditions, the best traditions of
Australia and, of course, many of our best traditions began here. They will 
stay true to the course and if we have faith in Queenslanders, they will have
faith in us and I think that we can show them that we have delivered.
At the last election our most solemn pledge and our most solemn promise
was to restore the economy back to growth and to get unemployment down.
Remember at the time I said we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind and
we have done these things. When the quarter we are living in, this current
quarter of the year, when the figures for the quarter come out it will show that
we have had 17 consecutive quarters of growth. Four full years and the first
quarter of our fifth year and those 17 consecutive quarters will make it the
longest growth phase since World War 11 670,000 jobs since the election,
we made a target of half a million, they said it will never be achieved, it's just
a bit of banter, never be achieved! We got to 500,000 jobs in two thirds of
the time in two years and we are now at 670,000 since the election. While
we have done that of course, we have consolidated low inflation. Not only
have we broken the back of inflation as no other government was able to do
after it struck Australia, but we have got it around now running at 2.5 to 3 per
cent. Remember about two months ago all the foreboding from the Liberal party
when the current account deficit came out at $ 3 billion for the month. They
went on about our debt, how we were ruined and then the following month it
was $ 2.2 billion and last month it was $ 1.5 billion, last month we were at half
of what it was two months earlier and now we are starting to see the current
account trending down. So, if you look at where we are I don't think we have
been anything like this in 12 years. In fact, the Governor of the Reserve
Bank made that point in today's press 4 per cent growth, 4 per cent
employment growth, 2-3 per cent inflation, the current account deficit trending
down and exports booming. While we have done all that we have got the
budget back into surplus, we have dramatically expanded superannuation so
that all of us will have a better standard of living in retirement. Everyone by
the year 2002 which is not far away, just seven years away will have
per cent minimum being put away for everybody to improve their income in
retirement while producing at the same time a massive pool of retirement
savings to help the country ease its savings path, to call upon for investment,
to give us a stronger economy and a stronger income for all of us into the
future. And to anneal these achievements while we have been doing that, we
have strengthened our identity and our culture. We have righted the wrong
of terra nullius with our indigenes. We have given them back that part of the
remaining land that was always theirs. We have built a relationship of quality
and trust with the countries of the region which, I think, is without precedent
and we threaded together while we have been doing all that the most
ambitious free trade undertaking in the world APEC and at the same time
layed down the blue print for an Australian republic.
We have done all these things in three years, in less than three years.
Within one Parliament. We have made Australia a country that we can be
proud of and, I think, we have made it one of the fairest countries in the world
and that is what the Labor government, after all, is all about. It is about
fairness. It is about equity. It is about imagination. It is about belief. It is ' A
A~ I~ 
about faith. Faith in our fellow Australians, compassion for their lot in life and
belief in Australia. But now at the brink of a new century we can't go back.
We can't go back to the inequality. We can't go back to our past
uncompetitiveness. We can't go back to the conflict, to our continental
insularity, to the monoculture, to the denial of truth about our indigenes, to
the monarchy. We can't go back to the old Australia. We can't go back to
John Howard's Australia.
We can't go back to the man who describes himself as the most conservative
leader the conservative parties have ever had. To the man who a week ago
told us Asia was a threat. To a man that told us when he was leader that
Australians need to avoid being fooled by Gorbechov and Perestroika. Who
railed vociferously against the economic sanctions against South Africa and
condemned our government's anti apartheid policy as mistaken and who
opposed the government's south pacific nuclear free zone initiative. We can't
go back to that person and to those things.
Imagine if John Howard had been managing Australia over the last twelve
years. There would have been no accord, no awards, no Medicare, no safety
net, no superannuation, no Daintree, no Gordon Below Franklin, no leap into
Asia and no progress towards a republic. In other words, we would be a
completely different kind of Australia, a right wing regressive backwater of a
country that would be unrecognisable from the country that we have today.
We have seen him in the last week with industrial relations. John Howard is
always talking about support for families. He says he is in favour of families.
He is in favour of families but not in favour of family support. He is in favour
of families but not in favour of awards. He is in favour of families but he is not
in favour of overtime rates. He is in favour of families but he is not in favour
of penalty rates. He is in favour of families but he is not in favour of annual
leave loadings. He basically believes as the Western Australian government
does, that he can cut across the rights of society, he can break the social
contract, he can do things which rob Australians of their sense of democracy
and their rights. He can do things to say that Australians can't withdraw their
labour, that they must keep their heads down, they have to work for the offer
that they have been given, that we take them back to where they were more
than a century ago in the 1890s. These are the things that he believes in.
But this week was, I think, quite revealing about the Liberal party. It is
haunted you know by its past. It is a bit like a haunted house. The echoes
come out of the walls, the old policies the old individual wage contracts or
the old disasters like Vietnam you see, he wouldn't see Do Muoi here five or
six weeks ago. He wouldn't meet the paramount leader of Vietnam, but the
US Secretary of State met him two days later. He was good enough for
Warren Christopher but not good enough for John Howard.
They are haunted and it keeps bubbling out. In just one week we have had
Mr Andrews the Parliamentary Secretary to Mr Costello the Shadow
Treasurer talking about the need for a GST. We have had Bronwyn Bishop
giving us her treatise on families and children. She said ' I think it is an 
important principle that when you bring children into the world you have to
remain responsible for them and that it is not the tax payers responsibility to
pick up the remnants of a family when it breaks up.' She is a real charmer
isn't she? She is a real sweetie, Bronwyn.
Then we had Costello, of course, today with his state income taxes. They, of
course, won't show us their policies. Andrew Robb says they are 98 per cent
prepared, but he won't let the public see them. Supposedly to keep them
from me, but somebody on the inside on one of the consultancies who are
working with them, gave the story to the BRW Business Review Weekly
published today, saying that basically they want income taxes for the States
so the States can put their rates up as they see fit. So you would have a
different rate in Queensland to NSW to Victoria et cetera. In other words,
they would fracture the country and break it up.
Then you have got, of course, Mr Fischer. Did you see him on Lateline the
other night? That was a -stunning performance wasn't it? Kerry O'Brien said
to him ' well, you would have to concede that it does on the face of it give
ammunition to the Government's claims that the Coalition is a policy free
zone?' He said ' but we do have policies, policies of substance, policies in the
pipeline, policies some aspects of which have already been announced. On
the small front but important, the reintroduction of the black spots road
program.' This is one of our programs. It happens to be an important one,
but you would hardly say it was the rationale, as the principle policy focus of
a deputy prime minister talking about the policy framework for a new
government. Of course, John Howard said it would dribble out. I made some illusion to Mr
Newman from that Mad magazine years ago, but it wasn't appreciated. But, it
is dribbling out and as it is, it is not doing him any good. I mean, we have
seen just in the last week his GST out from Andrews, Bronwyn Bishop giving
us her view on children and the support of children I don't think the Pope is
on her side. Mr Costello with state income taxes and then, of course, I had
little Johnny at 8: 00am Monday morning. Now, I don't listen to I used to
be an ' AM' junkie until 1983 and I gave it up. I broke the habit. But my
colleague Don Russell is coming back from the US to support us and I
thought he would be on ' AM' so I turned it on.. And heard them say we
have got a blockade in Western Australia and we will cross live in the
Canberra studio to the Leader of the Opposition. So, I thought oh here he is
like the cat who swallowed the cream. Sitting up there about to lay into this
strike which Premier Court and he have basically conjured up, lay it on us as
if it is our responsibility. Sure enough, first sentence, and he has now got this
Menzian tone of voice, he says ' I think it is a disgraceful thing in a country like
this when a Prime Minister will allow the blockade of a State'. Now, I don't
know whether he has been schooled in this, but this is now the way he is.
It is a long time since I phoned in, I wouldn't even know what the number was.
So I got onto Greg Turnbull and said ' you had better get me that ' AM'
producer because I want to get into this and I had the flu, I was as crook as
Rookwood I can tell you. Anyway I staggered to the telephone, in the dark, 
and I got on there but I got the drift after a while because they put me through
to the sound box so I had the debate coming over. Of course, it didn't take
me long to hit the themes. The main theme was if John Howard was Prime
Minister this is how it would be every week that he was Prime Minister.
Well, it was only in the evening that we saw the film footage of his reaction. I
don't know whether you saw it, but it was one of the classics of Australian
politics. He took the earphones off and then banged them back on and
banged his glasses off and then put them back on straight again and banged
himself again, then said ' turn him off, turn him off and I thought God! he has
got St Vitus dance. He is doing an Inspector Clouseau impersonation here.
Now, it is little wonder he is hearing voices. There is little wonder there is
echoes from the haunted house because as we squeeze him, as we squeeze
the tube and a bit comes out, every bit that comes out always leaves us
plenty of room to get into it because they have no policy structure and they
have no discipline.
And it is the same team, the same old team that was there at the last election.
Sixteen of the nineteen are the same ones who put Fightback together. The
new ones are simply replicates. Bronwyn Bishop being one of them.
He said this recently, he said this on radio. He was on with Jeremy Cordeux
in South Australia:-' the major issue will be what Mr Howard, industrial
relations do you think or what?' And Howard says with all of the
seriousness he could summon ' no, I think the major issue will be essentially
whether or not it really isn't time that a new group of people were given the
leadership of this country.' Not that you deserve it. Not that you have got an
agenda for change. Not that you can lead the nation. Just that a new group
can come in and give us the leadership of this country. You know, like the
new Minister for Trade Mr Fischer, the new Deputy Prime Minister, our black
spots specialist. Or the new Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Downer. Now,
there's a fresh face. Or the new Minister for Industrial Relations Mr Reith, he
is real new. Or that happiest one of them all that new Minister for
Employment, Mr Kemp. He is always such a happy fellow. Or the New
Minister for Privatisation, Senator Bishop. Or Mr New himself, the member
for Bennelong. Or the new Treasurer, of course, Mr Costello.
There never was a new group quite as old as this one. Never was thinking so
stale. Now, you can take recycling so far, but this is taking it to absurd
lengths. You have got to say when you look at some of the other people like,
and I always forget his name, that young monarchist, Abbott. Yes, the mad
Abbott. You have got to say of the Liberal Party where do they find these
junior monarchists to lead Australia into the 21st century? Do they look
around for them or do they just spring up naturally? Where do they find these
relatively young men and women with the social and political ideas of a
century ago. I mean you have got to look pretty hard.
The fact is, this is what we face. This is the same group that put Fightback
together. I said the other day they have had the sort of Paulian conversion
on the road to Damascus. I mean, 16 of the 19 of them wanted to throw the 
unemployed off unemployment benefits after nine months. They wanted to
set up a GST. They wanted to make young Australians pay full fees at
university. They wanted to abolish Medicare. But now, they are into ' me
tooism'. They are in all the things the Government believes. You say
Medicare, ' no we're for that'. You know, expansion of opportunity in schools,
no. we're for that.' Awards, ' no we're for that.' So, well God! if that is the
case why don't you let the authors of the policy. If we are the authors of the
policy why don't let us do the governing? ' No' they say ' it's time for a new
group to run Australia'. Time for a new group to run Australia. In other
words, it is on a rotational basis. You know, they have had five turns and
now it is our turn. I mean, you know how it works inside the Liberal Party.
Howard used to go around saying Andrew has had two turns and I want two
turns and he got two turns. He got two turns and now he thinks, he says ' now
they have had five turns it is our turn. It is a new group and it is our time to
run Australia.' Well, righto, ok, good luck to you Johnny but we are not going
to make it easy mate.
I'll tell you what is wrong with the Liberal Party, they don't believe in the
country. [ Sound system breaks] Hello someone has knocked us off. There
must be a Tory on the staff. Get their names! It has got to be a Lib.
We may laugh at these characters, but the thing about the Liberal Party is
they have got one fundamentally bad trait and that is they don't believe in
Australia, in what we have become, and the have no faith in Australians.
That is their problem. I have often said and I have used this term that
Manning Clark used to use. He said there are only two kinds of Australians
the enlargers and the punishers and the straighteners the enlargers are the
ones who always believed in something better, having faith in people,
believing they could do something better themselves and having faith we
could do greater things together enlarging Australia, making it bigger and
making it better. That class of Australians and the others were the punishers
and the straighteners. Those who said be happy with your place in life, get
your head down, know your place, get your nose to the grindstone. I mean,
you could see it in Western Australia last week. You know, you want to have
a strike? Give us seven days notice. Want to have a strike? Go and tell
your employer first. If you try to get under the federal awards we will actually
deregister your union. You know, take the offer, get your nose down, don't
complain. This is their view, they would never have faith in the people, in the
institutions we have built, in the country we have become.
It is as if Australia has passed John Howard by. His defence speech of a
week ago could have been given by Harold Holt. No nonsense, no joking, it
could have been given by Harold Holt. It wasn't security in Asia, as we are
saying but security from Asia. Nothing has changed. The same industrial
relations policies, the same general approach. No real pride in the
institutions we have built. The Accord which is a model of co-operation in the
country and the economy, the lowest level of industrial disputes since 1940
working days lost per 1000 compared to 690 working days lost per 1000
when Howard was in office. A model of co-operation, low inflation, high
productivity. 
I was out at a workplace today with Michael Lavarch and the people there
were saying ' look, the first enterprise bargain, it took us a while to work out
what to do with it. The second one we actually got something out of it, we
have got higher pay, better hours.' One fellow said ' I'm home more often than
I've ever been these days getting to know my wife again' and ' a real spirit of
co-operation' he said. ' When we get to the third enterprise agreement we will
really know how to do it better', so the Manager said ' yes.' That whole cooperative
spirit is there. No, they want none of that. No faith in people to do
the right thing. No faith in the bigger view. No co-operative model. No view
that we should basically keep these egalitarian concepts of Australia that it is
a good thing that we don't have an underclass here. You saw the American
Labour Secretary Robert Reich, no less a person than the US Secretary of
Labour saying that in the US ' we have had enormous employment growth, but
unfortunately we have had falling real wages for 16 years. We have got an
army of working poor.' And you can see the divisions in that society with the
O. J Simpson trial. You can see the tensions there. You can see it in
Washington during this week. You can see what happens when you don't
have the commitment to one another. You don't have that sense of
compassion. You don't have that sense of consensus. You don't have that
co-operative spirit.
We have got it because we believe in people. We trust them, we've asked
them to be in it with us, to make it a new economy. An efficient place, but a
caring place and we have done it. But they have none of these
understandings and they don't believe in people. John Alston said it another
way recently in Canberra. He said ' there is only two kinds of Australians' he
said ' lovers and the others' and we know what to think of the others don't we?
I said at the Labor Conference in Sydney a week or so ago, we are going to
make this election a referendum on ideas. A referendum on who has the
ideas for Australia. Who are the people that can lead it into the 21 st century,
who can lead Australia into Asia, who can find us an organic place for
ourselves in the region. Who can find us peace at home with our indigenes.
A society which feels together and at one truly one nation one that has a
focus on growth and on jobs and on co-operation and on fairness and on the
environment and on the big things that we believe in our identity, the
republic and the things that have made this a great country. The things that
have made us unique as a culture and unique as a society and as a people.
This is the agenda of Labor. The big agenda. The big ideas. The big ideas
of the nation. The big ideas of our sovereignty being fully expressed by an
Australian head of state. Of taking us into Asia and being part of it. Of
threading together a great free trade agreement around the Pacific rim, with
APEC. Of coming to terms with our indigenes. To say we can't ever make
the leap to these old societies in Asia without settling these things at home
first. I mean, these are the things that follow. It is not just mean spirited
budget making or penny pinching or trying to cut the lowest paid people
down, to cut people under $ 22,000 or $ 25,000 down. What an objective in
l ife to try to do that. 
I believe this, that the election will be a referendum on ideas. That it will be
about who has had the faith in the country. Who has adapted and been able
to change it. Who has been able to make it better. Who has been able to
make it fairer and more decent and to be able to say as the Reserve Bank
Governor said today, in all the years he had been in economic policy making,
he had never seen the Australian economy quite as strong as it is now.
John Howard can slip around, he can try to hide his policies, he can try to
keep it under wraps until those last couple of weeks before a poll, but in the
end I don't think the Australian people will reward him. I think the sands are
running against him already and one thing about the Liberal Party, there is no
sentimentality in it. Once your use by date is past you are for it. He is the
third choice after all in this Parliament and he knows that.
So, I can say this, I look forward to this election and so do my colleagues.
We go into it with tremendous fervour, great faith in what we have been able
to do and faith that we can do more with the Australian people. But we know
this, we are democrats and we know that all power comes from the people
and that we need their support to keep on going. It is not just elected
governments, you need that constant support to put the mandates into place.
We need their confidence and we need their encouragement. And we will go
back to them and say three years ago you wanted us to restart the economy,
we have done it. Three years ago we made a commitment to do the hardest
thing, to get unemployment down and employment up, we have got
employment up and we have still got it growing. We have done these things
that we made our commitments to you to do and we want you to assess us
but assess us fairly against the other party that has not done the hard yards,
that has not done the policy thinking, that has not done the work, that hasn't
come together, but after all this that they can't at this point just simply reel off
some dreary policies without basically having faith in the place and believing
in the place because our Party has the change. It was formed in Queensland
100 years ago, as I said in the beginning, 100 years later it is still useful. We
have adapted Australia. We have adapted ourselves and we have adapted
Australia and we have made a model of social democracy, which I think now,
is unique in the western world. We have got an efficient economy grafted
onto a compassionate social wage and, I think, Australians are going to think
very hard before they put that asunder, before they put their mark against it.
I can assure you that we will be going into this election with great confidence.
And we will be putting those big views, the big views about where we see
Australia and where we see it going. And I know that visiting a school today,
all those young people joining the rolls, they have got no doubt about which
way the direction in this country, which way that direction should be. It
should be for the things we value the republic, the environment, faith in
ourselves, opportunity, the right to a job these are the things which I think
they hold dear. They are not about to take a trip down the time tunnel to the
Liberal Party. 
Perhaps I can conclude on this point by saying how much I have appreciated
the Party in Queensland, bringing us together the Cabinet today here in
Brisbane. For the Lord Mayor for having us at the Town Hall which is a
singular pleasure. But to be here in the presence of Wayne Goss and his
Cabinet as the Labor family together. Because the thing about the Labor
Party is it is united. We are together. There is no fracture in our views, there
is no great divide in the Labor Party on social policy or foreign policy or
economic policy. There are changes at the edges, there are shades of
opinion, but there is no great divide. We have never been as united as this
and as well as that we have got the industrial movement with us. We are a
united force. I don't think, as I said earlier, the Labor Party has ever been
stronger. But this is the State in which it was formed, in Queensland, and to
be here with 1200 of you with such bonhomie and buoyancy, with our State
Cabinet colleagues and with Wayne, it gives me a lot of pride and a lot of
pleasure. We will need your strength to carry it through. But don't believe for
a moment that we can't win well and win here in Queensland. We can. And
if we have faith in Queenslanders they will return the faith to us. The one
thing I pledge is to work for their support. To work with our State colleagues
for their support. To work as a united party and when we have that mandate
to work hard to put it into place and the great catalogue of things we have
been able to achieve in these three years, we will be able to do again in the
next three as we come down to the end of the century, as we make that leap
into the 21st century and put the indelible stamp of Labor proudly across the
face of Australia.
Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS
AUSTRALIA AND A WORLD WITHOUT NUCLEAR WEAPONS
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 24 OCTOBER 1995
Thank you for coming today to this commemoration of the 50th anniversary of
the signing of the Charter of the United Nations.
I want to give particular thanks to the members of Australia's National
Committee for the 50th Anniversary and to its co-chairs, Gareth Evans and
Roger Shipton.
The Committee encouraged debate about how the United Nations should
respond to the challenges of the next century. It has played a great role as a
catalyst, encouraging a very wide range of organisations to create their own
anniversary activities. And in a particularly appropriate focus, it has
encouraged the involvement of youth in these discussions. We have a vivid
illustration of that in the postcards from primary schools all over the country
which are displayed around the room.
As we have seen again over the past few days, this 50th anniversary has
already generated another round of critical debate about the role and
functions of the United Nations. Practically everyone, it seems, has a view of
how the UN could operate more effectively, or cost less, or do more, or do
less.
This is no bad thing when an organisation matters as much as the United
Nations does. I've done it myself. And no doubt I will do it again. But not
today. Or not much, anyway.
Because on its 50th birthday the UIN is entitled to a bit of a celebration, a
reminder to us all of what it has done in that half century to build a more
humane, enlightened, tolerant and secure world.
And Australians, especially, should join in the celebrations. Because through
all the ups and downs of those fifty years, the UN has had few better friends
than this country.
When the Secretary General, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, visited Australia in
April to take part in our conference on global cultural diversity he said to me 
that he judged countries not so much by their size and GDP as by their ideas
and commitment.
In financial terms, Australia is the thirteenth largest contributor to the United
Nations. We pay our dues on time and in full. But I think that by the
Secretary General's measure we have been even more important to the
organisati on.
We were there at the beginning of course.
Dr Herbert Vere Evatt, was instrumental in drawing up the Charter. He
battled long and hard to ensure that the voice of the smaller nations would be
heard in its deliberations.
And the great feminist pioneer Jessie Street, the only woman in the
Australian delegation to the 1945 San Francisco Conference, helped to
secure in the preamble to the Charter a reference to equality between men
and women the only human right explicitly so mentioned.
Fifty years on, most of you in this room are here because in one way or
another you have been carrying on the work of those Australian pioneers.
And many other Australians have been there before you.
Australians were the first peacekeepers to serve under United Nations
auspices when we sent military observers to Indonesia in 1947 during the
independence struggle. Since then, Australian military and police personnel
have served with great courage and distinction in Europe, Asia, Africa, the
Middle East and the Caribbean.
Australians have a distinguished record as aid workers, as diplomats working
on disarmament, as health experts dealing with smallpox or AIDS.
The Australian government and ordinary Australians have been able to
contribute, including through one of the world's largest humanitarian
resettlement programs, to the wonderful work of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in providing help and sanctuary to the millions of people who have
been forced from their homes by conflict and disaster over the past fifty
years. Australians have played a prominent role in the system of human rights
protection created under the UN's auspices. Eminent Australians, including
people such as Phillip Alston and Elizabeth Evatt, have served in their
personal capacity on the expert committees which monitor implementation of
the core human rights treaties.
Part of the reason for holding this reception today is publicly to thank all of
you and your predecessors for your service to the interests of this country
and the international community through the United Nations. 
But another reason for this gathering today is to thank the United Nations for
what it has done for Australia.
Because the United Nations has given us a forum where nations can resolve
differences in an environment bounded by agreed rules and norms. It has
provided a space in which the challenges facing humanity can be discussed
and our experiences shared.
For all its faults and imperfections, it is impossible to imagine a world without
it without international forums for the discussion of human rights, setting
universal standards, and developing measures to prevent human rights
abuse. A world without bodies to address issues like the status of women
and racial discrimination or to give voice to the aspirations of indigenous
peoples.
A world without the capacity to negotiate the pressing trans-national
challenges of the environment or to tackle the most difficult problems of
economic development.
But in addition to these large issues the United Nations also affects for the
better the lives of ordinary Australians through the web of international
agreements which have been negotiated under its auspices. These cover
issues as diverse as weather monitoring and prediction through the World
Meteorological Organisation; improved labour standards and protection of
workers' rights through the International Labor Organisation; safety standards
in civil aviation and maritime transport; the placement of satellites and even
the transfer of mail between countries.
But for all the good work which the UN does in such areas, its ultimate
success or failure will have to be judged by the impact it has on international
security. Because above all else, the people who drafted the Charter 50 years ago,
who had just experienced a global conflict the most destructive in all of
human history were motivated by the desire to rid the world of the scourge
of war. But their hopes were almost immediately crushed with the coming of
the cold war. For the first time, the international community had to
contemplate the possibility that another world war would destroy our
civilisation.
The UN system has a great responsibility to help the world avoid such a
catastrophe. The disarmament goals of the international community are set
in resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
The vital international treaties to turn these goals into reality are negotiated in
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. And the ultimate recourse for
enforcing compliance with international disarmament obligations lies with the
UN Security Council, as we have seen in the Council's actions on Iraq and
North Korea. 
This central role of the United Nations makes today's occasion an appropriate
one to make a major announcement about Australia's arms control and
disarmament policy.
In all the debate and anger over the past months about the French
Government's decision to resume nuclear testing in the South Pacific, there is
one point which consistently recurs in our thinking about the issue.
I have made that point publicly. It is that, however strong our opposition to
them, those tests at Mururoa, and China's continued testing, are not
themselves the core of the problem. They are instead a symptom of the
problem the deeper and more troubling problem of nuclear weapons in the
world. The reason we have seen such a huge outpouring of public concern about
the French tests, not only in this region where they are being held, but also in
Europe and Japan and elsewhere, has been a feeling that we have been
cheated robbed of the chance of a world free of nuclear weapons.
With the end of the cold war, we all breathed more easily. We allowed
ourselves to think that the nuclear threat, the nightmare of two generations,
had finally passed. The thought of nuclear weapons and nuclear war faded
from our minds.
But the reality has not faded. Fifty thousand nuclear war heads remain in the
arsenals of the five declared nuclear powers. And it is no less real and
frightening that others not just the so-called threshold states of India,
Pakistan and Israel, but others like Iraq wait and work to acquire nuclear
weapons. The French decision to resume testing announced within weeks of the
indefinite renewal of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was an outrage
and a folly. It has produced an entirely understandable wave of anger around
the world. But we may yet be able to derive something positive from it
because it has jolted us back to the reality of nuclear weapons in the world.
I now feel a growing certainty that some great good might yet be got out of
the present bitterness if we make this the moment to take on the challenge of
nuclear weapons.
I believe we can turn the global outrage at French and Chinese testing into
something broader and more ambitious I mean the creation of a world totally
free of nuclear weapons.
This has often been talked about in the past, of course. It is a goal which has
been forcefully articulated by Professor Joseph Rotblat, who won this year's
Nobel Peace Prize. It has long been an aim of Australian policy.
However, to most people, including me, it has always seemed an
unachievable ambition, at least in our own lifetimes. 
The strategic uncertainties and deep political suspicions of the cold war
would surely have made this goal impossible.
But that world has now changed.
We still have conflict, of course. We still have competing national interests.
But the strategic framework in which nations operate has changed profoundly
and I believe it is now possible to contemplate getting a concrete program to
achieve a nuclear weapons free world.
Because the truth is that the sort of world we now have, with nuclear powers
committed to reducing their arsenals and unlikely to use their weapons
offensively, will not continue forever. We can be certain of this.
Unless we take action now, the nuclear competition that characterised most
of the second half of this century will very likely return and probably in a
much more unstable and multipolar form.
The world must extricate itself from the circular argument that we need
nuclear weapons because we have nuclear weapons.
The nuclear powers cannot be excluded from this: they must understand that
the most likely threats to their security lie in the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. This is a point we have made often about the French tests and the way they
cut across the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the most important arms
control treaty ever negotiated within the UN system.
I notice that former French President Giscard D'Estaing made a similar point
in an article in the French press on 12 October. He said that " the increase in
the number of states, be they big or small, who manage to develop nuclear
weapons, now constitutes for France a threat just as serious, if not more
serious, than that of a strategic strike decided by one of the rare countries
with nuclear weaponry."
I believe that a world free of nuclear weapons is now attainable. It can be
done and it will be in the best security interests of Australia and our allies and
friends if we do it.
As we saw in the Gulf War, new technology has given weaponry an accuracy
that substitutes precision for brute explosive force, and with far less risk to
civilians than those from nuclear weapons.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, we have also seen how real is the
potential for catastrophic nuclear accidents.
The Government believes the time has come for more determined movement
towards the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. 
There is no magic wand we can wave to make this happen. As with the long
negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament to get rid of chemical
weapons, ultimate success may be decades away. And getting there
involves security issues of the greatest complexity and profundity. We do not
minimise the difficulties or the dangers.
Success depends ultimately on having the will as well as the ambition. The
Chemical Weapons Convention, endorsed by the UN General Assembly in
1992, has shown that where there is a will there is a way to put the genie
back in the bottle. We proved it was possible to rid the world of a whole class
of weapons of mass destruction. And the verification problems for a total ban
on nuclear weapons should be easier to solve than those for a ban on
chemical weapons.
A key building block for a nuclear weapons-free world is already in place with
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, article VI of which commits the nuclear
weapon states to " pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures
relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear
disarmament". But this generalised statement of principle is not nearly enough.
What we need now is action to achieve the abolition of all nuclear weapons.
These are the next steps the Government has in mind.
In our own region we want an end to nuclear testing by France and the
closure of the Mururoa test site.
For nearly 50 years since the beginning of the nuclear weapons era the
Pacific has been used as a testing ground. The Americans began testing in
the Pacific in 1946 and continued until 1962; the British tested in Australia
from 1952 until 1963; and the French are still testing in French Polynesia.
In 1983 the Australian Government set the objective of ridding the region of
testing and began its campaign to declare a South Pacific Nuclear Free
Zone. With the announcement on 20 October by France, the United
Kingdom and the United States that they would sign the protocols of the
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty in the first half of 1996, we can say
that we are on the point of achieving our objective and ending a dark period
of the region's history.
The Government's deep regret, of course, is that France is not drawing the
logical conclusion from its intention to sign the SPNFZ protocols and ending
its tests now as we urge it to do.
We also want the nuclear weapons states to support the African Nuclear
Weapon Free Zone Treaty, which is being presented to the current session of
the General Assembly, as well as the South East Asian Nuclear Weapon
Free Zone which is nearing completion. 
We believe that progress towards a nuclear weapons free world would be
given a major boost through the creation of linkages between existing or
potential nuclear weapons free zones in the South Pacific. Latin American.
Africa and the Indian Ocean which already cover most of the southern
hemisphere. Globally, the most immediate priority has to be the conclusion of a genuinely
comprehensive test ban treaty by mid-1996, followed by its early entry into
force. Australia, together with Mexico and New Zealand, is presenting a
resolution to the current session of the General Assembly to entrench this
deadline. In Geneva, Australia has been consulting closely with key countries on ways
to expedite the CTBT negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament to take
advantage of this opportunity. Over the next few months the Government will
be devoting substantial resources as we did for the Chemical Weapons
Convention to doing what we can to help bring this about.
Next, we want to see the immediate start and early conclusion of negotiations
on a convention to ban the production of fissile material for weapons
purposes the so-called " cut-off" convention. And we want to see the
development of a regime requiring all states to declare and account for their
present stocks of fissile material, as another necessary prelude to the
elimination of nuclear weapons.
We want to encourage the further strengthening of international safeguards,
in particular by building up the International Atomic Energy Agency's ability to
detect illegal undeclared nuclear facilities.
We want universal membership of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
particularly by the nuclear threshold states of India, Israel and Pakistan.
But as I said earlier, Australia is determined to pursue the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons.
We want the nuclear weapons states to carry out their commitment to the
elimination of their nuclear stockpiles by adopting a systematic process to
achieve that result.
The next steps towards this are the adherence by the United States and
Russia to the destruction timetable under START, and further nuclear
reduction agreements between the United States and Russia, with the
earliest possible involvement of the United Kingdom, France and China.
We acknowledge the need as we always have, for a system of stable
deterrence to be maintained while the reduction and eventual elimination of
nuclear weapons is being achieved. 
All these elements constitute a program which will set norms for international
behaviour, establish new international legal obligations and further develop
international control mechanisms which will serve as an essential framework
for the safe and secure elimination of nuclear weapons.
I am writing to other heads of government who share Australia's concerns,
suggesting that we look at the means by which we can advance the cause of
a nuclear-weapons free world. I hope a new coalition of international
interests will emerge from these consultations.
As its contribution to this, the Government will establish a group of
knowledgeable and imaginative individuals from around the world. In a major
series of meetings in Australia, this group will be tasked to produce a report
to be submitted to the next United Nations General Assembly and to the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
The group will examine the problems of security in a nuclear weapons-free
world and suggest practical steps towards the goal, including the ways of
dealing with stability and security in the transitional period.
Next week, the International Court of Justice will be hearing a case referred
to it by the UN General Assembly, asking it to give an advisory judgement on
the legality of the use and threat of use of nuclear weapons. We believe, and
will argue before the Court, that it would be best for the Court not to make a
judgement the legqality of nuclear weapons is a different matter, of course,
from their utility or strategic value or even their morality.
A judgement by the Court that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is
gal, even if only in some limited circumstances, runs the profound risk of
achieving precisely the opposite of what those seeking the Court's opinions
want namely the encouragement of others who want to join the nuclear club.
Even a judgment that nuclear weapons use or threat is illegal unless very
carefully framed to deal with how that conclusion might be put into practical
effect would likely be ignored by the nuclear powers and, as a result, serve
no purpose other than to weaken the standing of the Court itself.
The Government has now decided, however, that Australia will also argue to
the court that if, despite the good reasons for not making a decision, the court
is minded to make a decision in the case, it should decide in favour of the
illegality of those weapons. The Foreign Minister, Senator Evans, will travel
to The Hague to present this case on the Government's behalf on
October. We are not naive about our role in this enterprise to make the world free of
nuclear weapons. We are a nation of only medium size and weight in the
world, and we are not a nuclear power. 
On the other hand, we are skilled at multilateral diplomacy and have
demonstrated on issues like the peace process in Cambodia and APEC and
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the protection of Antarctica as a
wilderness reserve and the campaign against apartheid, that we have the
energy and ideas and the capacity to create coalitions with others, to make a
real difference in the world.
With the same energy we gave to those projects we will now commit
ourselves to the goal of a nuclear free world.
Reflecting on the history of nuclear strategy, the American writer Fred Kaplan
says that nuclear strategies were contrived to disguise the real nature of the
nuclear bomb. It is in fact, he writes, " a device of sheer mayhem, a weapon
whose cataclysmic powers no-one really had the faintest idea of how to
control. The nuclear strategists had come to impose order but in the end
chaos still prevailed."
The world has a chance just now to find a way out of the chaos. The chance
will not last long. We can help the world to grasp it, even show the way.
At the beginning of the United Nations' second fifty years, there could be no
better way for us to show our commitment to the ideals which motivated the
men and women who drew up the Charter than by working, like them, to turn
a coalition of noble ideas into a concrete and enduring reality. 



PRIME MINISTER
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN NURSING FEDERATION FEDERAL DELEGATES
CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, 26 OCTOBER 1995
It is an honour to be asked to address the 11 th Biennial Australian Nurses
Federation Conference.
I have been talking to nurses quite a lot lately at Ballarat yesterday, and in
Perth a couple of weeks ago.
And this is not just because I believe that nurses do some of the most
important work in our communities, although I do think that. Nurses provide
-the most important ingredient of any civilised society, any decent community
and, I think it is fair to say, any successful health system. They provide care.
How as a society we treat nurses is therefore a measure of how much we
value care. It is a measure of what we mean by " civilised", by " decent", and
" 1successful".
To take nurses for granted is to compromise those values. To actually cut
into their pay and conditions speaks of abandoning them altogether.
Something similar can be said, I think, about the present fashion for
privatising health services, including ambulance services.
A great many things can be done equally as well by private interests, but
where the people's health is involved there are very clear lines to be drawn.
The people's health should never be subject to ideological fashion or
obsession. It should never be placed at the mercy of no other consideration
than the bottom line.
On these things on the pay and conditions of nursing, on cost cutting and
privatisation in health there is a very significant national debate now raging.
Ar. 
At present, the antagonists are the Commonwealth Government and the
conservative state governments. I can tell you now that the Commonwealth
Government will do all it can to protect nurses against state governments like
the one in Western Australia.
The industrial relations policies of the conservative States and the health
policies of the conservative States are of the same ilk. They are related.
They come from the same family of thought.
And, needless to say, the conservative States and the Coalition come from
the same family too. So what we see happening in the conservative States
we can expect from a conservative Coalition. In fact, there are indications
that a Federal Coalition government would hand over much more
responsibility for health to the States.
That is why this debate is so important. It is a debate about not just the
fundamentals of health care or even just the fundamentals of industrial
relations and fair wages it is a debate about the kind of society we want
Australia to be.
If this strikes you as a political speech, you are probably right. There is a
great deal at stake, and the fact is we can only defend the things we have
won and the things we believe in by winning the political debate.
As I said the battles at present are being fought out in the conservative
States. In the conservative States there have been particularly poor dealings
between nurses and those State governments. For example, in Western
Australia and South Australia, the second safety net adjustment of just $ 8 a
week has still not been paid.
Nurses in conservative States have received almost no pay increases for
several years.
This has meant that many thousands of nurses have experienced cuts in the
purchasing power of their pay. Nursing is one of the very few occupations to
have had this experience over recent years.
The lack of empathy for and understanding of nurses' needs led the
Government to make an important decision.
We decided to support a Special Case before the Industrial Relations
Commission on nurses' pay.
This is an Accord commitment to guarantee wage justice for nurses in
conservative States and it should be noted that it is very rare for a specific
occupation to be identified as in need of help in the eight Accords negotiated
with the ACTU. 
It speaks volumes for the Accord and, I think, for the difference between
Labor and the Coalition.
Some might say, that's well and good for nurses working in conservative
States, but it's a relatively minor issue, isn't it?
In fact, it is a major issue for all Australian nurses.
It is a major issue because the vast majority of nurses are covered by the
Federal system, and this is where the current industrial relations debate
really matters.
It is a major issue for all workers simply because the Coalition will radically
alter the Federal awards, and that will mean reductions in pay and conditions
for nurses.
The big point and it is a very big point for nurses is that the Coalition's
policy does not guarantee workers' pay. The value of penalty rates, and
overtime, and holiday loadings, among other allowances, will disappear.
When I was in Western Australia I illustrated what this might mean for the
earnings of nurses and, I must say, there were some signs of shock at the
extent of what could happen.
How much pay is involved? Let's have a look at some facts.
Currently working nightshifts typically pays about 15 per cent more than the
day rate, or about $ 15 a night extra. The Coalition's policy means that the
nightshift can be paid at the day rate.
Most nurses who work full-time work some nights and some weekends every
year. For weekends there is at least a time and half penalty rate.
Taking away the penalties and the holiday loading costs the average nurse
around $ 5000 a year. This is a typical nurse, not a special case. $ 5000 a
year. Typical nurses have typical needs. Typical family needs, typical recreation
needs, typical financial commitments. Cut nurses' pay cut anyone's pay
and you cut into their standard of living, into their hopes and expectations,
into their opportunities and opportunities for their children.
Cut nurses' pay and you cut into the quality of health care and the fabric of
communities. Cut nurses' pay and you cut into the basic values of Australian
society. 
That is why I have said so often about John Howard and to John Howard
you cannot pretend to stand for families and communities and the decent
values which bind them together and also stand for low wages and wage
cuts. Even if you put aside all the obvious moral judgements to be made, it makes
no logical sense.
Now I don't know whether Australian nurses think of themselves as " battlers".
I prefer nurses myself. But if nurses are battling now, they would be battling
a lot more if a Coalition government were elected and applied the same
policies as Western Australia is applying.
A Federal Coalition government will mean pay cuts of over 20 per cent of
incomes. About $ 100 a week.
The Coalition says that this is a fantasy, that it just won't happen, that it's just
a scare campaign.
Of course, the Coalition would have the Australian public believe that any
questioning or criticism of their intentions to draw the merest negative
inference from their past policies or their present lack of them is a scare
campaign.
They say that anyone who wants to stay on the awards can choose to do so.
But this is not how things work.
And it is not what most nurses will experience.
A huge number of people and a very large number of nurses move into
new jobs every year.
How will these nurses be able to " choose" to stay on an award with penalties
and holiday loadings if such conditions aren't offered as part of the job? After
all, there can't be a choice if the employer doesn't want to offer it. And there
is no effective way a government could insist on this.
In 1994, 1.73 million workers took a job with a new employer, and there were
many nurses among them.
Several hundred thousand of the 1.73 million had just finished higher
education, and there were many nurses in this group.
Around 400,000 were married women returning to the labour force, and many
of them were nurses. 4' 
A large number would be workers including nurses who have moved for
any number of essential reasons. Australians often have to move. It is a
pretty basic necessity, and a pretty basic freedom: attach to it the penalty of
significantly lower wages and less security and that freedom is pretty
seriously compromised.
So how many nurses face a new employer each year and would thus, under a
Coalition government, have no effective choice about keeping penalties,
overtime, holiday loadings and other allowances?
In 1994 the number was 32,387 about 22 per cent of all registered nurses.
In just one year.
10,897 of these nurses were women aged between 25 and 34. That's 31 per
cent of all female registered nurses in this age group.
About 1 in every 3 of this group, and just in the course of one year. This
means that the maeority of nurses would have faced a new employer within
just a few years.
And it's not just the nurses facing a new employer who have things to worry
about with the Coalition.
What's to stop an employer even a Federal government employer from
reducing pay and conditions when nurses' contracts without penalties expire?
What's to stop an employer giving preferred working hours to nurses who are
prepared to take the contract instead of the award?
What's to stop an employer offering promotions to those who are willing
initially to move off the award?
And what's to stop an employer from eventually decreasing pay for workers
on contracts without penalties who will find themselves unable to get back
onto the award?
The answer is, nothing.
In bringing these issues to public attention it must be recognised that what
happens to nurses' pay is not just an issue for nurses.
It is a reflection of what can happen to the majority of Australian workers.
And it is a symbol of the essential differences in the sorts of societies valued
by the Government and the Coalition.
This Government will continue to protect the bargaining position of all
workers. 
The Government, through its Accord commitments, has worked to ensure that
not only is Australia a place of reform, but also a country in which the welfare
of families is assured.
We say that the best way to ensure the income of families, particularly
working families with children, is through the maintenance of the value of
award conditions.
Our opponents have long made it abundantly clear that they do not value the
Accord and the consensual philosophy on which it is built, or the award
wages system which is in many ways its expression.
They are committed to doing away with both.
That puts at risk our social cohesion, the very nature of our society.
This is evident in more fields than industrial relations, of course. But
industrial relations are the most basic of relations the relations of work and
how we conduct them determines the most basic of our needs and the most
basic characteristics of our society.
That is why I say that this industrial relations debate is so important.
It is why I say the Government must win it.
We also have to win on health.
Labors health policy is built on Medicare universal access to quality health
care. Medicare is affordable, simple and accessible. And, unlike many other
countries, we do this while maintaining spending on health at a sustainable
per cent of GDP.
As front line health workers, nurses are the guardians of Medicare. Nurses
ensure that Medicare means quality care that is efficiently and
compassionately delivered.
A recent survey shows that 88 per cent of Australians are satisfied with
Medicare very few government programs ever reach this level of public
support. And a decade ago the figure was only 44 per cent.
The Government is very proud of this, and you should be too. Because the
best policy in the world will flounder without dedicated and skilled people to
put it into place.
So popular is Medicare that John Howard now says that he also is a
supporter of Medicare. 
Just a few years ago he described it as " a great failure"; " an absolute
nightmare"; " a total disaster".
And back in the 1970s he was part of the government team which dismantled
Medibank when that was the name of the national health scheme even
though they had promised the Australian people they would keep it.
This is the same man who was happy to leave 2 million people without any
health insurance.
The same man who voted twice against universal bulkbilling in the Australian
Parliament.
The same man who went to the last election with yet another policy to abolish
Medicare. Some people say I am unfair to disbelieve Howard's change of mind.
I say that for John Howard to support Medicare he would need more than a
change of mind. He would need a change of mind and heart and
fundamental values. He would need a transplant of proportions which are
beyond the reach of both science and credibility.
But more than that, he would need a change of Party.
Because the Liberal Party has never supported public health. They have
never lined up with those who down the years have argued for the right of all
Australians for access to free, public health care.
They went to the last election with a health policy which the AMA described
as " music to the ears".
The ears of the AMA three years ago were pretty well all on the right of
course. They included those attached to the now endorsed Liberal candidate
for the safe seat of Bradfield.
It was reported at the weekend that Mr Nelson is keen to have a say in the
development of the Liberals' health policy. He is also on the record as saying
that bulkbilling should go.
Mind you, he said as recently as May this year, " I don't know what the Liberal
Party's health policy is, and if you do, could you please let me know'. In
doing so, of course, he gave voice to what has become pretty well a national
refrain. But we know that, at its core, the Liberal's health policy will always support
private health over public health.
rC -7N 
And if you doubt this, you only have to look at what the State Liberal
Governments are doing to public health.
Jeff Kennett has cut $ 260 million a year out of public health, and plans to
close two public hospitals in the La Trobe Valley and replace them with a
private hospital.
Dean Brown in South Australia reduced health expenditure by $ 35 million last
year and has plans to cut a further $ 35 million over the next two years and
privatise public hospitals.
Ray Groom in Tasmania has privatised the Mercy Hospital.
And, of course, Richard Court has an agenda for widespread privatisation of
the public health system in Western Australia.
All around the country, Liberal Governments are cutting funding and
privatising hospitals. And, in Victoria, even ambulance services.
If John Howard wants to persuade us that he has changed his mind, that he
does really believe in Medicare, that he does really believe in the public
health system, there is one simple thing he can do for a start.
He can condemn the actions of his colleagues in those conservative State
governments who are slashing public health.
If John Howard wants us to believe that he is going to break with the Liberal
tradition of Medicare bashing a tradition he supported in the Fraser
Government, a position he supported at the last election never was there a
better opportunity to demonstrate it.
He can disown the policies of Jeff Kennett, Dean Brown, Ray Groom and
Richard Court. He can tell them they are wrong.
Over the past two years, the Commonwealth has increased health funding to
the States by about $ 800 million. At the same time, the States have cut more
than $ 700 million from public health. He can tell them to put it back.
But maybe taking a stand for public health sounds too much like taking a
policy position.
It strikes me as strange that the only health policy we have heard from John
Howard is that he intends to give tax incentives to encourage people to take
out private health insurance.
Tax deductions for private health insurance would cost over $ 1 billion.
So he is going to show his support for Medicare, for public health, by giving a
billion dollars to the private health system. 
This is a novel way to show support.
If you want to improve the public health system, why would you give a billion
dollars to the private health system?
Why is he doing this?
Is he doing this because he thinks the private health system needs support?
But over the past five years, there has been an increase in patients using
private hospitals. Admissions to private hospitals as a proportion of total
admissions has also increased, as have the reserves of the private health
insurance industry from $ 991 million in 1991-92 to over $ 1.35 billion now an
increase of 36 per cent.
At the same time, average premiums for private health insurance have
increased by 40 per cent in real terms.
It doesn't sound like the private funds need an injection of $ 1 billion to stay
solvent. He can't be doing this because he thinks that private insurance is more
efficient than Medicare. The administrative costs of private health funds are
11.6 per cent of the benefits paid, compared with only 3.5 per cent for the
Government's Health Insurance Commission.
In fact, a shift to private health insurance would lead to a less efficient and
more costly health system. Overall, health costs are likely to increase
because of higher administrative costs, fewer controls on over-servicing and
the reluctance of private health funds to encourage cost-containment in
private hospitals.
We would end up with more, not fewer, resources being spent on health care.
And you don't have to take my word for it this is the view of respected health
economists such as Jeff Richardson, Richard Scotton, John Deeble, Stephen
Leeder and Kevin Forde.
The evidence could scarcely be clearer. In the United States the introduction
of tax subsidies for private health insurance caused an increased demand for
medical services. It was a major cause of the rapid escalation of medical
costs in the US.
Tax subsidies for health insurance would also assist specialists to raise their
fees. Specialists have made it clear that the existing system holds their fees
down. 
John Howard wants more people to take out private health insurance. But
let's be very clear that this would mean that those families and individuals
who took up private insurance would pay more for health care than they do
today. They would have to pay the difference between the tax subsidy and the cost
of private insurance. And they would have to pay the high cost of gap fees
charged for private hospital care.
His policy is simply cost-shifting. Under the Coalition, the cost of health care
would be shifted from government to the people. Patients would pay more.
And who would get the extra money?
Private hospitals, specialists working in private hospitals and the private
health insurance funds.
The private health system, not the public health system.
In short, the Coalition would deliver neither an efficient nor an equitable
means of solving health care problems. The major beneficiaries of the tax
subsidies would be tax-payers who already have private health insurance
people who we know are more likely to be higher income earners.
The real danger is that a two-tiered health system will develop a rich,
privately funded health system alongside a poor, publicly funded system.
Coalition thinking on health, like their thinking on so much else, betrays a
strange magnetic attraction to the example of the United States. Yet,
America's health system costs nearly twice as much as Australia's and it is
based on sharp distinctions. It treats the well-off privately insured person
very differently from the publicly-insured and uninsured poor people.
As I said in my speech to the nurses in Western Australian, the fundamentals
of health care are not negotiable in the market place the core of the health
system, along with education and other essential human services, resides in
the public sphere. It is the responsibility of communities and governments.
One of the challenges of the public health system is patient waiting lists for
hospital admission.
Our best estimate of the number of patients on waiting lists is between
100,000 and 120,000 at any point in time.
It is not to in any way play down the need to solve this problem to put it in
perspective in fact, only by getting it in perspective will we get the solution
right. -= 7 
There are four million admissions to public hospitals each year in Australia,
about 11,000 a day. So patients on waiting lists make up about 3 per cent of
the total load on the public hospital system. And of the 120,000, 15,000
require surgery within 30 days and 20,000 within a year. These are the
people we have to target.
Many of the other patients are counted on waiting lists because they may at
some later stage need hospitalisation for a condition which does not respond
to other treatments.
I make these points to demonstrate that the solution to waiting lists is not
beyond us. It is within our means. And it lies primarily in the public health
system. It does not lie in giving tax concessions for people to take out private health
insurance. It is folly to think that people who take out private health insurance will only
seek treatment in private hospitals, and thus free up public hospitals. In fact,
many sophisticated procedures are only carried out in public hospitals. And
most people, even Kerry Packer, when involved in an accident or an
emergency, are treated in public hospitals.
Since 1992-93, the Government has provided some $ 88 million additional
funds to the States to reduce waiting times for elective surgery.
The Commonwealth is also funding demonstration models of public hospitals
which have best practice approaches to waiting time management to improve
the delivery of service to patients.
And in this years Budget, the Government provided extra funding to the
States to reduce waiting lists for public patients. Under the new
arrangements, specific targets will be set for waiting times for elective surgery
and for access to accident and emergency care.
We are serious about improving waiting lists. But are the States? Is John
Howard? How serious can the State Governments be about reducing waiting lists if
they cut funding for public hospitals? Jeff Kennett's cut of $ 260 million a year
alone would fund an extra six public hospitals.
How serious can John Howard be about supporting public health if he not
only does not condemn these cuts, but advocates giving $ 1 billion to the
private health system $ 1 billion which would more than pay for the treatment
of all the people on the waiting lists for public hospitals?
I am justified, we are all justified, in disbelieving John Howard's claim to
support public health. 
His record shows he is not to be trusted. He has voted against Medicare, he
has campaigned against Medicare. His Party in government at the State and
Federal level has consistently cut funding for public health.
And his proposal for tax concessions for private health insurance shows he
remains a supporter of private health at the expense of public health.
As I said at the beginning, the two issues of support for public health and
support for the wages and working conditions of nurses are inherently linked.
If you support Medicare, you must support the front line workers who deliver
the care and who make the system work. You cannot expect to maintain a
quality health care system if you do not give fair and just reward to nurses for
their expertise and dedication.
And you cannot expect to be believed when you say you support public
health if in the course of your public life you have done little but oppose it,
and your colleagues in the States are just now busily tearing into it.
Labor built Medicare. We have always believed in the right of all Australians
to free hospital care. We have always supported public health. We have
made the building and maintenance of a great public health system one of
the foundations of a fair society an essential and defining element of
Australia's modern democracy.
And because Australia's nurses are an essential and defining element in this
great equation, we will support you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MPD
SPEECH AT BOX HILL TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, 27 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much for that very generous and enthusiastic welcome. Helen
( Mayor), Tony and Sandy ( Robinson), my parliamentary colleague John
( Thwaites), Kelvin ( Thomson) and any others who may be with us today from the
Victorian Labor Party, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen and boys and
girls. It is great of you to come along and to support Tony and the Party in the battle
for Chisholm and to focus some of the public Issues that are now in the current
debate as the Coalition tries to remake itself.
So much of the last decade of our politics has actually swum around Box Hill.
This was the site of John Howard's ' Little Big Horn' in 1987. This is the place
where he had his last stand and, of course, he went down with that taxation and
health policy of his and as a consequence we have seen Labor win two
subsequent elections. We won 1987 and we won It, really, here in Box Hill in
1987 and, of course, that gave us a chance to win 1990 and 1993 and it has
given the country the chance to grow and change itself and adapt Itself into one
of the fairest societies In the world. That would not have been the case if Mr
Howard's miserable conservative message, which he launched here in Box Hill
In 1987 had of had the support of the Australian public.
But, the thing about the Torries is that they never change. It wouldn't matter
whether it was John Howard in 1987 or John Howard in 1995 or Stanley
Melbourne Bruce In 1921. It wouldn't matter, it Is always the same message.
I have often said and I quote Manning Clarke's words about Australians dividing
themselves into two categories. The enlargers of Australian life and the
punlshers and the straighteners. The people have belief and faith in Australians,
who believe In themselves and know they can do good things together and
enlarge and make the place bigger and greater and better and those who say 
' keep your place, keep your eyes to the ground, be happy with what you have
got, know your place', the punishers and the straighteners. And, of course, Mr
Howard belongs to the punishing and straightening camp and so, of course,
does Mr Kennett.
Nothing has ever changed with them even though nearly one hundred years on
from our Federation, with all the bounty and wealth that the country has, they still
have the same miserable view that they have had right throughout the century
and when, of course, speaking now as we do about industrial relations and
health being two of the principle issues, these are the issues that they have been
on. John Howard is now trying to remake himself. All of the things which he has said
and done throughout his record of public life he is now trying to disown roll
himself up into a very small ball and say ' just look at the Government, don't look
at me and don't dare repeat what I have ever stood for in the past, because if
you do I will call you a liar' and that is what he does. We say of Mr Howard,
' you have always been in favour of cuts to real wages, you have opposed every
wage increase bar one since 1978'. ' Lie' he says ' lie'. So, you have always
been opposed to Medicare? Uie. This is his technique now, to try to paint
himself to be something that he isn't. But we have got to remember that 16 of
the 19 members of his front bench are the same people who put Fightback
together just three years ago. The same people who want to throw the
unemployed off benefits after nine months. The same people who wanted a
GST. The same people who wanted to cut Si10,000 million $ 10 billion out of
government spending and mostly in the social wage. The same people who
wanted young people working for $ 3.00 per hour. Sixteen of the nineteen of
them are still there. The so called new ' group' as he puts it.
He got asked the other day on an Adelaide radio station Mr Howard what do
you think will be the big issue In the next election?' He said and he now has this
Menzian tone about him, he says sagely Well, think the real issue of the next
election is that a new group will come to run Australia. A new group will come to
lead Australia and that Is what, think, the issue is going to be'. Apparently, it is
now on a rotational basis. They have had five turns, it Is now our turn. It is like
when Andrew Peacock was around. Andrew got two turns so he wanted two
turns. I said ' oh, the new group', the new Prime Minister perhaps, John Howard,
he is very new. Or the new Deputy Prime Minister Mr Fischer. Who when asked
on Lateline two weeks ago when quizzed about their lack of policies and asked
by Kerry O'Brien for some definition of what their policy prescription said, he said
I.. we have got a number of policies out there, we have got a policy out there on
the black spots program' he said. That was the first thing he mentioned, the
black spots program on the roads. This was his reason for a change of national
government. And the, of course, we have got the very new Shadow Treasurer 
or the very new Foreign Affairs Minister Mr Downer. So, these are the things
that they are saying.
We are now focussing on their industrial relations policies and we are focussing
on their health policies. Given the battle at the Little Big Horn here in 1987 1 just
thought I would go back and just repeat from a transcript which was done a few
days before the election on 1 June 1987 by Mr Howard on the John Laws
program in Sydney. Mr Laws asked him about whether there would be
reductions coming from for lower personal tax, he said well, they will be very
major reductions. In health, the Medicare system is a total disaster. We will be
proposing changes to Medicare that will amount to its de facto dismantling. We
will put it right apart. The second thing we will do is get rid of the bulk billing
system, it is an absolute rort.' So the questioner Mr Laws says so really what
you are saying is what you will do is take us back to how things were pre-
Medicare?' John Howard says ' As best we can, yes, recognising that in a
society you never go completely back, but I would love to go back.'
You see now, there it Is. But now we are supposed to say ' oh you are a believer
in Medicare are you John?. You are going out there kidding everybody that you
are going to keep it while you want to put $ 1 billion into private health?' And he
says ' yes'. We say ' but look, your record is that you have opposed bulk billing
twice in the Parliament. That in 1993 you actually wanted to dismantle Medicare
as part of the Fightback policy. In 1987 you had these things to say about it.
Really, you are intending, if you get into office, to dismantle Medicare and
twisting the system back to private health.' He says ' lie'.
The thing about politicians, there is a lot of poor commentary in this country
about politicians because some people in the media think that they don't have
convictions. Politicians do have convictions. They have beliefs and mostly you
show me anyone 55 years of age, who has been in public life for 30 years, who
has a long track record of views and I'll show you somebody who is basically
going to stick to their views. Just as I have a conviction about opening this
country up, making it internationally competitive, making it fair and equitable,
making the leap into Asia, giving us an identity, having an Australian republic,
these are things I believe in. I am not going to change. John Howard is not
going to change either, but he expects us to believe that he has had a Paullan
conversion someway between the Fightback election and now. He is now in
favour of Medicare. He is in favour of award wages, he is in favour of all these
when we know, in fact, he is not. It Is like seeing a man in a balaclava crouched
in your rhododendrons with a crowbar and a bag. And you would say ' excuse
me, would I be right in inferring that you have sinister Intentions?' And he says
' liar'. You say ' but look, we have seen your record' and he says ' it is a scare
campaign' to which we are supposed to say ' oh look, I'm terribly sorry I wont
disturb you any further. I'll go off to Bridge for the afternoon'. 
What do they think It is? Do they really think we are that stupid? Do they think
the whole community while he hides his policy is so silly as to accept his bland,
now, support for Medicare? He will tear Medicare to pieces. He will rip it apart.
He will rip public health apart because he has no respect and they never have
had any respect for public health. Much of this election is going to be about the
sort of society we are. The sort of society we have become. The things that we
regard as community norms and we in the Labor Party have always believed
that one of the things which is a community right is public health. The health of
our citizens, the right to treatment, the right to have a healthy existence, that it is
not a right defined by your Income. That is what we believe and we have always
believed In that. They have always believed in private health. They have always
believed In support for doctors. They believe in now kicking another $ 1 billion
into private health through tax rebates which will go to the incomes of specialists
and private hospitals and to private funds.
Yesterday I told the Parliament that private funds have now got $ 1.35 billion in
reserves. Yet, they have stuck up premiums for private health by 40 per cent in
the last year. They have got $ 1.3 billion in reserves, yet John Howard wants to
give them another $ 1 billion by way of tax rebates for private health insurance
where in fact what he should be doing is putting the money into the public health
system. In the last year the Commonwealth has put $ 800 million into the public health
system and the States have taken $ 700 million from it. In Victoria here Jeff
Kennett has taken $ 260 million out of public hospitals. That Is where they stand.
All around the country coalition governments are taking money out of public
health. Does Mr Howard admonish them? Did he say to Jeff Kennett you are
wrong? Did he say to Dean Brown you are wrong? Did he say to Ray Groom
you are wrong? Or to Richard Court? No. He supports all that. Let me just
repeat something he said in that same interview about health. John Laws said to
him you must be fairly happy that Bruce Shephard is the newly elected
President of the AMA in NSW pledge to destroy Medicare?' Howard says Well,
it does, I have a lot of time for Bruce. I think he is a very courageous man, both
in the personal sense and professional sense.' Laws says will the AMA be
better off? Howard yes, I think, the AMA will more aggressively represent the
interests of free enterprise medicine.' What is free enterprise medicine? What is
free enterprise about the health of the community, but this is their view and they
are ripping money out of the system all around the country.
Jeff Kennett is now thinking of privatising the ambulance service. Now, I know
some ambulance officers are here with us today and I heard that story in Ballarat
the day before yesterday. Where somebody died because when they called,
instead of getting a response in eight minutes it took 55 minutes because no one
was there. Is the state of Victoria so lacking in moral fibre and so poor that it 
can't run an ambulance service? Are things so crook that Jeff Kennett has got to
put locks and chains on public toilets on railway stations?
I mean, is that what it has come to under the Liberal Party? I mean, is that what
we are all about in 1995, when the All Ordinaries Index is at 2150? It was under
500 ten years ago a four-fold increase in the wealth of the stock market, a
huge multiples of our national GDP In ten years. And what is it about? Some
sort of miserable, public accountancy view that, you know, we get the books
back into surplus by putting chains on railway station toilets, or privatising the
ambulance service, or in John Howard's case knocking over Medicare and
bulk billing and driving everybody back to private practice to give the specialists
the incomes they think they deserve. I mean, that's what they're about. So,
when John Howard says he supports Medicare, don't believe him. When John
Howard says he is going to keep Medicare, say what you will do John is you will
bust open bulk billing. It will go. The whole notion of public health and universal
access will go if there is a Liberal Government, as sure as I'm standing here it
will go if there is a Liberal government. So, when he does his chameleon act,
and tries to repaint himself, we just need to go back to those quotations on the
John Laws program: " We will be proposing changes to Medicare that amount to
its de-fact dismantling we will pull it right apart. The second thing we will do is
get rid of the bulk billing system it's an absolute rort." So you're really saying
you will take us back? ' Yes. Recognise in society that you never go completely
back, but I would love to go back". And that's where he stands that is what he
has always though. That's how he has always voted, and that's what he will
always do.
Now, the same goes for industrial relations. Industrial relations they are now
saying that we are mis-representing them, that we are liars, and everything else.
And this is the response they have given, and they expect journalists to run it,
and repeat naively ' oh well, the Opposition says they wontt have that that's not
true". We say well hang on, if you have got any guile about you at all? I mean,
is there any scepticism left in journalism in this country? I mean, this is what
they have always done and said why would you think they would change now?
Just simply for the convenience of an election. But what they say on industrial
relations, what we say, is we want a more flexible labour market. We want
enterprise bargaining where people can trade away certain things for greater
beneft, and make the working of the business more flexible, in hours In the sort
of rosters, in some of the penalty rates and overtime rates, but we have an
important element In our policy. We have a thing called the ' no-disadvantage
test". And those agreements have got to go past the arbitration commission,
and they look at them and tick them to see that there is no disadvantage from
the totality of the new package to the employee. So, under our policy you can
have flexibility up, you can flexibility sideways, but you can't have flexibility down.
There is a no-disadvantage test. But the Liberals won't endorse the nodisadvantage
test, because they want cuts in the wages of Australians down. 
They want the last two or three deciles of the income of the labour market to be
subject to reductions. And you can see it here in Victoria, and we have allowed
many State registered unions to register themselves under the Federal
jurisdiction, so as to escape these sorts of individual contracts offered by the
Kennett Government. Now, Jeff Kennett told a business audience at the
Business Council last week when the Federal Ubs get into office, the employees
will have nowhere to go. The employees will have nowhere to go they will be
trapped. Trapped. In other words, his model, has employees running around
trying to get wage justice as the sort of Federal legislation, and the State
legislation, closes in on them. And it really matters, because yesterday on the
ABC, Mr Reith was asked pointedly and repeatedly ubut can you guarantee
that there will be no reductions in the pay of people if they actually agree to an
individual contract in the terms you say?". Arnd he said. " we have always
believed In good wages" etc etc, but the journalist came back and said can you
guarantee that no-one will be worse off? And he said " we will be trying to do
our best in all the circumstances". In other words, no guarantee. Because what
they're about is basically flexibility down. What John Howard has always been
about is cuts to lower and middle income earners.
As if the economy isn't strong enough. I mean, we have had 670,000 job growth
in the last 2.5 years. We have got the profit share and that Is the share of
national income going to profits almost without any historic precedence, in
terms of Its height. Its why the stock market is so buoyant. We have had quite
strong productivity. We have had the lowest level now this year of industrial
disputes since 1940. This year, we had 70 working days lost per. thousand
employees. In John Howard's period of office, it was 590 working days lost per
thousand employees. So. if It's not industrial disputes, and it's not productivity.
and it's not the Inflation rate, its not profits, what Is it? Why do they want to hop
into working class incomes? And it's because they are spiteful and nasty that's
all, But that's all it is. Basically, they are ideologically arraigned against the
great majority of the working community. They want to, basically, push them
down the old punishing and straitening point. And you see, don't take my word
for it read what Reith said yesterday: " Can you guarantee Mr Reith, that
people won't be worse off, " We'll do our best in all the circumstances", he said.
In other words, no guarantee. Now, you can see all of this coming out of this
Issue, and it's what I said earlier what sort of society we are, Because
industrial relations is about more than just pay-rates, and classifications and
awards, it's about the sort of country we are. That sort of basic community right
how you relate to your employer, how your employer relates to you, what sort
of labour market there is, what sort of environment you have at work.
See, John Howard runs around and says 1I have always believed in families'. I
don't know what he thinks the rest of us believe in. I mean, does he think we're
Martians we don't come from families? I mean, the arrogance of him, saying
he always believed in families as if the rest of us don't. To which I say yes, you 
believe in families, but you don't believe in family support. You believe In
families, but you don't believe in decent wages to support families. You believe
in families, but you don't believe in overtime rates. You believe in families, but
you don't believe in penalty rates. You believe in families, but you don't believe
in the holiday leave-loading. You believe In families, but you don't believe in
universal health insurance, and health access. You believe in families, but only
those on the highest incomes you can give a tax-break to they are the families
you believe in.
Now, this is not an academic discussion, or an academic debate let me just
give you some idea about the impact on working people of these sort of policies.
And It is this let's take a typical ambulance officer, who lost the penalties for
night shift and weekend work ambulance officers, of course, work most
weekends, and plenty of nights, so it's bound to matter quite a lot. And it does.
A typical ambulance officer's pay would be reduced by $ 172 a week, even with
the same hours but without the overtime and penalty rates. That's over $ 8000 a
year lost, and that's a lot of income for officers who typically earn around
$ 36,000 a year. And the same Is true of nurses if you take away from nurses
who, of course, have as components of their income overtime, penalties and
holiday leave loadings to mention a few, there will be no compensation for them
if they are lost, and for the average nurse, it will cost around $ 5000 a year. And
this is a typical nurse not a special case. That is, someone who is working in a
typical circumstance, doing typically certain hours of overtime during penalty
periods. So, there's just 2 classifications of people.
But what sort of Government and you can see it In Western Australia under
that vicious legislation there. Now, the Western Australian Government won't
pay the second $ 8 safety net for nurses they won't have an enterprise bargain
with them, and they won't pay them. What sort of shabby Government beats up
on a group of nurses? That won't give them an $ 8 increase to maintain their
wages? So we, in the Commonwealth Government, have joined with the
Australian Nurses Federation in a case before the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission to bring on and make mandatory the payment of the I mean,
that's what they are about. Now, what Reith will tell you and Mr Howard will
say mhlook, you can stay on the award, we're not changing that, we are
giving you that chic" but what they don't tell you is this that each year,
1.7 million Australian workers either enter the labour market from school, or from
university, or women joining the labour market, or come as migrants, or change
jobs 1.73 million people. In 1994, the number of Melbourne people who faced
a new employer was 270,000. The nation, ft was 1.73 million. If you take a
three year period, 42 per cent of Australian workers will have changed jobs
with~ in three years. That's 42 per cent who will never get a choice about staying
on the award, because once they lose the award, they can't get it back.
They then take the contract, or they take nothing. And so there's no choice.
The Liberals say we're givng people choice but there's no choice in that. 
And I gave an example of a woman here in Melbourne who is a librarian, two
weeks ago in Parliament. She was an $ 36,000 a year in her present job, but
wanted to apply for a job as a librarian in a part of Melbourne closer to where
she lived. She put the application in, to find the job now paid $ 19,000. so she
had to stay where she is there's no choice for her. But you see, what happens
is once 2 or 3 years go by, and you have got one business out contracting and
doing work, who have got employees on much diminished wages, and you have
got another business with people on awards, it won't be very long before the 2nd
business Is uncompetitive. So, what will be happening Is they will only take
people on who don't want to go on the awards, and so the whole decay goes into
the system, and the whole underpinning of the award system goes. So, when
Peter Reith says we will give you the choice of staying on the award, say " sure
you will Peter sure you will". And in three years time, half of us will be out
there on individual wage contracts without any protection whatsoever. We will
go back to that master and servant provisions of the British Common Law of the
19th Century.
So, this is the labour market they have in store for the rest of us this is the sort
of way after now a decade of industrial cooperation, with a 3 per cent inflation
rate, with 670,000 job growth, with over 2 million new jobs since 1983, with an
economy performing at nearly twice the rate of economic growth under Labor as
under the Liberals, with a stock market going up by four-fold in value they're
saying well thank you for that cooperation, now we'll tell you what we have
instore for you. You keep your place you get out there in indmdual wage
contract, and you take what the employer offers you. And you say well hang on,
what's wrong with some protections of the awards arnd the safety nets haven't
we struggled for this for a century, and haven't we reasonably operated this
system? And they are just going to go back to the same policies that you would
have seen as I said earlier under the likes of Earl Page of Stanley Melbourne
Bruce or Joe Lyons or any of them they will try to push working people down
And while they are doing it, rip away at one of those fundamentals which is, of
course, protection under the health system and under Medicare.
So this is going to be an important election, just like 1993 was. Now there is a
lot of new wisdom invented particularly by commentators about election results.
They said Labor won the 1993 election because of the GST. That is simply not
true. We won the 1993 election because people had an idea of the sort of
Australia it would become under John Hewson.
You might remember coming up to that campaign I was making a speech in
Brisbane to a Labor audience about the unemployed and we had at the time
unemployment rising not failing. And I said we will never leave the unemployed
behind. We will always put our arm out and bring them up with us. We will bring
them back Into the society. We will deal with the long term unemployed and we
will put a premium on employment and we will bring them along. 
John Howson said in Parliament a week later, " the Prime Minister says he will
put his arm out and pull the unemployed up. When you put your arm out to pull
up the unemployed and the disadvantaged, they will pull you down.'
Now it is that sort of remark and that sort of view that lost the Liberals the 1993
election. The OST was but an example of the panoply of nastles they had ready
for the Australian people, including, of course, destroying the health insurance
system amongst others in the biggest tax switch which would have
disadvantaged low and middle income people. And now, they think, they can
hide that. At least Hewsan had his policies there.
The point I make about John Howard, he is always saying " oh, I am honest
John". I say, well listen, what about this for an idea? I believe that honesty and
credibility in politics can only be about policies. That the nation's entitled to know
from its political leaders where they see the national direction going, where they
see the policy framework being developed.
I mean aren't they at least entitled to know where each of the parties would take
them? What sort of honesty can there be without some integrity in the party
policy processes about telling them? But what he thinks he will do is repaint
himself and camouflage himself and try to slide under the wire at an election and
then bring all the nastles out afterwards.
Now we saw a typical example of this, this week, in the Business Review Weekly
a business magazine. In it Peter Costello, the Shadow Treasurer says he will
introduce something to deal with, what is called, the Vertical Fiscal Imbalance In
the payments between the Commonwealth and the States. What he was saying
was a Coalition Government will introduce a State income tax so that the States
can raise more money, more like the money they spend, rather than relying on
the Commonwealth to give it to them.
This expression Vertical Fiscal Imbalance means it Is a comparison between
what the States spend and what they raise and because there is, they say, a
perceived imbalance because the Commonwealth gives them a lot of the money,
they don't actually raise it, States would behave better if they raised the money.
Therefore, they are better with taxing powers.
Now the Liberals have always believed In fracturing Australia back to the States.
They are always talking about new federalism as if the act of Federation was in
some way an act to buttress the States. The act of Federation In 1901 was the
act of the creation of the nation and, since the war, we have seen the
development of a national economy from the uniform taxing powers that came
under John Curtin and Ben Chifley In the war years, we have developed a
national economy. 
We're 18 million people, we're in a continent, we share a border with nobody,
there is no line of distinction amongst them other than some phoney colonial
lines drawn on a map one hundred odd years ago we are a nation at one.
We are one nation.
There should be basically one national economy. One national Government
running the national economy. One national income tax system. But they say
the problem about that is that the progressive agenda is advanced by Federal
Labor Governments who win office because if they have a national economy and
a bag full of national powers, they will advance the progressive agenda which
is, of course, contrary to the conservative agenda.
So they say the way to stop a Labor Government, federally, doing this is we split
the power back to the States so we give them income taxes and we give them
consumption taxes. We can't do a consumption tax. Every time we put our
head up, we get beaten on that. So we will give the States the right to put a
consumption tax and we will then have six State little economies. So when a
Federal Labor Government comes along in the future, they won't have the
powers they have had in the past to do things like universal health insurance or
the external affairs power for the environment, or any of the other great
redistributive things Labor Governments do. We won't be able to have an
Accord with the trade unions. We won't have wage/ tax trade-offs. We won't
have award superannuation. We will split the power back.
Here we are this week and Costello brazenly is up their saying " we will do
something about Vertical Fiscal Imbalance In our first year of office. 0 The
moment I put a statement out saying notice this, he says ' lars'. And we say well
hang on, here is your quotations. He said " oh, what I meant was only giving
them a fixed share of Commonwealth income.'
But a fixed share of Commonwealth income is still Commonwealth income.
It doesn't touch the Vertical Fiscal Imbalance and it Is that, he sa~ d, he will repair.
He then says he has talked to the States and surprise, surprise or really no
surprise Jeff Kennett comes out this week and says ' the Commonwealth
should have 20 per cent of the tax and the States should have 80 per cent'.
And then he says ' the Commonwealth should have just some core functions
defence, and the currency, and a couple of other things, and that is it". In other
words, the powers should be back with the States and so should the money,
But we say, well hang on Jeffrey you have got the powers now and what are you
doing, you are closing schools, you are closing hospitals. You want the powers
but then you don't want them. You want the power to take the power away and
then you want the income tax. 
Now Peter Costello has said he consulted the conservative States and he did
and he consulted Jeff Kennett, and he consulted Ray Groom, and he has
consulted Dean Brown etc and they agree with him. They want a State income
tax. But the moment we say, by your own words, here it is, they say " lie".
Now I don't know whether they expect the media to just repeat their rebuttals.
But gradually, you know, these things are coming into the public debate and you
see what their real agenda is and it is the same old agenda, isn't it? Income tax
powers for the States, a State consumption tax. And, yesterday, we found that
Access Economics is putting together a study on a State consumption tax for the
conservative States.
A State income tax, State consumption taxes, an industrial relations system that
goes back to individual contracts and no award protections and declines in
wages, private health insurance and support for specialists in private hospitals.
And yet John Howard thinks he is going to get away with repainting himself as
some sort of new-age person who is going to trick the rest of you into believing
that at 55 he has eschewed all the views he has ever had and he is a changed
person. He has had the Paulian conversion on the way to the ballot box.
Well I will just tell you this, There is another -Box Hill coming up for
John Howard. Now he won't have his policy launch here because this is the site
of a Little Big H-orn for him. He won't have another one here, But there is
another Box Hill coming for him and it is coming for him because, for this simple
reason, that he wants to change the community values of Australia. He wants to
change the sort of society we are.
And you saw his defence speech two weeks ago, where he was saying nwe want
security from Asia, not in Asia". I mean indirectly he said, " the region has an
opportunity but at the same time it Is a threat and we really should be cuddling
up to the United Statesu.
You know, it is the same old view. They want to change the society. They want
to change the culture. They want to take one of the fairest and most decent
societies we have developed here and break it and smash it up. They have no
faith in Australians and no belief In the nation as a whole. And that is the thing
I have always held such objection to the Liberals about.
At their core, they don't have the faith in the Australian people. They don't think
we are capable of better things together. They don't believe that there is
goodness in people, that they will do things for their own good spiritedness and
for the national good. They don't believe. Yet they want to govern Australia with
some sort of miserable alien philosophy to the place, that you might have found
in Victorian England In the last gasp of the 19th century, or in the middle of this
century in Australia like Cold War warriors like Sir Robert Menzies you know, 
who regard Asia as a problem, who could only see ourselves cuddling up at
Whitehall or in Washington, who basically want to keep working people in their
place.
Well they are not going to be kept in their place. They are going to find out
about him just like they found out about John Hewson.
The difference between John Hewson to give him his credit he had the
courage to say what he meant he would do. But this character, thinks he can
slip and slide around it and not say it at all.
So this is going to be a fight for Australia's values. This is going to be a
referendum on ideas and ideals and in the big marketplace of those
referendums, John Howard can't escape by having no policies and trying to
camouflage himself.
So I say to the people who have come here today, many of you believing in
these things but particularly some of the industrial representation that is here
today, from the nurses and the ambulance officers and others and just say that
your plight is not falling on deaf ears, that we know what a battle it is, that we
know about the miserable public accountancy of the Kennett's, and the
Stockdale's, and the Howard's, and the Reith's, and the Costello's.
But we won't have a bar of It and when we win the next Federal election and
when we have got them on the grass for 16 years, we will then be in a position
where most of these mares are so imbedded that even doing their worst, they
will never unseat them. Now that Is what the battle is about.
Now in this electorate of Chisholm, we have had a former Deputy Leader of the
Coalition, Michael Wooldridge. Basically he was unknown until he made a few
outrageous remarks about Carmen Lawrence a couple of weeks ago. He does
nothing here. Nobody I have ever spoken to from this electorate knows him or
can remember anything that he has actually done for the community.
Now this is not true of Labor people. We are always of the community. We
believe in the community. We come from the community. That Is what
Tony Robinson will do. He is from the community. He will represent the
community, as Helen Mayer before him, for Labor. And you can't run an
up-beat, up-lifting society with people in the parliamentary parties who don't
believe in things, who don't really represent people, who don't feel the
community views coming through and who try and advance the commonweal
with that belief and faith In Australia and Australians.
Now all of that, I believe, is certainly part and parcel of Tony Robinson's
character and make-up. He will make a first class Member for Chisholm and he 
will help put a Labor Government back there in Canberra because this is one of
the seats we have to win.
So we are not here just beating our gums. We are here about real and genuine
things, about values and ideals that matter and about the shape of Australia as
we approach this exciting period. Never have we been set up like this before.
18 million of us in a continent without a border with anybody, with a chance of
having an environment second to none, in the fastest growing part of the world
the Asia Pacific while we are making our settlement of our participation in the
region. I mean what an exciting prospect and a fair country that has got good values.
I mean to turn all that back now and go back as John Howard said he wants to
do, to go back to the values of the mono-culture, to regard Asia as some alien
place and to start fracturing up Australia Into States, and dividing our community
this is not the way forward for Australia. And the Labor Party, as always, will
fight the good fight for good values, for good ideals and for good things and
I know you will help us do it.
Thank you very much for having me.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW VICTORIAN COLLEGE OF THE
ARTS BUILDINGS, MELBOURNE, 2 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
We hear a lot about economic development and about growth. But when
I come to places like this we just had a little tour through the Art School and
through the Television and Film School and I often think that when a country
gets a chance to reflect upon itself, when one's development is to such a
point that there is actually a premium and a value on reflecting upon yourself
and thinking about the essence of who you are and what you have become
and what you might be, well then I think you are starting to really make it.
That is, it is not all about widgets and making things, or boring holes in the
ground, or growing paddocks full of wheat we can do all those things.
The world is out there making widgets these days, some make them better
than others, some more innovative than others, some more competitive than
others. But in a lot of the countries we compete with, the one thing they are not doing
is they are not doing this and that is, I think, one of the things that marks us
out as a society and why we should always have a premium on the arts which
are about, of course, the mind and the soul and the heart and the things that
are dear to us all. And I have often thought that anyone that has ever had an
emotional connection with the arts could never forsake it, could never leave it
off, never not support it. And we were just reminded, if ever so briefly by
Natalie Christie's rendition of those two Strauss songs, what distilled genius
always means you know the things that are up there with the sublime, that
are just under the subliminal barrier, that haven't quite got through it, but are
so close to doing it that it doesn't matter.
So I thank you very much for the introduction and the songs. I have often
thought that it has always been a great pleasure for people to write songs in
German because it is such a great speaking language and I often think what
I could have done in the House of Representatives with it. It is one of those
things that lends itself to some poetry. Well with English you have got to
really work hard at it. 
But I am very pleased to be here today because we have got Jeffrey making
a nuisance out of himself this morning in the press and in Federal politics you
are always swatting blowflies. I mean you are always trying to blow them,
shake them, off. But I am glad that Dick is here to remind us what an old
fashioned Liberal he is. He has always had his heart in the right place and
his head in the right place and I think we have, all of us, always appreciated
him and the things which Louise said about his role here.
I think that national governments should think about such things as the arts
and culture. Not because it is the thing to do, it is the thing we can't be
without and that in undertakings such as this it takes a long time to build
an institution like the Victorian College of the Arts. It doesn't happen
overnight, it happens with a long gestation, it happens with performance,
it happens with commitment. It takes a long time for something like this to
grow and, therefore, when a national government gets involved with it you
know that if you can basically provide some of that financial and moral
support to an institution which is already up and running, you can actually do
a lot more with it.
So it is more than a pleasure to be involved here, with the Victorian College
of the Arts, and to be engaged with others today in opening these new and
refurbished buildings housing the school of Film and Television, the School of
Art and, of course, the Library and the Student Union.
I mean these things are always about, in the end, assets of the Australian
people and I am very pleased that they are in the State of Victoria, which has
given so much to this country in terms of its art and its artists. And, of course,
so many people famous Australians and famous artists have had their
association and their connections with the VCA and its predecessor schools,
such as Tom Roberts and Fred Williams and Clifton Pugh and
Suzanne Johnston and Gillian Armstrong and Geoff Wright and
Richard Lowenstein just to name a few. So there is a very deep heritage
here and one that I think we should be very solid in supporting.
Now we introduced this Creative Nation statement last year, it was
$ 250 million expenditure on the arts and $ 100 million, I think, of it now has
been spent and that is starting to percolate its way through the Australian arts
community. And we are in the course of establishing the National Academy of Music here
in Melbourne to provide a training centre of excellence in Australia for young
musicians of outstanding talent and I think that is going to be a significant
thing. We have established the Australian Foundation for Culture and Humanities
here in Melbourne with a budget of over $ 6 million for three years with,
as I said, that distinguished Victorian Dick Pratt as its Chair and I know you
know that he has already given $ 3 million himself to it, which must be the
biggest single private donation to the arts in our history, I think. 
But it is not the money so much we appreciate. We appreciate that because
it is about raising private finance. But what we appreciate most about that
gesture is it is not simply a snip from a very large cheque book, but it is rather
the importance and the meaning which it has from somebody who knows how
important the arts are. I think that is appreciated as much as the money
in fact more.
We are funding the Australian Ballet School and through the
Australia Council we are supporting the Australian Ballet which, of course, is
headquartered here in Melbourne as well as the Melbourne Theatre
Company, Circus Oz and the Victorian State Opera. And I am very proud that
the Government has been able to contribute to this development here.
Now, I might just say a couple of things about Jeffrey because I don't want to
leave him out. He has got this ad this morning which, even for Jeffrey, is
quite a nasty little ad. It says ' why is Mr Keating punishing the Victorian arts
community?' And he has got the Victorian College of the Arts, School of Film
and Television, recurrent spending $ 1.3 million; capital spending $ 35 million
and equipment maintenance $ 35 million. That is the spending for 1994/ 95,
but if you take it over the period of the development which is 1991/ 92 to
1993/ 94 we have spent $ 16 million here and this more than favourably
compares with the $ 10 million and not the $ 14 million in Sydney's Australian
Film, Television and Radio School which, of course, was established during
John Gorton's period, way back there.
Jeffrey is playing a very seedy little game here and we don't expect this sort
of thing from Victoria and I think he has been comparing notes with Richard
Court or reading from the Bjelke Petersen style manual. I notice the other
day when I went into Treasury Place that Jeffrey has got his new offices done
up like the Reichstag down the back of the building. He has got flags decked
off it all over the place. His Casino awash with money, I mean his and Ron
and Lloyd's casino, but of course there is no money for the arts. Victoria
spends less money on the arts per capita than any other State. He has got
no money for the arts, no money for public transport, no money to run an
ambulance service, no money for lavatories on railway stations but he keeps
increasing the capacity of the Casino to gather up the earnings of Victorians
and he keeps selling off everything that moves. Every public asset in place,
but he has got no money for the basic amenities of the civilised society. I
often think that these casinos are a tax on the poor and a massive blight on
Australia and this one is a massive blight on Victoria. To cover his
embarrassment about having no money for the arts and no money for this
college because he gave it, basically I think some land and that was not
much, he decides to spend a very large sum of government money to tell
some untruths about the Commonwealth.
The truth about Jeffrey is he is becoming a worried man and he should be.
He runs one of the nastiest ouffits in the country which is nearly as nasty as
Richard Court's. There are a lot of questions being asked about Melbourne
and around Australia about this government and I don't think trying to sell the
Commonwealth short on the arts is a way around the problem. 
I rather like Jeffrey on occasions, but I don't like him today at all. We have
spent $ 18 or $ 19 million here and $ 16 million of it has come from the
Commonwealth. As I said $ 11 million for the new School of Film and
Television and $ 5 million for the refurbishment of the Art School and as well
as those other important cultural identities which have come here, but more
importantly than all of this is that we are developing arts institutions of
substance and of depth and this will stick to Australia like nothing else.
Whenever we get a chance to put some public money into the arts, you've got
now a lot of critics of public commitment to the arts and that is fair enough
and we need some more private funding of the arts, but it still is important, I
think, for a country to put a premium on what it is doing a premium on itself,
on its identity, on its culture and to make that commitment and I think that
every Premier and Prime Minister who have made commitments to the arts in
the past have always understood this and have understood how important it
is. It is why Australia can stamp itself out as a unique country which has got
good values and good belief and why we are, as a civilised country, it is
important for us to focus on these things.
These days all the artistic disciplines of this institution are represented on this
four hectare site in the heart of Melbourne's art precinct, even that is
important. We are in the new building of the School of Film and Television
which in another life was the famous Swinburne Film and Television School.
I was interested to see some of the work just in a very brief visit I had before
coming down here and to know as we know that in a country like ours the
premium is going to be on the ideas we generate on the products we
generate which have got ideas and intellectual content that we are not going
to be in there competing with low labour cost countries on low value added
products or products without value adding, but rather on things which have
got these important artistic and intellectual components to them. I think what
we are seeing is a measure of, you know just walking through the Art School,
just seeing what people have done in-particular sectors whether it be in
landscape, painting or just painting objects or people or situations. It is all a
focus on trying to distil the essence of the country, of ourselves as a people.
These are the things, I think, which will travel. We are an English speaking
country and a large part of the worlds market in entertainment and art is
generated from countries such as Australia and it is one of the things that we
can do well and that is why the Government invested quite a lot of money in
multi media. Moving again as we move from theatre to film, from film now to
multi media and seeing that will generate a lot of creativity because I think the
more we increase the milieu of creativity, however it spins off in whatever
discipline, the greater the critical mass, of course, the better it is for the sort
of things we produce and that we are famous for.
I always think of those people who look at our productivity or GOP per capita
or whatever measure it might be and we do alright in all these things, but
there is never a premium in any of this sort of thing as I said earlier which a
lot of countries do not do and really don't understand and haven't put the
premium on it. 
So, I regard this as being another very solid addition to the capital stock, but
rather the creative stock of our institutions and our country and you have just
got to get such a good feeling about Australia now. Here we are towards the
end of the century, the place is growing strongly, we have licked the scourge
of inflation, we are now on the edge of the fastest growing part of the world,
we are much more confident about who we are now, about our identity, we
are more proud about the country than we have ever been and our children
have an education, by and large, across the board which was not true when
most of us were at school and the sheer capacity to do new things, the
excitement of it is profound. I have never in nearly 30 years of public life
struck a more exciting period than this. These are the things that excitement
is made of.
I have just come away from quaffing down a red wine over on the Southbank,
which is definitely not a Jeffrey creation, it is one of yours and it is just
another measure of the way in which this great city is growing intellectually,
culturally and every other way in the middle of one of the important
international festivals of the world. That is so successful this year too.
Wherever you go in Australia you find this all around the country now. This
burgeoning of intellectual thought, of enjoyment, of pride in our culture and
pushing out the envelope of the things that we might be able to do. This is
what this institution is about and it is a very proud day, I think, for all of those
who have been involved with it. Those who have supported it over the years,
those who have helped it grow, those who have directed it, to know that the
product of it the statistician may not be able to measure, but we all know in
the end it will be a more important measure than almost any other thing the
statistician is able to measure.
Thank you for having me along, to be involved in the declaration, of the
opening of these important buildings.
ends 



rK~)
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
ANNUAL DINNER, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, 2 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am very touched that Peter Reith and John Moore are with us tonight.
I mean yes, Peter said he is close to me, well he is not close on policy.
I mean they get to hear me these days, Mondays and Thursdays.
But Thursday nights I am touched and indeed a third one, Mr Kemp, I am very
touched. They come out to take a few after hours pointers. A bit of
off-the-job training and I don't mind doing a bit of that either.
Well we are in a very interesting period of our economic history. I think
everyone in this room understands that, because it wasn't all that long ago
that Australia faced the long-end point of a very big decline in the terms of
trade. Now that expression always ends up being an economist's expression,
but it basically boils down to something like a ratio of the value of the things
you sell versus the things you buy.
And, of course, in the early post-war years, Australia's terms of trade were
very good. The things we sold were very valuable and the things we
produced were valuable. But the things we bought were fairly cheap and
manufactures, generally, were inexpensive in those days. But raw materials,
food, agricultural products and minerals were expensive. We have seen a
long trend decline in that and it got to its bottom point in 1985-86, the year of
the Banana Republic so-called, and that meant that we were still pursuing a
lifestyle to which we had become accustomed, but without the income which
we had for most of our post-war period.
As a consequence, we were in deep trouble and not only that we had double
digit inflation and we had profits in very bad shape, poor levels of investment,
a regulated and over-valued exchange rate, a sclerotic financial market and,
of course, high tariffs. In short, we were in a very parlous state. 
Now what has happened since is a determined and conscious opening up of
the economy and all of the things which affect our competitiveness are
essentially being put right. The most important price in the economy, the
exchange rate, was set in the market and, as you know, we had a very large
fall in the exchange rate in 1985-86 by 25 per cent.
Now this restored our competitiveness but the trick is to turn a big
depreciation of the dollar into a real depreciation that is, to wash the price
surge and inflation from it and we have done that. And today the Australian
economy is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 1983.
Now, as a consequence, manufacturing exports have doubled, elaborately
transformed exports have tripled and, as you know, manufacturing production
has risen by over a third 35 or 36 per cent. All this, of course, has changed
the nature of Australia and a part of that competitiveness has, of course,
come through the Accord with wages.
Now I want to say some things about this tonight because in the election,
which is going to be held some time in the next six months a little note there
for Andrew Robb, some time in the next six months, Andrew industrial
relations will be an issue and the way in which we run Australia will be an
issue. Now, essentially, what the Government has done with the ACTU has
introduced a consensual model in the way in which the economy is operated.
So we rely not just on budgetary policy, fiscal policy and monetary policy, but
we also rely on the third instrument the Accord and in that instrument,
essentially, we have made a bargain with the unions which is wage restraint
for growth. Wage restraint for employment and throughout the history of the
Accord we have now seen that restraint and we have seen a very large
measure of that growth.
So much so that we have quite phenomenal levels of employment growth in
the period and, of course, we have seen GOP growth average 1.9 per cent
during the period of the last Coalition Government that is a seven year
period, it is a decent chunk of our history 1.9 per cent. The average GOP
growth under this Government is 3.5 per cent.
Now it is nearly double and you show me any economy in the world where the
economy is growing twice what it used to grow and I will show you a much
wealthier one and a better one. Now, of course, that growth has produced
very high rates of employment growth and the employment growth is the thing
which underpins, of course, the industrial cohesion and the egalitarianism.
As a consequence, you get more compliance with the underlying objectives of
the wage restraint and the commonsense.
So, as a consequence of that, in the period 1 976-82 there was less than 1 per
cent employment growth a year. In the period since, we have had between
2 1/ 3 per cent and 3 per cent employment growth over the period. So we 
have got nearly 2 1/ 2 times as much employment, probably just on three
times as much employment. Now you take an economy which has got three
times as much employment and twice as much economic growth and you
have got a very large change. This has produced a quite profound change in
incomes. Household disposable income has risen by 40 per cent since 1983 because
more people in households are in work. And if we look at household income
per capita that is wages, salaries and supplements looking at, also, the
family allowance payments, pensions the works put that through it, we have
had a 21 per cent increase in household disposable income per capita.
That means that all of you out there operating a business, that want people to
buy your products, there is more demand for your products because there
has been real growth in household income and there has been more people
in work.
In 1983, we had a workforce of six million. Today we have got a workforce of
just over eight million, which is a phenomenal increase in growth.
Our workforce is growing about 2 to 2 1/ 2 times the western world average
certainly the average of western Europe and this is what is putting the
buoyancy under the economy and under the sort of markets that you are
living with.
Now, of course, the measure of the wage restraint is the profit growth and the
very lowest profit share in GDP this is the proportion of national income
going to profits the very lowest share was higher than the highest in the
seven years of the last Coalition Government. The highest profit share in that
period was in 1981, which is 15.89 per cent of GDP and the lowest we ever
had was in June 1983 at 15.92 per cent of GDP. In the last few years, of
course, profits are now bumping up against the 1988-89 high which, of
course, has no historic precedence in Australian corporate history.
So, the Accord which is the consensual model, which says you give us growth
and we will give you wage restraint, you give us growth we will give you better
profits, you give us growth and we will therefore give you better investment
and employment, and all of that means that the Australian economy is more
fully employed, people are more prepared to be part of a very large change
and to make the adjustments.
So when the dollar fell out of bed in 1985-86 as it has in many countries
it dropped by 25 per cent, prices come up, the landed cost of imports rise,
that price surge then goes into the economy, then it goes into wages. All of
that was taken out and we turned a massive nominal depreciation of the
exchange rate into a real depreciation. We did what most comparable
countries don't do. They have the big depreciation, then they get the price
surge, then they get the wage surge and the competitive benefit is gone. 
We have captured the competitive benefit and that is why we are now seeing
manufacturing exports growing so strongly and, of course, by lowering the
tariff walls, we are starting to see very strong import competition, productivity
between businesses and a better outcome altogether.
Now this sort of model is something which is now fairly unique in the western
world and people talk about the need for wage flexibility. Now the
United States is often used as a model. People say, well look at the
United States, it is a very flexible labour market, you can go out there and
basically make an individual wage contract, people will take the job,
they'll take whatever basically is on offer and, therefore, you will get a more
flexible economy.
But what the United States has shown is that it has had about one of the
lowest rates of growth in labour productivity in the OECD for decades. In the
United States currently, labour productivity growth is half that being
experienced in Australia. Now that is one number I would like to sink in. That
is, in the so-called most flexible labour market, the ultimate dog-eat-dog
labour market, labour productivity is half that being experienced in Australia
and, of course, you know the United States economy has a speed limit of
2 1/ 2 per cent.
Now everywhere in those big US markets, once that US GDP growth rate
starts going over 2 1/ 2 per cent, the US Federal Reserve starts hitting the
panic button, policy makers start hanging their heads. It generally hovers
around 2 per cent, or under 2 per cent somewhere between 1 1/ 2 per cent
and 2 1/ 2 per cent.
Now we are doing either half that much again, or twice that much.
So it doesn't say very much about their supposed labour flexibility that they
have got a speed limit of 2 1/ 2 per cent. That is outside of the recessions of
1981-82 and 1991, we have been growing now around 4 per cent for most
years. It doesn't say much for the United States economy that where you
have the supposed flexibility of a labour market without safety nets, or without
award structures, that their labour productivity is so low and that their growth
is so constrained.
Now take New Zealand. We hear a lot about New Zealand. My colleagues
here from the Opposition think New Zealand is somewhat of a model for
them. But let me say this about their policy, the Employment Contracts Act of
1991. Since that was introduced, the rate of growth of labour productivity has
been 1 per cent per annum, while Australia's has been 2.5 per cent.
Now there is a strong message, I think, in that and that is get people
interested in running a business more productively and they do a much better
job than putting the whip across their back.
This notion that they are out there and they have got to keep their place and
keep their head down and line up and take what you give them and then they
will just be their most productive selves is, of course, a nonsense. And look 
at some of the countries which have adapted to massive productivity change.
Look at Japan, which had a couple of hundred yen to the dollar, 250 yen to
the dollar, coming down to 88 yen to the dollar, it is now in the
somewhere yen to the dollar. A huge call on that country for productivity
change just to keep its exports going, massive productivity demands.
How did they get it? They got it by bringing the employees into the
productive system. They didn't get it by putting the whip across their back.
Now in this country, we have been able to do that. We are now into a very
big phase of enterprise bargaining, a very big phase. And I met a couple of
people the other day at Tubemakers in South Australia they are producing
extruded plastic pipes and I said how are you going here? And one fellow
said to me, well look to be honest this is the best time of my working life.
He was about 54 or 55. 1 said, is that right? He said, yes, I am earning more
and I have got more time to myself than I have ever had. And he said we got
that out of the last enterprise bargain and then they had a little discussion
around the table.
They said the first one wasn't that good, we didn't know really what to do with
the first one, it was pretty much a reflection of what we had. The second one,
we realised we could actually do a few things that would help the business
and that gave us, you know, a better pay packet. But they said the third one,
the one coming up, that is going to be a beauty because we have got this
idea, that idea, this idea, that idea. They have just put in a new production
line. They were saying how they actually improved the production line, how
some of their ideas had actually made it more productive and how the
management had taken some of their productive ideas on board and in the
third model they think they are really going to hit the jackpot that the
business is going to grow in productivity and the management was just as
optimistic as the people I was speaking to at lunch.
So I think we are starting to get the hang of doing things productively and
cooperatively within a consensual framework and enterprise bargaining, the
movement away from centralised wage fixing, is the key to this.
But, of course, you know that under the Government's policy we say if you
can't get an enterprise bargain, we give you an increase under the safety net
and that you need the safety net to maintain real wages and the purchasing
power that you have.
Now we have a thing called the no disadvantage test. That means you can
trade in things like overtime rates and penalty rates and holiday leave
loadings, but you must come out the other side with something at least as
good as you have now. You can't go backwards.
So under enterprise bargaining we can see that flexibility. Under the safety
net you get the protection and the two together mean that we can have higher
levels of labour productivity, higher levels of profit, higher levels of
investment, higher levels of production and, of course, a better Australian
society. 
Now the coming election will be about, amongst other things, whether that
consensual model stays, whether the Accord model is thrown away and many
people in business today, I think, don't remember what it was like back there
in the 1 970s and the 1 980s. Let me just give you one statistic. In our period
of Government, through strikes, we have lost an average of 70 working days
per thousand. In the period of Government of the Coalition, the seven years
from 1976 to 1983, the average days lost through strikes was 590 per
thousand. Now I haven't got the numbers mixed up there 70 versus 590. Not for one
year or six months, but for an average period of seven years in the case of
the Coalition and 12 years in our case. Now that is what it was like. It was
strikes the norm. There was, essentially, high interest rates to try and hold
down inflation, which held down growth and with it held down profits and held
down production.
So there is no easy choice, there come the next election. If you vote for the
Coalition at the next election you have got to really mean it because it's going
to punch a very big hole in your company accounts. And the reason it is is
because the consensual model is going to go out the door and what will come
in is, essentially, a view about industrial relations which I now think is alien in
Australia and where the central bank is asked, basically, to keep inflation
under control through higher interest rates.
But when it gets the flame-thrower out on inflation, it burns everyone else in
the street as well. I mean we have had now, some of you might have heard
this morning on radio the British Deputy Leader of the Labour Party. We see
a lot of people like Mr Prescott these days coming and saying what are you
doing in Australia that lets you grow at least half as fast, or twice as fast, as
the rest of us with high rates of employment growth and low inflation?
You are doing something here that we are not doing and people come here
now inquiring about it. It is called throughout Europe, now, the Australian
model. A lot of people in North America are interested in it and I think it is
something that I am very proud of. That is we can, together, do something
and when we do things together we are stronger. This is the point. When we
do things together we are better.
Now we want to make that big leap into Asia and consolidate it, we want to
grow those market opportunities out, which we can do, we have got the
products, we have got the intellectual capacity, we have got the R&amp; D, we
have got the innovation and we have got the competitiveness. We have to
keep the whole country signed up to it. Not just part of the country, but the
whole country and that means keeping the executives, and business, and the
boards of management of companies, and the employees, all signed up to the
same view. That is, that we want to be able to while these windows are
open in East Asia particularly, where we are now set so closely to the fastest
growing economies in the world make every post a winner and we want to
drive it. 
Now, of course, that means more than just an Accord. It means product
innovation, it means education and in education the Government has spent,
now, a very large amount of budgetary dollars on the education system.
Ten years ago, only three young people in ten completed secondary school.
This year, it is just under eight in ten.
We have lifted the number of university places from 340,000 to 600,000 this
year and, of course, now we are rapidly building the Cinderella of Australian
education TAFE, vocational education into a system that can sit beside the
universities and that is the thing that will power the businesses along and
make the difference in the sort of products we produce and the sort of access
that we will have to markets around here.
But the other thing we have got to do, we have got to want to be in it.
We can't approach Asia as some sort of a fad, or a fashion. It has got to be
something where we take a view that we are going to be in Asia, involved,
forever and that we want to make our way with these Asian societies and
Asian economies. Now we are making great strides. But we have still got to
consolidate it. We still have to make them believe that we mean it.
Now I was addressing a group of school children in Queensland a week ago
and I said to them look when we came here in 1788 as Europeans, we were
like miners in the field, we pegged the claim, we banged the white peg into
the ground and said we will consolidate the place, we will get it to a critical
mass, we will try and hang on to it. We have been doing that, and we have
been doing that well, since that time.
But the negotiation of our settlement in the neighbourhood is not complete.
Our negotiation with Asia and the terms of our settlement into the
neighbourhood is not done. We are part way through it. It is only 20 years
ago that we had a White Australia Policy. We were very lucky not to be
marginalised then as South Africa was marginalised to its great economic
cost. And it is not a long time ago and memories are not that short.
So people are watching Australia to see with what conviction we want to do
this and how earnestly we want to make the settlement a final one, and it is
why when you talk about the Australian Chamber of Manufactures, or its
constituency, or its product, you are talking about really, amongst other
things, not its role as an import replacer, or as an import competitor, but as an
exporter into these markets. We won't keep the market opportunities unless
we make certain that the political relationships are the right ones. So, this is
another thing where the Government believes that foreign policy and
domestic policy are all the one. That no longer in Australia do we have a
domestic political discussion and then out there as an outrider is foreign
policy, but rather it is all part of the one debate.
When we succeed in this, of course, we will succeed as a country, but the
opportunity we have is manifest and profound. Very few people, 18 million of 
us, very few nations have been given this opportunity. Eighteen million of us
in a continent this large with such bounty, now located amidst the fastest
growing markets in the world, with a good environment and a good social
attitude, a good social view, the view of egalitarianism and a fair go, very
much built into Government policy.
So, whether it is access and equity in health through Medicare or access and
equity in education, or whether it is fair wages and the prospects of doing
innovative things in the work place. Whether it is running the Australian
economy on a consensual model or not. These are all the things which mark
out our maturity and the way in which we can be in quite a special way a
unique country that can do very unique things. Because we have been,
through our history, our origins are European, yet we find ourselves perched
with some of the oldest societies in the world, some of the largest countries in
the world, large old Asian societies. So, they will always look askance at us
until they are absolutely clear that we want to be with them forever, in an
amalgam of co-operation and progress.
The Accord is more than just a deal between the Government and the ACTU.
It is about saying how can we operate as a country, as a community, how
can we do the things we need to do that we must do be competitive, lift our
profits, lift our investment, provide a decent income for people and carry this
model right through the society, through the social wage, through our social
policies, through issues about our identity and into our foreign policy. All the
bits make up the whole, but the whole is a bigger whole than we have ever
had as a society and as a country before.
This, I think, is going to be a fork in the road. You know that saying, I came to
the fork in the road and I took it. Well, there won't be any coming to this fork
in the road and taking it. There will be a very clear choice. It will be one way
or the other. But if the way is to take the view that we don't have faith in our
fellow Australians, that we don't have faith in working people to see
something good in all of this and to do co-operative and clever things, and we
don't have the faith in Australian management to think more cleverly and
more productively, if we don't believe we can do these things together, we
won't. We will go back to a bickering society, that is clawing away at income shares,
that are not at all agreed and where the strife which comes from it will be
manifest again and we will look around for models and while we are looking
we will watch all of the countries around us leave us for dead. That is not
something I think Australians can really endure anymore.
The model we put together is interesting, not just in Australian terms, but in
world terms. It has been going now for nearly 13 years. Not 13 months.
This is not a flash in the pan or an experiment and as I say, we have been
just on doubling the GDP growth on average we had previously, lifting the
profits to levels that have been unprecedented and giving us a rate of
employment growth two or three times what it used to be. 
This is a very strong thing and you know the old saying, when you are good
thing stick to it. The thing, I think, for Australian manufacturing is that it may
be a great irony that it took a Labor Government to give Australia a true
market economy, but that is what has happened, and by knocking the tariff
wall down and by letting you show us how you can compete and adapt and
not just do that, but actually grow your business and your production while
you are doing it and making yourself stronger, really means that that thing
that most of us have always believed, that under stress and competition,
Australians will always answer the call and always do well.
Whether it is in business or commerce or sport or culture or what ever it might
be, but the big call of the last decade has, I hope, changed the Australian
economy forever. And the changes you have made as constituent companies
of the ACM are as much part and parcel of that change as any change made
by the unions and the Accord or any change made by the Government or any
change made by the institutions. We have all been in it. As a consequence
we have got a very remodelled Australian economy and a far more cohesive
and much nicer Australian society as a result.
My message, of course, is a simple one. Don't change horses. I don't know
how many of you are going to rush out of here and think about this and make
your way down to your local polling booth to vote Labor maybe not as many
of you as I would hope. But, the thing is, even if you do support the Coalition,
I know many of you in your hearts, you'll be hoping out there with those
stubby pencils and all the other polling booths that other people don't.
As a consequence, we will keep a co-operative model in this country and we
will know when we have made a change of substance and we will know that
thing, I suppose we have always known, that when we do things together we
are stronger and we are better. That is the thing I want to keep doing.
That is, I'd like to keep things going as they are, and that is to see Australians
understand that something good is being done here and we should think long
and hard about it before we put it asunder.
Thank you very much.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
** Embargoed until 9: 00pm check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN REPUBUICAN MOVEMENT 5TH ANNUAL DINNER,
SYDNEY, 3 NOVEMBER 1995
It is a pleasure to be here, even if it is something of a daunting task to follow
Robert Hughes, and I thank Malcolm Turnbull and the Australian Republican
Movement for inviting me along.
Robert Hughes is an expatriate Australian but a genuine patriot. He maintains
a keen, intelligent and very sympathetic interest in his homeland; he has
written a couple of the great books about Australian art and Australian
history; and by his work and his character a sort of pragmatic Australian
humanist he is a great ambassador for this country.
He is to Australian arts and letters what Lew Hoad was to tennis.
An unselfconscious ambassador for Australia to the world.
And of course he is a republican.
There used to be another kind of Australian expatriate of course the one
who left and from a great distance heaped scorn upon the place. But these
are much less common than they used to be and we are all grateful for that.
We are not alarmed if Peter Carey decides to write his novels in New York
instead of Sydney or Bacchus Marsh. We do not get a fit of the cringes if
our film directors
and actors base themselves in Hollywood, or our painters get themselves a
villa in Tuscany, or our musicians set up camp with the Berlin Philharmonic or
sing with the Scottish National Opera. 
For those of us whose memories extend to the fifties and sixties, this
represents a considerable change of heart. We are much more relaxed about
it.
And rightly. No one really leaves anywhere for good these days. Not in the
way people used to.
In part the change stems from the revolution in global economics and
telecommunications. It is going to be increasingly difficult to be xenophobic
and prosper in the modern world. If you are not open and interacting with
the globe you will not be in the game.
This demands a large measure of tolerance, openness and adaptability; and,
remarkably for those of us who remember the days of insularity and the
mighty cringe, suddenly these things can be said about Australia.
This is a tolerant, open and adaptable society. It is hybrid, eclectic and
infinitely diverse. I hesitate to use such terms in the presence of Robert
Hughes, but Australia does seem to me to have a touch of the post moderns
about it.
That is not to say that it has happened overnight, only that it feels like it.
Nor is it to say that this generation is singularly responsible for the change, in
fact the foundations were laid a long while ago. The roots go down to the
colonial democracies, to the democratic institutions we inherited from Britain,
to the experience of war, to post-war immigration.
It is impossible to overstate the significance of post-war immigration or the
power of good it has done us. Nothing has wrought such a change on the
national consciousness and the national fabric.
And nothing was better calculated to drive away the fear and the prejudice.
It is one of our great national successes, this transformation of Australia into
a tolerant and diverse and outward looking modern society.
Every day a thousand cliches are uttered about it but we really should take
great pride in the achievement, because it proves something about both the
old values of Australia and the new.
And we should passionately defend the principles of tolerance and democracy
on which it is built. 
That is not to say that what has come to be called multiculturalism is beyond
either criticism or the need for reform and adjustment.
And in the past couple of years I have been making this point: what we have
come to call multiculturalism must never become an ideology, or a
bureaucratic citadel of political correctness.
It must never become exclusive or exclusionist. It will self-destruct if it
begins to mistake diversity for the mainstream. Nothing in the agenda of
multiculturalism has ever said, and nor must it ever say, that the culture of
pro-multicultural Australians is to be washed away.
That includes those great institutions and traditions we inherited from Britain,
and those Australians of earlier times adapted and invented.
We are not discarding the old tiles in the social and cultural mosaic, we are
adding to them.
I suspect that the mark of a truly successful multicultural society is less the
degree of diversity than the sense of unity, the sense of oneness.
Diversity is easy to achieve, and we have proved that it can be managed in
ways which are equitable and fair and which preserve social harmony.
The real trick is creating the glue that holds it together. That is probably the
hardest part. It is certainly the crucial part and the part we must be forever
vigilant about.
And it is the part where the republic comes in not as a sufficient condition
for national cohesion and purpose, but a necessary one.
And these are things we need.
We have a huge continent and a small population. There is a a great deal of
cultural diversity within the geographical and occupational spread before you
even get to the ethnic differences. The federation is a loose one.
I don't see these facts of Australian life as a threat to the nation though it is
always worth bearing in mind that we cannot take our nationhood for
granted. Rather I think that in them lies the clue to the sort of country, the sort of
republic, we ought to and can become. 
One that values the diversity of the place and the population; one that is
deeply democratic, egalitarian and tolerant; one that expresses a love for the
land and the best traditions of the people and yet can accommodate the new.
In a sense, this is the other meaning of minimalist. As much as a republic
will set a new direction for Australia and express our hopes for a new sense
of common purpose, it will confirm what is already there.
It will confirm our independence. It will confirm that tolerance and diversity
and our democratic institutions and traditions, It will confirm our belief in
Australia and our love of the land and the environment.
I think that this is the essential beauty of it, the huge opportunity it presents
to us. In a single essentially symbolic act we can confirm both the history
and the contemporary reality of Australia, including our contemporary
ambitions. I include among these our ambition to make women truly equal partners at
every level of our national life; our ambition to give Aboriginal Australians
both justice and opportunity and to make our Aboriginal cultural heritage
secure. And I also include our ambitions in the region and the world. Our ambition to
succeed in becoming a partner and player in the region. Our ambition to
make this a clever and creative country.
And we can do it at a hugely symbolic time at the close of our first century
of nationhood, at the dawn of a new century.
Few other countries have such a chance.
I don't think I need to tell you that I believe it is altogether too good an
opportunity for Australia to let pass.
Now, this seems to me to have certain inescapable consequences for the
Australian Republican Movement and for all those Australians who believe
that our head of state should be an Australian.
It means, perhaps above all, that we talk a good deal less to each other and
a good deal less to Lloyd Waddy and his little band of soldiers and a good
deal more to Australians who remain sceptical, uninterested or, for whatever
reason, vaguely hostile.
It means that the great debate the really great debate should now begin. 
The republic is no longer an abstract idea, it is not something out there in the
never never.
I think Australians should now assume that there will be a referendum on this
question before the year 2000. And I think the debate should be conducted
with this in mind. Australians will soon be asked to decide whether they
want as their head of state the monarch of Great Britain or an Australian.
Now for most of us here all of us is a reasonable guess the issue is
beyond doubt.
I confess I sometimes cannot understand how anyone could fail to see why
Australia should have an Australian head of state.
And I also confess that sometimes, even though I know there are
complexities to resolve and obstacles to overcome, I cannot understand why
anyone should not have faith enough to think that we can overcome them.
Nevertheless, I know and I'm sure all of you know, that there are good
reasons why Australians are cautious and sceptical about this change.
" If it ain't broke, don't fix it" sums it up pretty well. Of course, it's less a
question of being broke than one of obsolescence. If being broke was the
criterion for discarding something most of us would still be getting around by
horse and cart.
What we're talking about here is a trade-in. A trade-up. A new model
called the Republic.
Now, it is possible that events since France began exploding bombs in the
Pacific again have possibly persuaded a lot more Australians that indeed it is
broke. Many Australians, I know, fear the change to a republic. I think their greater
fear should be that we will be left to share a head of state with a country
which may very often in future feel itself obliged to oppose our interests in
this region and the world.
The British Government has made very clear what has been obvious for a
long while that Australia's interests and Britain's interests are often very
different and even fundamentally opposed. 
This was made plain even before John Major declared his outright support for
President Chirac's actions, when Britain stood alone among European nations
in refusing to condemn the French nuclear testing program. Now it is plainer
still. It should come as no surprise to anyone, of course.
I seem to remember making a speech in the presence of Her Majesty The
Queen shortly after I became Prime Minister; and in it saying that just as
Britain had for many years been pursuing her interests in Europe, Australia
was now pursuing Australia's interests in Asia and the Pacific. And drawing
the conclusion that while we saw our heritage as shared, and there was
much else to share in the future, we saw our destiny as distinctly different.
It was entirely unexceptional. I was a little worried I might be accused of
being platitudinous.
But then that closet republican, John Hewson, rushed outside Parliament
House and condemned me for showing too little respect.
We can't be sure at all that Australians everywhere will see in the British
Government's support for the French Government more evidence that it is
silly for us to share a head of state with another country and I stress this,
any other country.
As confirmation that Britain would pursue its best interests regardless of
ours, John Major's action this week approached the brutal. However, the
lesson to be learned from it is not an anti-British one but one about the
inappropriateness of Australia having a head of state who is not one of us.
So how do we proceed?
I think the answer is by persuading our countrymen and women that we can
make the change to an Australian head of state without danger to our
democracy and our federation and without offence to a Queen we hold in
very high regard.
And by resisting the course on which the conservative parties have
embarked, which is to stall the debate and progress towards a republic by
means of a charade called a peoples' convention.
The peoples' convention they talk of has very little to do with genuine debate
and democratic participation, and a great deal to do with political diversions
and procrastination. 
It is about to use an expression attributed to Mr Howard kicking the
republican ball into touch. Mr Howard cannot be relied upon to change his
views on the monarchy: I doubt if there is a more ardent monarchist in the
country. Let me quote to you from an article Alex Mitchell wrote in the Sun Herald on
June this year in which he referred to a discussion he'd had with a person
he described as " a very senior Liberal". He meant John Howard. How would
the Liberal Party respond to the republic he asked him
No worries he replied. We can kick the whole thing into touch by
calling for a peoples' convention, the peoples' convention is a perfect
talking shop. It will keep the issue off the party political agenda and
the election agenda. With the people's convention up and running, the
Liberal Party wouldn't have to say or do anything about the republic.
It would effectively bury the issue for as long as we want it.
Later in the conversation he announced: I am a monarchist. I was
born a monarchist and I will die a monarchist.
Dare I say the rest of Australia need not die with him.
Mr Howard can be relied upon to create smokescreens and confusion. He
has lagged behind the progress of this nation throughout his political career,
and that is what has made him a difficult opponent. The experience of being
forever at odds with the direction of the country, forever trying to catch up,
has made him Australia's foremost spoiler.
We can be sure he will want to slow progress and he will do that by trying to
create as much uncertainty in the public mind as he can. He will try to make
the resolution of this issue appear more difficult than it really is.
But we have got over him before and we can get over him again.
If you ask Mr Howard what his policy is on the republic, what policy he will
give you he will say: " you can be for it and against it". That is, he'd give
you the direction either way.
But what he is really saying is that he himself is against the republic and
effectively, he would make certain there is no chance of a republic.
John Howard says that if there was a referendum for a republic put by a
Government led by him, he personally would be for the monarchy. 
Does anybody in this country seriously believe that where such a referendum
proposal must secure a majority of electors in a majority of States that such a
proposition would have a snowball's chance in hell if the Government of the
day wasn't going flat out for it.
Particularly if the Prime Minister was running on the " no case"
Any Government putting a referendum proposal for a republic would need an
all out national effort an all out political effort.
But to go into such a campaign with the Prime Minister saying that he is
actually against the proposal would be to make a sham of the whole process.
John Howard's shonky republic proposals mean one thing and one thing only
no republicl
A Coalition Government would mean no republic.
There's only one way to an Australian republic and that's with the only Party
which gives real meaning and expression to the great breadth of national
sentiment and identity that is, of course, the Australian Labor Party.
Like all great reforms, the Labor Party will have to carry the weight of this
one too. But to carry it with an Opposition saying that they could be with
you on the same proposal when their purpose is to destroy it is taking
political chicanery too far.
And we will do it by the same means. We will be appealing to the Australian
people who are sceptical and pragmatic but not bad judges and who are not
averse to necessary change.
Mr Howard said the other day that the republic was now " election neutral".
Let me tell you and him it is not. It is alive and well and all his efforts to
neutralise and destroy it, will almost certainly fail.
If we take our argument to the people of Australia and put our case well
and the media of this country allow us to put it well ( and at least on their
editorial pages they do support the republican cause) I am sure the people
will vote for an Australian republic.
We will have to take it well beyond the perception that the republic is for the
well-heeled of Sydney and Melbourne. We will have to dispel any perception
that it is a male and middle class movement without much consequence for
the great majority of Australians. 
And we will have to dispel some of the myths about the Government's
proposals. For instance, it has been alleged that an Australian president
elected by a two-thirds majority of parliament and only removable by the
same means would be able to abuse the powers he or she would possess.
In fact this method of election is much less likely to give us wilful or
whimsical Presidents than a popular election, and Presidents much less likely
to claim a popular mandate for their political or other beliefs.
No President could be elected without bi-partisan support and no President
could be removed without it. As we have said many times, popular election
would mean that a Ninian Stephen or a Zelman Cowen would never become
President of the Republic of Australia.
And as we have also said, the requirement of bi-partisan support would
insure against arbitrary or politically motivated removal of a President.
The Government's proposals have been carefully constructed to avoid the
appointment of Presidents who bring their own political agendas to the office
of the head of state. Serving politicians would be disqualified for
appointment for five years after leaving parliament and for those who
remain in any doubt, I can ensure you that would disqualify me for life.
An Australian head of state would be expressly required to exercise his or her
powers, other than the reserve powers, in accordance with ministerial advice.
And the reserve powers would have to be exercised in accordance with the
Constitutional Conventions.
The Government's proposal provides for a President who performs essentially
the same functions as the Governor-General does now.
Because we will have to answer these and many other questions about the
implications of the move to an Australian head of state, the Government
today released an information kit for distribution throughout the Australian
community. Of course I will leave a few of the kits with you tonight and I hope that they
will be of use in the great campaign that lies ahead of us. 
We will need all the resources of reason and faith that we can muster. Even
with the tide of history and logic running for us we can't expect to be easily
carried ashore. We are going to have to swim. And we are going to have to
expect the occasional attack from jellyfish and stingrays and the odd hold-up
in the seaweed otherwise known as proposals for a peoples' convention.
But the tide is with us and the incentive is certainly there. Drifting is no
longer an option and drowning is simply not on.
It really can and must be done and I urge you all to make the mighty effort it
requires. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF TARGET/ TCFUA DEED OF AGREEMENT,
TARGET RETAIL STORE, MARIBYRNONG, MELBOURNE
3 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
This is a milestone indeed, a landmark deed of co-operation, signed
between a major union and a major retailing organisation. But it is more than
that it is something which is underlining what the whole spirit of co-operation
at the workplace is about, about the consensual model that we have in this
country in operating industrial relations. That is, a model where we believe
that when business and labour come together and decide to run the economy
co-operatively on a consensual basis, better things happen. We end up with
low inflation, more growth, more employment, and a better environment at the
workplace. As you know, we have had I gave some figures yesterday that
this year, we have lost 70 working days per thousand people at
work... . whereas, under John Howard, in 7 years during the period of
Government in which he was Treasurer, they lost 590 working days per
thousand. 590 compared to 70. Of course, in those days, the economy was
strike-prone, there was no co-operation, there was a conflict model. As a
consequence, we're seeing a much more cohesive, industrial scene a more
co-operative workplace, where we have got values of co-operation in the
workplace, of consultation with employers, and, of course, under enterprise
bargaining, a whole different notion of how the economy should run, how
businesses should operate, how the employees can help the businesses be
more productive, and how that extra earnings can be split between profits
and wages.
Now, that's the model that's the Accord model. What our opponents are
about, basically is back to the conflict model. They are basically back to what
they call labour market reform and flexibility, which they really mean flexibility
downwards it means losses in pay and conditions, and that's essentially
what they're about. Now, what this is about is something completely different.
It's about recognising the fact that there are 300,000 home-based workers in
the textile industry, that for every worker that works in the textile industry at
work, there are 14 that work at home. And that's an enormous workforce of 
outworkers away from work and at home. And these are mostly women
mostly women from non-English speaking backgrounds, and most of them are
Asian. And they are set up classically to be exploited by unscrupulous
employers who will use them in the most unscrupulous ways to get work from
them for essentially small change. Now, what this landmark deed of cooperation
is about, is about one very large and important company Target
showing what a good corporate citizen means by writing down what the ethics
of a good employer should be. And I think Target has proved itself to be one
of Australia's best corporate citizens in both the way it's behaved, and in
doing this, it has declared that any exploitation of workers is unacceptable.
And it has told this to its suppliers, so it's saying to suppliers don't supply us
with garments which have been put together with blood money. Don't supply
us with garments which have been put together by usury and exploitation of
women at home.
Now, this is a big statement, and it says much about the ethical issues in the
labour market, and much about the ethics in the way in which the Australian
industrial relations are being transformed. Now, Target worked with the
TCFUA to develop this agreement, and Target has been recognised by the
union as an outwork best practice organisation. And that's going to matter, I
think, in terms of the industrial relations that Target has, because I think the
whole union movement appreciates this sort of sentiment, as does the
Government, and that's why I'm here to mark the event. The execution of the
deed of co-operation between Target and the TCFUA will, I think, be a
watershed. It will help bring outworkers into the mainstream labour market,
into the world of fair wages and decent conditions into the world of social
and economic justice. Now, this is what it means, and it is walking away from
the dog-eat-dog kind of labour market that John Howard and Peter Reith
want. It's walking away from the dog-eat-dog society that Jeff Kennett wants.
It's walking to decency and fairness and equity in the way we live, the way we
relate to one another, and we don't pretend we don't know there's 300,000
people working out there in sub-economic conditions. And we don't pretend
that they're out of sight and out of mind. Rather, we put them up in lights and
say that they are as much a part of the workforce as anybody else, and that
they need to be treated properly.
The Agreement, I think, is in line with the spirit and letter of the Accord, and
it's in line with the motivating ideal which runs like a seam through our
national life, and that is as I often say, reflecting what I in fact find here in
Australia that we are strongest, all of us, when we work together. When we
work together and have regard for one another, we're stronger and we're
better. So, I am very glad that the Government has been able to assist in the
promotion of this agreement and the protection of outworkers. And in
response to a request from the TCFUA, we fronted the National Outworker
Campaign through our workplace reform program, which reached into the
community. Now, John Howard attacks us giving money to unions. You will
often find the Coalition attacking the Government for so-called " giving money
to unions". But part of it is something like this the Workplace Reform
Program, and the National Outworker Information Campaign, which finds out
about the conditions people are working in at home in these circumstances, 
and then tries to find out the truth about their conditions, to educate workers
about their entitlements, and employers about their responsibilities. In other
words, it's money well-spent, and money properly spent.
The result of the campaign was the TCFUA's report " The Hidden Cost of
fashion", which shed considerable light on the vulnerability of workers. Now,
in our Budget of 95-96, the Government announced a new $ 33 million
development package for the TCF industries, which includes funding for a
new Outworker Information Campaign, and research into contracting out in
the clothing sector. And Accord Mark VIII recognises special needs of homebase
workers, and committed the Accord partners including the
Government, of course to work towards ensuring that minimum standards
apply to outworkers as much as to other workers.
Now, can I also say we have acted on the social security front as well.
Employers have been known to force out workers to take the dole illegally,
saying get out there and take the dole, stay at home and make work, and we
will give you something for the piece work at home, in order to drive down
their wage bill. This is the sleaziest kind of exploitation. And they threaten to
expose their employees if they speak out, so that there are a lot of people
particularly women frightened about the fact that they might have been on
the dole, but at the same time earning some piece work income from an
employer. Now, because the situation for outworkers has been so difficult,
and because without special assistance many of them would remain outside
the mainstream, the Government has now amended the social security
legislation to provide an amnesty for affected workers. This means that the
social security debts of outworkers in the clothing and textile industries will be
waived if DSS is advised of undisclosed income between the 1st of
December 1995, and the 31st of May 1996. So, we should say to all those
people out there especially, and in the main, women who might have
picked up the dole, who may have picked up the dole, but who have been
doing piece work for an unscrupulous employer, and even perhaps been
threatened by an unscrupulous employer with being exposed, don't be afraid
any longer. You can tell DSS about it, and you will qualify under the
amnesty. So, we are very proud as a Government to have played a role in
buttressing the protection extended to home-based workers, and I think the
deed of co-operation will be good for Australian workers, and it will be good
for Australia.
It's the sort of thing let me say unambiguously that the Labor Party stands
for. I'm very pleased to see Bob Sercombe and Kelvin Thomson with us
today, our Candidates in the next Federal election. And these are the sort of
values that we stand for. I mean, the Labor Party is a community-based
party. It represents no vested interests it represents just the broad mass of
the people, and these are the things the thing we're doing today is the sort
of the thing that only Labor Governments stand for, that you will never see
from the Tories. I made this point yesterday about Jeff Kennett I mean here,
he is making the run for the bottom line of the Budget, but he never knows
when to stop. He never knows what is important to a civilised society. And
when someone has had a heart attack, or a child is threatened, there should 
be an ambulance there to pick them up. There should be a hospital to
receive them. And getting to the point where we are putting chains on railway
station toilet blocks is about the bottom of the pack. And now, of course,
herding vehicles herding vehicles, funnelling vehicles, siphoning vehicles
into roads which are just a common right.
I mean, there is a thing called the social contract. And the social contract
means that you have the right of free movement, the right to do things. Sure,
we obey the laws of the nation and the state, we're all part of the contract
providing one partner doesn't squeeze it too much. But in Victoria it is being
squeezed too much the social contract is being put under threat. And when
they brazenly stare down the parliament and say things that are not true, Mr
Kennett chides journalists " well, what are you going to do about it?".
Meanwhile, the flags are hanging at 45 degrees outside the Reichstag over
there in Treasury Place. And he's for labour market flexibility, like John
Howard and Peter Reith they're for labour market flexibility. Which means
they will all see the executives taking very strong increases in pay, they all
think they should enjoy a lifestyle to which they have become accustomed.
But they would be very happy to have migrant women, from non-English
speaking backgrounds, working away at home on sub-economic rates of pay
and saying to them if you happen to be on the dole at any stage, we will
threaten you with exposure. I mean, this is the sort of ethic that comes from
the sort of " greed is good" mentality. So, there is something important being
done here today, about the values of this country the ideals of Australia,
about the egalitarianism, about the fairness. And when a big company like
Target stands up, and a big union stands up, and join hands together, in
national terms, it is entirely noteworthy. It's entirely noteworthy, and it is an
important change to the fabric of our society, and the sort of country we have
become, and I hope we will always be. So I'm very happy indeed to formally
present copies of this Deed of Co-operation to Target and the TCFUA for
execution, and with all the hopes and expectations for a better deal for
workers. And can I again extend my very sincere congratulations to John
Irish, to Tony Woolgar, to Brendan Soraghan who have been involved in the
negotiation, to the TCFUA in the broad, to Kevin Boyd as President, and just
say how different, and how nice it is, to be at a function like this, instead of
some grasping, greedy little outfit that wants to rip off ordinary Australian
people to line their pockets and make their corporate earnings just a little bit
bigger. Thank you very much indeed.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
~ PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTE R, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
SIGNING OF COMMONWEALTH LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCORD,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 14 NOVEMBER 1995
I am very pleased to be here to sign the first partnership agreement entered
into by Commonwealth and local governments.
The textbooks commonly refer to local government as the " third" tier of
government. I suppose it might seem a little remote when you're sitting on
Capitol Hill but that description seems much less accurate when you're
driving along a suburban road, or sitting in a local park or using the local
library. Of all the tiers of government local government actually operates closest to
the people. Good local governments keep their communities together and
keep them strong. Local representatives are drawn in a very immediate way
from their communities and because most elective positions are part-time,
the incumbents remain fully engaged in those communities.
Local government is situated directly in the communitys line of sight and
your work is of interest to all the members of the community.
Australia's councils have always served as the forum for local decisionmaking
on local matters. But they are also increasingly significant to our
national life.
In all bu a few areas of Australia's public life, the decisions of local
government and the quality of those decisions help determine our
progress. This is the case with the regeneration of our cities and the redevelopment of
our regions. It is most certainly the case with the protection of our natural
environment. The health of our people and the houses they live in, the
culture in which they participate, their jobs and their standard of livng all
this is touched by the processes of local government-Many of the problems
we face as a natio lie at the 1oca level and so do ft solutions.
29461 
All Australian governments owe a duty to the Australian people and all are
charged with serving the Australian nation. No less than their
Commonwealth, State and Territory counterparts, local governments have a
role in addressing national issues and pursuing national goals.
As local governments become more aware of their national responsibilities,
the federal government is moving to anchor itself more securely in local
communities.
The lesson we can draw from such widely different initiatives as Working
Nation Landcare and Australia Remembers is that national programs work
best at the local level when they are delivered by local people, fuelled by
local energy and informed by local needs.
We realise that in pursuing national priorities, we must make use of the
people and resources on the ground and very often that means local
, tered governments. So a partnership between the Commonwealth and local government is very
worthwhile and long overdue. But like all matches, it required some making.
j on
re In February David Plumridge first mentioned to me the idea of an Accord
; al spurred on, I believe, by the success achieved at your First National
Assembly last November.
081, to I thought it was a very good idea and an excellent means of broadening and
and deepening the relationship between our two levels of government
e way
-time, In the intervening months, the two parties, led by David Plumridge and Brian
Howe, have worked hard to put some flesh-onto the bones of this Accord
and they have succeeded. We will sign a very valuable document today, one
ind which contains some significant undertakings and which will shape our future
working relationship.
At the heart of this Accord is a set of principles shared beliefs sincerely held
ur and shared goals to be sincerely pursued. These include commitments to
social justice and community cohesion, the pursuit of reconciliation with our
indigenous people, recognition of the benefits of cultural diversity and the
need for all governments to pursue micro-economic reform and to protect the
environment. This is an important statement a statement of the principles which guide
ent of Australian government. These principles have not always been the subject of
iral consensus within the Australian polity, so it is worthwhile setting them down
in ink if not in concrete.
-all
blems B# ftiPc= icmposed of morn than finwoLs. Both th-
I murom. i adocal govermwrtitmwedi~ i~ iimudrakg 21) i 47? 
W(
The Commonwealth believes local government should be involved in COAG de
processes and Ministerial Council activities where local government has a a r
legitimate interest, such as a significant statutory responsibility or financial up
commitment. Or
The Commonwealth will consult with local government when its initiatives are thit
likely to impact upon local government, having regard to normal budgetary an,
processes and existing arrangements with State and Territory Governments. If/
And the Commonwealth undertakes to provide funding, within existing anf
resources, for a range of local government initiatives from the Local PC
Government Development Program and to review the financial position of
local government, taking account of such issues as future changes in local W
government functions and responsibilities. de be
So the Accord is good for local government. But it's also good for Australia. we
It folds local affairs into the national mix and draws local government more rer
fully into the mainstream of national life. art
Under the Accord, local government commits to pull its weight in the arena of It v
micro-economic reform, particularly through the implementation of national thE
competition policy, enterprise bargaining, productive diversity and regulatory
reform. Fir
go'
Following on the Report of the Urban Design Task Force, the Commonwealth pei
welcomes local governments willingness to pursue reforms that will improve
the quality of our cities and thus the quality of life of our people. Th
I welcome your commitment to the protection of the environment. The Accord tw(
provides for an integrated approach to planning and development and to Fe
appropriate involvement in areas like waste management, sewerage and
stormwater treatment issues that are crucial if we are to look after our rivers Tland
our coasts. ac, th(
In this Accord, local government signs up to the cause of invigorating
Australian democracy through the creation of an effective citizenship W!,
education program. 191
Th
I know you had Philip Adams speaking to you yesterday and I gather you na
warmly welcomed everything he said about the program called Australia
Consult. Lei ffui-
The government endorsed the program back in June, shortly after I Cc
announiced the Government's preferred model of an Australian Republic. an(
There has been a good deal of debate about the model. I believe it is the
best means of reaching the objective of having an Australian as Australia's W(
Heed of State; Au
I t 
We decided it was the best model after extensive consultations and a great
n COAG deal of hard thinking. We still firmly believe it is the best model. But it is not
has a a model we want to force upon Australians indeed no model can be forced
iancial upon Australians. A republic can't be forced upon Australians.
On the contrary, we want the whole nation to consider the issues. In fact, we
atives are think that the consideration of them will be immensely beneficial to the nation
igetary and to the life of our democracy.
rnments. If Australia Consults serves the purpose of encouraging interest and debate
ng and knowledge of our democratic system and an enlivened sense of national
possibilities and national purpose, it will be an invaluable program.
; ition of
n local We have a chance with the approach of the Centenary of Federation and the
debate about our Head of State and other constitutional arrangements to
become much more familiar with our democracy and ourselves. And I hope
, ustralia. we learn a great deal more than what our shortcomings are. I hope we will be
int more reminded that there is no more robust democracy in the world: indeed, there
are few older democracies and few, if any, more truly democratic.
arena of It will do no harm if through the national debate ahead of us we are reminded
ational that Australia is a very good, and very democratic place to live.
egulatory Finally, by participating in a national system of performance indicators, local
government joins the other two tiers of government in the measurement of
ionwealth performance and progress in the delivery of services.
improve The Commonwealth Local Government Accord is a balanced document,
which will make for a more secure and productive relationship between our
he Accord two levels of government. More than that though, it will make for a better
nd to Federation and a stronger nation.
iand
our rivers The Accord demonstrates how well Australian federalism can work when the
activities of all governments coalesce around national priorities and when
the decisions of all governments are measured against the national interest.
g
a When this Labor Government signed our first Accord with the trade unions in
1983, no one could have predicted the benefits that would flow to Australia.
There is no reason why today's agreement should not similaily advance the
ir you nation over the next decade.
' ralia Let me say in dosing that it has been one of the real pleasures of my time in
this office of Prime Minister to watch the relationship between the
Commonrwealth and Local Government grow into something truly substantial
iblic. and creative.
is the
; tralia's We will all have to drew our own conclusions about the other side of the
Australian political equation who, at this premier event on fth local 2 I 9, 
mi
government calendar, decided that the interests of local government are best
advanced by a deafening policy silence. DPI
If we all rack our brains, perhaps we can think of some reason why we should
be kept in the dark. I must say I can't think of one. If it is a decent policy I
cannot think of any advantage the Government could take from it. If it is not a
decent policy I cannot think why it would be more credible just before an
election than it would be now. The
Let me offer my thanks to those responsible for negotiating this Accord Lim.
ehsep leecaivaellsy bBerhiainnd H aonw eim. pBrerisasniv ree trierecso rfdro omf speurbvliicce l ifaen da t atchhei enveexmt eelenct tion and aM rre I
And to all the local government representatives here today: good luck for the Eproc
future because the work of local councils represents much of the hard work " No
of government. I trust you will return to your communities excited by our D
achievement today and confident in the ability of Australians to work BedF
together for a common cause. Bd
Thank you. Po
A scopc " Bas,
US$]
R Tin mar:
E ~ trad.; Mar'
L and
E Norr
A indu
A dem. Norr
S Furti Mini DPIE
2950 



.9TEL: 2~ No0V. 0: 31 No. 004 P. O. 1/ iiU
L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE MTIA ANNUAL DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, 27 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Graham and Jo ( Kraehe), Bert and Pauline ( Evans),
Bill and Barbara ( Page-Hanify), Senator Robert Hill, Senator Kernot,
distinguished members of the diplomatic community, my ministerial and
parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen.
Well, I did want to follow you immediately, Graham, so I could get back and
get into the tucker and the wine. But you may be a bit weary and I think I'll
have to cheer you up a bit. It was a reasonably cheerful speech, but only
reasonably cheerful and I thought I would say a few things to you that have
occurred to me in recent times about our prospects and where we are.
We are about to go into, sometime next year, an election campaign where
one half of politics will say we are all ruined and the world is about to end and
the other half will say that things have never been rosier. But I think the truth
of the matter is that we are facing a period of substantial prosperity In the
region in which we live and we are in a good position to capture it and to
grow with it.
We have got a number of commentators in Australia now talking about, for
instance, Don Stammer calls it a ' long lasting upswing that will take us
through to at least the year 2000' and, I think, that if you look around the
world particularly in our region, you can see plenty of reasons why that
probably is so. That is apart from the domestic reasons that we have now got
on top of, a lot of the problems here of competitiveness that we have been
growing quite strongly, certainly in OECD terms and that there is no particular
reason why we shouldn't continue to do that. Our cost structure is fine, the
profit share in the economy is very high, the exchange rate provides a
mechanism for competitiveness, we have essentially now endemically low
inflation and, I think, we can keep that there and we are trying now to remedy
the savings imbalance through the public sector in superannuation as you,
Graham, remarked. 
TEL: 28. Nov .95 0: 31 No. 004 F. 02-' 10
2
So, all those elements are in place and I think there are other good signs too.
The Japanese economy is now starling to show some signs of growth again.
I think the so-called bubble of the late 1980s, they are starting to wear their
way through that problem, the Japanese government has just introduced a
very large stimulatory package which will lift domestic demand and lift activity
in that country. The Yen has started to depreciate against the US dollar
which will lift Japanese competitiveness. This gives the breathing space in
terms of their own productivity changes and if that economy starts to lift again
it will have a lot lugging power for Australia.
The US is still bowling along quite well at around 2.5 to 3 per cent or probably
at the moment just over 3 per cent. China is growing more slowly than it was
two years ago, but still at such a speed as to provide a lot of demand in this
part of the world. So, the environment we find ourself in is quite good, even
Europe is starting to pick up now with the German economy knocking up
around 3 per cent and the British economy doing quite well in terms of
growth. So, the scene is really quite an up-beat one in terms of growth and
activity. Given that we have now got a much higher proportion of our product
in exports, there is no reason why that can't make quite a substantial
difference to us.
I think that that presents some real opportunities for us and the Government
is trying to make the most of those opportunities by our trade penetration in
the region and also shifting the pattern of what we are doing here. It is worth
recalling, I think, that a decade ago we were exporting 13 per cent of GDP.
The middle range of the OECD countries is between about 23 and 25 per
cent of GDP. We were lagging way behind. In 1983 we were right at the
bottom of the pack. Since then, of course, we have had a very big change in
opening up our economy and competitiveness so now we have got exports
running at around 22 per cent of GDP. -We are not quite up there at that, if
you like, mid range of the OECD, but we are closing quickly and, of course, 9
per cent of GDP the difference GDP this year is $ 500 billion 9 per cent is
billion, you can just imagine what that current account would look like If
that transition had not occurred. I mean, you would be sitting here In a
comatose. economy, growing at probably 1 to 1.5 per cent a year with high
interest rates holding it down and those who had a quid would keep a quid
and those without it would never get one and there would be a lot losing it.
As a consequence that $ 45 billion in addition to exports a year has
completely transformed the face of the Australian economy and, of course,
elaborately transformed manufactures are now leading the way in terms of
our growth. That is a very, I think, important change and it is also just worth
recalling that you hear a bit of doom saying about our debt and we certainly
have to keep an eye on it. But, 10 years ago 21 per cent of our export
proceeds went to paying our interest. This year it is I11 per cent. So, there
has been a very big transformation in the debt service component of the
Australian current account. You might say ' well, we have got substantial
national debt', we have. Perhaps like the person in the street with a big 
T2EL8:. Nov. 95 0: 31 No. 004 P. 03/ 10
3
mortgage, they have just had a doubling of their income, it certainly makes
you sleep better at night and that is what has happened to us. Our debt
service component has come down immeasurably and we are in better
shape. The other thing that I think is worth saying is that and Graham made a couple
of comments about the primary exports sector, obviously his company is not a
foundation member of AMIC or any of those other bodies, but I am rather
bullish about the terms of trade. The terms of trade have been shifting on
Australia since 1950. In 1950 the things we sold to the world were valuable
and the things we bought were relatively inexpensive. Resources were
expensive and manufactures were cheap and we had, therefore, a very high
standard of living in the post war years. That all changed so we got to those
absolutely depression level terms of trade in 1985/ 86, the period that I talked
about the banana republic and those banana republic terms of trade. That
was probably our low point, but I think we are probably going to see, with a
rise in the Chinese economy, India, South America, Russia, all really joining
the world economy certainly for the first time in the case of China, India and
South America and for Russia the first time since World War 1, 1 think we are
probably going to see an upward pressure on prices and more value
attaching to real things as distinct from manufactured things.
I think the premium that has been on widget making technology, gadgets
which has carried a lot of industrial societies along for quite a long time is
probably going to shift given that most countries are now in the gadget
business, whether they be developing economies like China or new
industrialising economies like Thailand for instance, or ones that now have
the aura of a developed economy such as Singapore, these are all countries
that have enjoyed a premium from technology. But, I think, there is going to
be a swing back to real resources, those finite things which for some reason
or another have fallen in value and, I think, if Australia actually gets the
double with a high value added manufacturing industries and at the same
time a pick up In the terms of trade, we'll start shooting back up that Income
curve which we slipped down between 1950 and the mid 1980s.
So, ther is a lot going on out there, I think, and a lot of countries you
compare us with in the industrialised world don't have the resource base we
have, they don't have the capacity to produce food the way we do, yet at the
same time now with an educated population and a much greater commitment
on the part of industry to produce transformed things we can pick up that
premium and at the same time improve our position on the resources front.
Now, that is a reasonably good outlook I think and the other thing then is our
penetration of these markets. Graham mentioned APEC, let me just say a
couple of things about it. The APEC meeting in Osaka was, of course, a
watershed for the region and for Australia. What it meant was that the Bogor
declaration which proclaimed free trade in the Asia-Pacific by 2010 for
developed countries and 2020 for developing countries was transformed into
an Action Agenda at Osaka which ran to 35 pages which was absolutely firm
TEL 
I' .1L0 J u: 61 No. COU4 F il
4
and solid all the way through in terms of developing that agenda, making a
start in 1997 and putting down a huge down payment on that agenda as the
first round of Uruguay Round commitments, WVTO commitments on the part of
APEC member states. In other words it was not just simply a declaration or
further words, but a very clear commitment on all the member states at Head
of Government level, to actually go down the path of free and open trade and
to do so in a way that also shows the lead in the Uruguay Round.
You could not have believed that such an agreement could have been made
just a couple of years ago. So, this will be not only transforming and
redefining the Asia-Pacific, it will probably lead the world in terms of free
trade given the fact that already 63 per cent of world GDP is in APEC and in
years time 75 per cent of world GDP will be in APEC. Three quarters of
the world's production, half the worlds population and at Head of
Government level we have sat down and hammered that commitment out. In
a structure, I might say, that in a very substantial measure Australia has
invented and dealt itself into. I think those of you who know a bit about the
Government and the way it works know that now no longer is domestic
economic policy and domestic and foreign policy two arms, two separate
arms and two separate areas of Government. But foreign affairs and trade is
as much part of the domestic agenda as any other part of the domestic policy
focus and we tend to try and operate it in a way where one goal serves the
other. Now with' APEC, we have put a body together which I think is going to
change, certainly in the next half century, the political architecture of the
Asia-Pacific, not just the commercial architecture. Because when I was there
recently I came there with Jiang Zemin the Chinese President, having
recently visited South Korea which, of course, would have been unthinkable
at any time since 1949 until now with a Japanese Prime Minister having
visited China, with the Korean President having visited Japan and I think a lot
of this goodwill has come from APEC. The fact that they all meet each other,
know each other and have some confidence of trust in one another means
that these barriers are dropping.
So it has political ramifications as well as trade ramifications and, of course,
we are an integral part of it. It has been, I think, a very key change and one
which Australia should take a fair bit of pride in and I hope more than that a
fair bit of sustenance from because some calculations we have done between
the Industry Commission and a couple of other of the economic intelligence
agencies is that APEC is likely to add about A$ 1 trillion of GOP to the APEC
countries during the period up to about 2015. So this is quite a dramatic
change and, of course, will start to open all that area up.
The reason APEC is working is because it has got a design quality that no
other trade body in the world has. First of all, it is driven by a
Leaders Meeting. It is not a ministerial meeting. It is a H-ead of Government
meeting and that meeting has decided the end-points of the trade
liberalisation. Whereas in that drawn out process of the Uruguay Round,
ILL: 
TEL 26,. 10V 95 0 -1 N'o . CC4 F'. 05/
there were never any end-points. There was only what you could garner from
the person next door and it was all based around the proposition that trade
liberalisation is something we had to do, but we didn't like it very much.
So you had to give something away just to. sort of, get along and to get your
share. Whereas what has happened here is that the APEC leaders have actually
decided that trade liberalisation is a good thing and that they will free up their
markets in goods and services by a certain date and the process will then be
driven towards that by the Leaders Meeting. In other words, it is just
completely different to the Uruguay process altogether and thinking of the
design of APEC and how it might function has been thinking about how we
can really change the whole of the Asia-Pacific, keep East Asia properly
resourced and keep it growing because Graham made the point about these
high growth rates in East Asia. Well if you have got a relatively small
economy, you can grow at 6 or 8 per cent because off a small base you can
get large increments to growth. But you get the Australian economy which is
$ 500 billion and grow it at 4 per cent, there is a $ 20 billion increment to
wealth. That is a large proportion. For instance, it is a third of the size of the
Malaysian economy our growth in one year equals a third of the size of the
Malaysian economy. So just keeping that sort of resourcing up to it is an
enormous challenge.
Now all of this is going to happen, of course, in the Asia-Pacific with China
requiring I mean I have got just a couple of statistics here, Talking about
energy. For instance, East Asia's demand for energy is going to double
every 12 years compared with the world average of every 28 years.
China's growing food needs has an estimated grain shortfall of up to
136 million tonnes annually within 15 years. That is three to six times our
total production of wheat. East Asia's infrastructure requirements for roads
and airports, railways and power stations are likely to exceed $ 2 1/ 2 trillion
over the next decade.
So just keeping that great machine resourced is going to be a great
challenge. In other words, if we want to keep growth in East Asia, and be
part of it,.-we have got to set up the machinery for it to happen. And clearing
the impediments in the road blocks and the logjams out of the system is going
to be an important thing to do to keep it going and that is what APEC is
about. Essentially if we can fuel income growth in East Asia, then we can
participate in it.
Now, fortunately, we have seen a lot of success in this part of the world.
Economies are growing, living standards are rising, people are getting better
opportunities. But this is not so all around the world. Look at Africa, for
instance, Southern Africa, or West Africa. There you have got, you know,
faltering political structures, falling real incomes. It doesn't have to be the
way it is here in East Asia. But keeping East Asia growing, keeping
expectations rising, keeping people happy means keeping income growth
moving, which means keeping resources mobile, which means getting the 
I LL: 2 . Nov U NO . u04 F u6/ I'
6
political will to get all that into place. And that is, essentially, what APEC has
done and which Australia, of course, has shown a substantial role in leading
in its formation and in seeking to support those other people who have given
it impetus such as President Soeharto of Indonesia with his declaration, and
Prime Minister Murayama in Japan. So this is Important.
The other thing that I think you should remember too is that the Government
is also working on putting together, as much as we can, some sort of union
between AFTA the ASEAN Free Trade Area and Australia and
New Zealand, or the CER agreement.
Here we have the opportunity in South East Asia of creating a market of
around $ 1.2 trillion in GDP and about 300 million people as a sub-group of
APEC and we are travelling quite well. The Foreign Minister and I are very
pleased with the progress we have been making to date in the AFTA/ CER
discussion and I think, around the region amongst the ASEAN countres,
there is a willingness to involve Australia and New Zealand in this particular
undertaking and where we help them open their markets up and in so doing
create a better mar'Ket for Australian produce.
So it is not anything other than an optimistic scene, I think, and the fact that
we are well placed here in this fast growing part of the world, that we are
starting to get these structures into place, that our own economy is
competitive, we are 40 per cent more competitive this year than we were in
1983 and that competitiveness is now driving that export growth into
elaborately transformed things in services and, of course, in the big bulk
trade of commodities in minerals and, of course, in agriculture. So I would
like to try and ride that process further and to see where it takes us and that,
of course, in trade. The other things in trade facilitation which Is a way of
clearing away impediments to things like the tax system, foreign investment,
customs harmonisation, all of these other things are very much on the
agenda as well.
Now, I think, that we need to savour how far we have come. Certainly
understand how far we have got to go, but know what the opportunities are
and there-are very few OECD countries like Australia that have either the
growth we have, or the growth opportunities we have and they are very much
there. But, first of all, you have got to want to be in it. You have to want to be In it
the East Asian game. You can't be there as a sideline, or a fad. You have
actually got to want to be in it and you can't straggle out there with loyalties to
Whitehall and to Washington believing that you are going to have all the
doors opened up for you in Kuala Lumpur, or Beijing, or Jakarta if our focus
remains only in the places where we have been before. Those things we
have got to do well too and, I think, we can and we continue to keep
for instance, Britain is the largest foreign investor in Australia, we are the
second largest foreign investor in Britain. We have still got very large
investments from the United States. We still have a great strategic 
TEL: 2 . NOV.-95 0: 31 No. uu4 F'. 07/ iñ
7
partnership with the United States. But we have got to make our way here
too and I believe we can.
Now Graham said earlier, we have had a period of sub~ stantial industrial
peace and he correctly identified the problems of the CPA dispute and
I would just like to say a couple of things about industrial relations.
One is to say that we have had a dramatic decline in industrial disputation in
this country. The Accord has delivered tremendous certainty, I think, to the
labour market. It has been principal amongst the instruments in reducing
inflation and lifting employment. We have had a 26 per cent increase in
employment since 1963, household disposable income has risen by
per cent since 1 983, household disposable income per capita has risen by
21 per cent and real wages have risen by 7 per cent. So there is a very good
scene there in terms of the workforce and that is reflected in the wage
restraint and the commonsense is reflected in a much higher level of profits
and, of course, stronger levels of investment which has been powering our
rate of growth.
We are growing, on average in the period of this Government, just on twice
the rate of growth on average in the period of the last Coalition Government
and that is, in part, because you can run. the economy faster without
crunching it with interest rates because there is an Accord to rely upon in
terms of wages growth.
Now this dispute we have had is, of course, not in the normal course of
enterprise bargaining, or in wage settlement. The dispute was not about the
normal growth we have had in enterprise bargaining which has changed the
labour market, I think, markedly. It was about, amongst other things, this
whole question of choice and, by and large, CRA had run a policy which said
that if you take a contract you are worth more than If you are on an award.
Or put another way, that it will discriminate in favour of contracts against
award employees who get their conditions by collective bargaining.
Now if the Government were to say to the MTIA, or to the Business Council,
or to AMIC, or any other body that our policy will be and the union's with us,
under the Accord that we will pay workers up to $ 10,000 $ 20,000 a year
more if they are unionists, there would be a hew and cry around the country
you would have to put cotton wool in your ears. What has happened here is
exactly that, but the reverse. They're saying that If you're on a contract, you
can have more because you are worth more. Now, that's not about equal pay
for equal work it's about unequal pay for equal work, and it essentially not
about choice at all it's about discrimination. And CRA played that game,
and quite successfully, until they finally put those civil writs on people, and at
that point, they stubbed their toes and the unions reacted against them.
Now, this Government is not about to discriminate In favour of unionists, we
are not about to go around and say that if you are on an award, there should
be a beneficial offer made and indeed, the ACTU for its part, wants only a 
TEL: 28. Nov. 95 0: 31 No. 004 P. 08, i0
level paying field. They want to be able to secure the same wages and
salaries for the same work if somebody is on an award, versus somebody
who is on a contract, and that's what the dispute is about. Now, it's not about
the way forward, it's not about labour market reform, It's not about organising
the workplace, it's not about best practice, it's not about training and
retraining, because if we look through the successes we have had in
enterprise bargaining in Australia which now affects, of course, about twothirds
of all federal award employees.., well, look at the great industrial
companies in Japan, and other big companies around the world who have
made very great changes in productivity levels, these have generally come by
teamwork, team spirit.
( tape break)
And that's why I wasn't at all surprised when the Industrial Commission held
in favour of no discrimination being brooked or tolerated. In a sense, there is
no place for ideology in this. And what, I think, the company is doing
essentially, is taking an ideological view that if you are on a contract, you are
more useful, and therefore, you are worth more. Now, you know that there
has been the Employment Contracts Act in New Zealand since 1991, but I
don't know whether you know that labour productivity has grown by 1 a year
since. And labour productivity in Australia has grown at 2.4% over the same
period. So, I don't think it's the answer to a maidens prayer, though New
Zealand, of course, has set a model which it's comfortable with, and which
can operate its economy. Can I just remind you, too, of the US Labour
Secretary Robert Reich, who not long ago at a European OECD Conference
lamented the absence of flexibility in the US labour market, and the US
economy. This is a country where the model that CRA wants is the vogue
where people are basically on contracts, and Robert Reich said " in the United
States, we have had huge employment, but falling real wages for 16 years.".
The US has a speed limit of 2.5% growth, and whenever it gets over that,
they start pulling it back, and that 2.5% growth you would have thought by
now would have been 4-5% if those who believe in flexibility, coming from
these sorts of industrial arrangements, having seen them operate for so long,
that flexibility would have been there. Well, the flexibility isn't there, the US
is still a much more rigid economy than it ought to be, and taking securing
an army of working poor is doing not very much for flexibility, but it is also
ripping the soul out of US society.
And, you know, I noticed just a little chilling statistic in Time Magazine a week
or so ago, while I was flying up to Japan, saying that gunshots account for
more deaths of young people under 16 in California than road accidents, or
any other category of damage. Now, they're unemployed, they're on the
streets, and no-one cares about them. And that's not what we went here, and
we are not going to have it here.
Now, we're going to have a debate in the election campaign around these
issues. Our Coalition friends are here tonight, and I just want to make this
point to them, and to you to say, the Government doesn't mind an honest 
TEL: 28. Nov .95 0: 31 No .004 P .09/
9
debate on this, our model is enterprise bargaining, collective bargaining.
each business tailoring its productivity seeking to draw from its employees
more efficient work, and sharing the gains between profits and wages. That's
happening I think we are starting to do quite welt with enterprise bargaining,
we have a very large training agenda, we have got an international best
practice agenda sitting there, we have got a safety net which looks after
those people who can't get an increase under the enterprise bargaining
system, and in terms of the contracts, we are saying in that respect, equal
pay for equal work. That's the model we are in. We are saying if you can't
get an enterprise deal, you pick up something under the safety net, but if you
can, you and your employer can actually produce a better business which is
more profitable. There's sense about that there has been a great evolution
in that, and there is, I think, a great deal of sense and respectability about
that.
And if the Coalition believes that it doesn't believe in enterprise bargaining in
this way, that it doesn't have a commitment to collective bargaining, that it
doesn't have a no-disadvantage test, that it doesn't believe the Industrial
Commission has a place in all this, then it should say so. And say why it
believes this. To say why it believes such a system would be better for
Australia. Because if they believe it, presumably, they can argue for it, and
make a case for it. But what we won't be having in the election campaign is a
radical change to the labour market by stealth of one side pretending they
have got the policies of the other side, when in fact, they have a completely
different set of policies altogether. Stabbing the Commission in the stomach,
knocking it out of the system, not having a no-disadvantage test, not
effectively giving people a choice these, I think, are alt the recipes, I believe,
of going back to the conflict model that we all came from in the late 1 9709,
which saw a spurt of wages growth, and then a big fall in real wages
thereafter. The inflation rate knocked into 10-11 investment smashed to
pieces, and rising unemployment. That's the sort of model out there. Or,
there's the model we have had as we gradually get the flexibility in the labour.
market, sector by sector, company by company.
Now, I think we are making the grade. A couple of weeks ago I was at tube
makers in.-Queensland, and I was very impressed by a couple of people a
couple of working fellows I sat down with for lunch, and they were literally
blue-collar people in blue overalls, sitting up there talking about how they had
put the last new line production line into the business, and quite proud of
the little innovations they had brought to it. And 1 said to one how are you
going? And he was about 55 or 56, and he said " look, this is the best I have
ever had it in my working life. The best wages I have ever had, the best
working conditions I have ever had, and more time to myself'. And I said,
" well, you please me no end, telling me that", and he said " no, we're looking
forward to the third round of our enterprise bargaining. The first round, it was
pretty much as what we had. The second round we made some real gains,
and we now think all of us think we can do a great job", and they all said
hear-hear down the table. Now, I think that mood is around, and I think we
can really pull it together and make it work. But I think that if we are going to 
TEL
split people off, and cut their wages, we will not grow the Australian economy
out as a low-wage country. The Australian economy is going to make it by
innovation, by education, by elaborately transformed things. It is also going
to make it by accessing those big markets for the things the raw materials
we produce, and the secondary processing of them. It's not going to make it
by low wages this is not going to be a low wage, low rent society, and nobody
should try and take it there. But if the Coalition want to take it there,
then this will be the issue in the election. That is, one where we will have a
referendum on industrial relations, on wages and conditions. Where we are
not going to see a sea-change of the kind of country we are by stealth.
Because in this country, IR is not just a matter of factory floor wages or
conditions it's about the sort of society we are, how we relate to one
another. Because your income gives you that mobility, it lets you pass
through the barriers, it gives you your standard of living, it looks after your
family, it brings you the human happiness that the political system should
bring. It's part of the fabric of the way we are, of the sort of country we have
become, the sort of society we now are. And this is why we believe it's
central and it is a debate where we can participate with a bit of goodwill and
keep our society together, and God forbid the point where young adolescents
are finding we're losing more of them from gunshot wounds than we are
through road accidents, or drugs, or anything else. That we actually have a
society that actually does care about one another, and where we have some
common values and some cohesion and some real beliefs about the sort of
country we have become.
So, if CRA wants to go out, and run this debate fine. The unions will rise to
the occasion, no doubt, and as a consequence, I don't know whether any of
us are going to be advanced by it. But let's not call it reform call it ideology
by all means, but not reform. So, perhaps I could conclude on this point -I
really think we are in for a long period of growth, after the turn of the century
at least. I see nothing coming in our way any impediments to knock that
around. Our cost structure is in good shape, our fundamental inflation rate is
in good shape, our competitiveness is in good shape, and our strategies
positioning in the Asia Pacific has never been better. Our bilateral
relationships with the countries around us with Indonesia, with Malaysia,
with Singapore, with Thailand, the Philippines, China, Japan have never
been better, We have got huge opportunities there we have got he trade
barriers down, we have got best practice coming in, we now have
international businesses to compare ourselves with, we are in there for the
break we have never, ever had before. We have had these phases In the
past like, we call the golden years of the 60s. But they were golden for
Britain, the United States, Canada, Australia and a few other countries. They
were not like now, where they are golden for the whole of South East Asia, for
the rising income levels of North Asia, for substantial parts of Europe. This is
a period, I think, none of us have lived through one as exciting as this. And
let's not trade it away in gloom. Thank you very much.
ends. 28 Nov .95T0E: L3: 1 2~ N. oN. v00.49 5 P. io'i': 



i L L I
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF ANDREW THEOPHANOUS' BOOK
" UNDERSTANDING MULTICULTURALISM AND AUSTRALIAN IDENTITY",
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 1 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you, very much indeed, William [ Albonj. Could I also
acknowledge the High -Commissioner of Great Britain, other distinguished
members of the diplomatic corps, Mr Rebikoff, Lois O'Donoghue and, of
course, my Parliamentary colleagues, other distinguished guests, Andrew,
and ladies and gentlemen.
Well about this time every year, Andrew has a new book and it has become
at least once In my itinerary/ agenda for the course of the year. I always say
that within the year we had better put a day in, for Andrew will have another
book and I am very happy to be here this morning to launch this one.
It reminds me, I think, of two points. One is that there are people in the
Labor Party the Labor Party is full of people who have all sorts of views
about all sorts of things, are in the business of politics out ot conviction not
convenience and you can see this just in this work, alone, that Andrew has
done, how thoughtful he has been and how he thinks about Australia, thinks
about the way In which it is changing and tries to write down and record and
perhaps lead in the way in which Australian thought has changed and is
changing. So it is a very interesting polemic he has written and the prodigious energy
which he displays with these publications is, of course, quite profound. He is
talking about, of course, the perhaps singular most defining feature of
Australian society today and that is the impact of the post-war migration
program on the cultural identity of the country and it is, we believe, a great
success story. We don't presume it is a model for the rest of the world.
But I think we are an example of a culturally pluralist society that works pretty
well and in this text he is, I think, trying to tell the reader why he thinks it
works well and to say that our whole process is informed by democratic
com monsense. I LL . Nov., j5 23: 24 No. 013 P0'~ 
I EL 0L . N o v. 95 23: 24 NC .
2
is main theme, I think, is that multiculturalism is successful because of the
strength of the nation's oldest values. That is egalitarianism, principally, the
belief that everyone deserves a fair chance or a fair go and our deep-rooted
sense of democracy and our basic tolerance, which comes from it, is the thing
which has given people the psychological space to let multicultural ism work
in a way that we have been able to draw strength from it.
He says that rather than diluting Australia's culture, it has replenished it.
Replenished it around the theme that the place is, essentially, deeply
democratic and tolerant and egalitarian and that the influences of
multiculturalism have, in fact, highlighted, sharpened, and replenished those
Instincts. And that people have brought colour and ambition to Australia and
that has generally supported the tendency we have all had to these
democratic ideals and democratic traditions.
And I think people coming particularly in the early phases from Europe,
who have in the first instance, changed the nature of the culture of Australia
have found when they have come here, particularly rent by two World Wars,
that the opportunities for freedom in Australia where these values are bound
and, also, in the sun because it is always easier, I think, to feel happy and
free in a temperate climate, than one does rugged up under a grey sky.
But the whole notion of you Know, you share in the bounty of the country
whether you are wealthy or not, when you share in the pleasure of its
environment. And, I think, all of that has produced a great view that amongst
migrants and in the community that the multicultural ism that has arisen from it
has truly replenished that which we have had here.
Of course no policy of the Government, or no document, could make
multiculturalism work. That has to come from the community itself. But a
strong Government commitment to multiculturalism is necessary and it is that
commitment which, I think, Andrew rejoices in in the Labor Party and I think
that we enjoy as a Party with people in the community.
Could I also say that in saying that I don't believe that multicultural ism must
ever be allowed to become an Ideological position, a sort of repository of
political correctness, or something beyond criticism. But certain things are
beyond the pale, like a racial basis in discrimination of our immigration
system, or discrimination against migrants in the workplace etc.
But, I think, the theme that the Government has been perhaps touching in the
last couple of years is our general embrace of multiculturalism, but. making
clear that everybody's first loyalty has to be to Australia. That is, within the
bounds of Australian democracy and egalitarianism, the things which Andrew
argues is actually feeding and replenishing our culture, the inspiration of it
has to be always that which the democracy is about. And that is the first
loyalty to the society we have created here and our first loyalty to Australia
and, of course, that Is most obviously expressed in the allegiance which the
Government strongly encourages and that is, of course, taking Australian
citizenship, which we are seeing, I think, as a growing tendency amongst
people who have had permanent resident status. . u16 ' C 
I EL: 30 . Nov 95 23 : 24 N1,3 13 P -05/ 0
3
Andrew's book sets out a narrative on the Government's recent advances
the National Agenda for Multiculturalism, first released in 1989. The National
Multicultural Advisory Council has reviewed the National Agenda for us and
the Government will soon formally respond to their report. The Racial Hatred
Legislation, commitment to access and equity principles, the platform on
which multicultural ism has built itself which is social justice, he refers to this
and he says that the very essence of social justice are the things that hold the
egalitarian notions together. Hence, the underpinnings of multicultural ism
and he goes through some of the elements of it Medicare, education and
training, superannuation for everybody, and in the broader, of course, the
Native Title Legislation which brings into the social justice equation more
obviously, of course, the first Australians.
Now, these are all things which, I think, that we see as a matrix, as threads of
a fabric. That is, it is not just about the Migration Program. It is not just about
a separate cultural identification with the countries of origin of people. But it
is about a bigger thing that they can identity these historic interests with the
new-found, in the case of those who arrived as migrants, freedom and
democracy here which is itself fed by a long egalitarian tradition, which is
itself supported by social justice and social justice policies.
And so while these things might seem to be in the realm of social policy, they
are In fact part of community policy. These are points we often make of our
opponents, wearily, about things such as Medicare, education and training
because education is the great boundary jumper. It is the place where
people skip through the stratumns and when only three children in ten
completed secondary school ten years ago, you can bet that most of the
seven of the ten, of course, represented preponderantly those of lower
incomes and disadvantaged groups.
Now, of course, this year that is eight in ten completing secondary school and
we have had now a 60 per cent addition to tertiary places and an enormous
revolution In vocational education. So that where once only 40 per cent of
people were trained after secondary school 60 per cent cascading into,
essentially, a labour market within which they were not equipped with skills
will have now the great bulk of the community, 90 per cent odd, coming into a
training situation post-secondary training.
And that is not a statement about education, it is a statement about your
society, It is a statement about mobility, it is a statement about the brightest
people being chosen on their abilities from within the education system rather
than their parents income or their parents social position. All of this has, of
course, made it likely that the children of migrants take a greater role in the
society. So, giving people universal protection against sickness which is not a market
matter your well being should not be a matter for the market place
education, training, the right to a decent income in retirement so that the
Commonwealth's tax concessions are equitably drawn down, all of these
things we think In the Labor Party buttress a whole notion of society and
buttress the notion of multiculturalism. 
TEL: 30. Nov. S 23: 4 No. 013 P. v4/ Ut
4
Now, you know, it is rare for me these days in a public address to ever let the
Coalition off and I'm not going to do it today either. I just wanted to say a
couple of things about them because there is a lot to say about them even
though they don't say much, there is still a lot to say about them.
We found something that goes to this subject. It is a report which Senator
Short the Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs had
commissioned by Mr Zachary Wilks of the University of Michigan. The
document is entitled ' Building Australia's Future. An Evaluation of Settlement
Services Prepared for the Office of Senator Jim Short, Shadow Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs'. In his covering letter to select migrant and
ethnic groups Senator Short states that this paper " is Mr Wilks' personal view
and does not represent a Coalition position." However, it is a document that
makes clear it is a research document prepared for, by and with the active
co-operation of Senator Short and his office and it carries hence his
imprimatur, It has been distributed officially by him at public expense. It says
" The Coalition is currently reviewing several important matters in the areas of
multicultural affairs and settlement services I would appreciate hearing
from you on the topics identified",
Should the Coalition win the next election, I'm sure this officially sanctioned
circulated paper would no doubt be used by a Howard government as some
sort of mandate for adopting the radical changes it recommends. I'll give you
a little taste of just a couple of pieces of it.
It says all business and skilled entrants including concessional family
entrants who are in a skill assessed class should be required to have English
as a precondition of entry. Without English ability their skills or business
acumen are virtually worthless in and to Australia Well, of course, bad
luck for Peter Abeles and Frank Lowy and Frank Belgiorno-Nettis. They
wouldn't have made the grade on that basis.
Then it goes on if they do not attend the courses or obtain English
elsewhere then they should be denied access to welfare benefits. In the
future their sponsors should bear their living costs In other words, If they
don't attend courses and are trained proficiently in English they shouldn't get
welfare benefits and their sponsors should be reminded they will have to
carry the costs.
It is so friendly. And it goes on to say this migrants without English ability
including humanitarian and refugee entrants in particular should be required
to undertake English language courses as a priority for settlement. They
should continue to receive financial assistance while they are undertaking
these courses. However, if they fail to attend class or drop out prematurely,
they should not be eligible for future unemployment assistance unless they
have obtained English either through the courses or elsewhere It is a
hard world Mr Howard has in mind for the rest of us.
1 wish Margaret Thatcher had come to Canberra recently. She could have
endorsed Johnny as well as Jeff. She would have endorsed this for sure. 
7u Nov 1j:* 1-4 No 013 F U , U t
if all else fails the Government may have to look at more prescriptive
methods to ensure migrants obtain sufficient English skills so they can fully
participate in society and are not at risk or impost to either themselves or the
community. Such a proposal could involve proficiency certificates that would
be awarded by accredited English programs and presented when applying for
a job Here Is a little rub employers who fail to check for the certificates
could be made subject to fines You see, all those nasty employers out
there employing people who don't speak fluent English.
Anyway, it goes on, there is pages and pages of it. I won't bore you with it. It
is just typical of the Coalition's snaky approach to multicultural ism. One of
the things I have said to Alexander Downer was multicultural ism is more than
heading for the nearest Chinese restaurant. It Is more than chasing a
meatball around a plate with a pair of chop sticks which is what he did on his
foray to a Chinese restaurant in my electorate.
In the Labor Party, of course, proficiency with chop sticks comes at the age of
16. In the Liberal Party it comes at about 42 or 43 years of age, but by then
the capacity for dexterity is long past. So, they never quite make it, there is
certainly no accreditation in their youth. But, I don't know whether these
things have ever occurred to our friends in the Coalition. At any rate, they
don't have a view that we have, that the thing that multiculturalism has done
has been to enlarge Australia, to make it bigger and to make it better, to
make it more interesting, to make it more resilient and to do, as Andrew has
suggested, replenish those basic instincts of egalitarianism and democracy.
In that sense, as people live their lives here, as their children grow up here,
the culture of Australia has changed to a newer identity. But one which is
uniquely Australian is that which some of the rest of us might have identified
or 40 or 50 years ago and indeed given our place in the world, our
proximity to large, old societies like Indonesia, very old societies like Papua
New Guinea and our proximity also to the fastest growing markets in the
world. The change to Australia is one that in our cultural diversity is not just a
social strength, but a strength in approaching these markets and being part of
the community and region in a way we might not have conceived before.
I have made the point and Andrew makes it well here, that you can't ever
really be thinking about a society at peace with itself, comfortable with the
changing nature of its culture and its identity without, of course,
understanding that the people who must feel comfortable in this are our
Indigenes. It is going to take a long time before the Australian indigenes feel
comfortable with Australia, the way it is now, but I think we have made as
strong a renewal of our efforts to that as perhaps any government has,
certainly in recent years and we are going to keep that commitment up.
But, you can't say that the place is open and fair and democratic if one
Important and key section is excluded from opportunity or where the barriers
to participation are too great. 
TE L 110. Nov. 95 ~$ 24 No. C01J. 3 . CxO/':
6
So, that is why that happy mix of social policy runs with the whole current of
our society and it is why too, with a republic that in renouncing a European
monarch as our head of state, we would have made that affirmation of the
way in which we have changed and to say to all the people who have joined
us that they are more likely to be and more welcome in being an integral part
of society which they volunteered to belong to.
I think we in the Party owe Andrew a debt for getting this down because
debates come and go and the plasma of the debates exist at the time but
then they disappear and you try to remember what debates were like
years ago or 20 years ago and you can remember the highlights, but you
don't remember the flux and I think what this text does is put that down. It
puts all of the issues down, it gives us the threads of the debate and records
this quite distinctive, defining change in our history. For that we thank
Andrew and it is therefore with great pleasure that I officially launch his text.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR MR YITZHAK RABIN,
CENTRAL SYNAGOGUE, BONDI JUNCTION, 3 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well Dr Oystragh, Ambassador, Consul-General, Rabbi Franklin, Rabbi Wolff, Rabbi
Ingram, my Parliamentary colleague, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much indeed for paying me the honour of asking me to come on
this occasion to remember Yitzhak Rabin and to remember what a significant life he
had, and to recall the very great things he did for the Jewish people and for the
State of Israel.
I had never met him. He is one of the people when one goes through life and you
often think I would like to meet this person. He was one of the people I would have
liked to have met. But I never, ever, had the opportunity.
But I always admired, obviously, his physical courage, his courage as a soldier and
a politician and remember well some of the things which have already been said
about his work, about his role in 1948 and in 1967, and how much and how
important he was to the people of Israel and to the State of Israel.
I think people came to his funeral to pay tribute to his courage and to underline how
important his work had been. And his courage was not simply the courage of a
soldier, but the courage of a politician in the sense that he understood that, in a
democracy, people need to feel the community, they need the plasma of
democracy, they need the pulse of community and community opinion and one
ceases to be, in a sense, a democrat if one is removed from them. So one always
had the sense of the accessibility that he gave to the people of Israel and,
of course, the attendant risks which he took and the courage which, of course, he
showed. The security of Israel and the survival of Israel was, of course, the one thing running
through his whole life. But that he had the flexibility to see that that aim could be
achieved by other than the policy he had formerly adopted was the mark, perhaps,
of his greatest strength.
That he understood that while Israel could be defended in a military way, it couldn't
be defended permanently in a military way and that to make it secure, one had to
gamner the support of the surrounding nations and peoples, and to do it on the basis
of friendship and to do it with magnanimity. And, I think, having dedicated his life to
its security and its survival, he saw peace as the way in which that aim would be
secured and the magnanimity of the peace process was important to securing the
peace. 
And I was very moved by similar thoughts that Shimon Peres had to say when
I visited him, saying that he would dedicate himself to this process, that he would
put his Government on it and that it was more important than the Government itself.
And that, were they not to succeed in this, then the security of Israel which Yitzhak
Rabin and he, Shimon Peres, had dreamed of may allude them.
And one had the impression, just in a short visit to Jerusalem seeing the young
people particularly the young people with the peace signs all over the city was
very moving indeed. And I thought that that sense that the community had to
embrace peace not just at the political level, but right down through the society, was
very much in evidence during the period I was there.
I was also struck by the informality of the funeral. A funeral without pageantry. One
which was, again, accessible and wasn't distant from the people and in my view it
underlined, again, the democratic tenor of Israel and the sense of democracy of the
place that the funeral was as it was without pomp, without an overbearing
ceremony and accessible to all the people. And, I think, that the shock and the loss
was borne, in a sense, by the dignity which has come to Israel's democracy and
those who are participating in it.
SO, I think, we one month later think about this very great man and we know what
he has done for Israel and we know what he was doing with a very intricate and
precise process of peace. In, first of all, building the confidence within his former
opponents, building the confidence so they could be confident enough to move from
the political to the constitutional to the administrative to be able to actually operate
an authority, to be able to operate a system of civil government and to invest that
importance in them and, in so doing, lift them up so that the peace process could
actually be accomplished.
This takes a great understanding of human nature, a great understanding of one's
opponent. But a very great understanding of one's objectives and I think
Yitzhak Rabin, obviously, had these things.
I can only wish Shimon Peres well in this, as we all do. And in watching him pursue
the peace process, with I think a renewed vigour from the people of Israel, and in
the securing of it, we will do more than anything we can say tonight, or elsewhere,
to remember Yitzhak Rabin and to pay tribute to his life and to his work and to his
strength and, in that way, to see his dream come true.
I appreciated very much the invitation to the funeral. I appreciated the fact I could
even be there. But his life mattered too much not to be there. That is why I went
and that is why I am here tonight.
ends 



6
I/ i
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE AREA CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE CHAIRS
NATIONAL CONFERENCE, HOTEL INTERCONTINENTAL, SYDNEY,
4 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you, Monique ( Aho], Simon ( Crean], my colleague, Derek Volker,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Well we appreciate very much you coming together. But, more particularly,
for giving us support over the course of the last year in doing what, I think, is
a new thing for Australia. That is, a partnership between the Government
and business in focussing on the labour market and particularly on the long
term unemployed.
One of the things, I think, we have always believed well we like to believe
certainly it is one of our characteristics, is that sense of fairness and
egalitarianism which I know you all share and I think most Australians share.
And there was no way that we can continue to lay claim to those qualities if a
large proportion of the workforce were denied opportunities to take their
place in society and to enjoy the things the-rest of us have been able to enjoy
and to share in the opportunities and the bounty of Australia.
And the difficulties of unemployment and longterm unemployment have been
pretty obvious for quite a long time and even in the 1 980s where we had
spectacular rates of employment growth, we could never get unemployment
below about 6 1/ 2 per cent because we could never get down into the people
who had already lost their place in the labour market. And I think we always
need to keep a sort of mind's eye picture of the labour market of people
coming into the pool, perhaps staying there a few weeks or a few months,
and then going out to employment. And the fact that some people in the pool
are there a very long time and they drift to the bottom of that labour market
and when we get strong employment, there is not enough pulling power from
the employment to tug the new entrants along and to pull them out of
longterm unemployment.
So you find we have this pattern of those who join the labour market are the
school leavers, women moving into the labour market often rejoining it, or 
for the first time migrants. * Aiid so even in an economy which is growing as
strongly as this one has where we have had employment growth of around 3
1/ 2 per cent to 4 per cent it is taking up the new entrants and it is taking
down unemployment. But it is not necessarily getting to the longterm
unemployed and for all the reasons that Monique mentioned a few moments
ago, people lose their self esteem, they lose their sense of importance and
their sense of self worth and, after a while, they are psychologically not really
prepared to apply for jobs or even were they lucky to snare one are they in
the right sort of shape to make a contribution to hang onto one.
So the challenge has been for us to deal with the longterm unemployed as
well as the raw demands of employment. Now I am very happy with the rate
of growth we have been getting in employment growth. We had the largest
fall in unemployment in the last 12 months we have ever had. But even so,
8 1/ 2 per cent unemployment is too high and you can see that even with the
economy growing somewhere between 6 per cent and 4 per cent in the last
few years, in fact we have had 17 quarters of consecutive growth. This is the
longest growth phase in Australia since the war. We have never had 17
consecutive quarters of growth since the Second World War and yet we have
still got unemployment with an eight in front of it.
Now our target is to get to unemployment of 5 per cent by the turn of the
century, which means as we continue with employment growth and we get
towards that 6 1/ 2 per cent we had in the late 80s this time with Working
Nation in place we ought to be able to go down further through the
arrangements we have in place with you and people like you, in the Area
Consultative Committees, and with employers across the country to focus on
the longterm unemployed so that we can actually get down to that group that
we weren't able to get to in the 1980s.
Now since Working Nation was introduced, we have had a 25 per cent fall in
longterm unemployed. And, I think, even after the end of the 80s with that
huge period of employment growth, we only reduced longterm unemployment
by something like 8 per cent or 9 per cent. So this is a huge improvement
and it couples in with what we are trying to do in education and training
generally. This morning I was out at the Canterbury-Bankstown Leagues Club, talking to
the Southern Sydney and South West Area Consultative Committees, and I
was making the point there about education and how education and training
are the bridges to better opportunities for everybody. It allows people to
crack through the barriers economic, social, however they perceive them
and find the opportunities for themselves.
Now a decade ago, only three young people in ten completed secondary
school. This year it is eight in ten and a decade ago we were putting 40 per
cent of young people through university and we are still putting 40 per cent
through, which has meant with a massive increase in participation and
completion rates in secondary school we have had a huge addition to the 
stock of tertiary places. We" -have 66ne from 325,000 university places in
1985 to over 600,000 this year.
So we have got that 40 per cent coming through. But, of course, in a much
fairer sample because so many more young people are completing Years 11
and 12 and going on. But we also had the problem of that other 60 per cent
cascading into very little training and in a country that wants to be
technological clever and innovative there is no way you can talk about a
clever country for a start, if only three in ten young people completed
secondary school, and even if we get to eight in ten as we are now, if we
can't get a higher proportion of them trained, we are not going to make the
grade in terms of their expectations and opportunities and our own for the
country. So we are doing two things. We are building a tertiary education system of
quality and we have had a big revolution in tertiary education and we are still
working our way through that. We have now expanded it. We have now got
to continue to lift the quality on that so we don't get lower common
denominator effects and now out into vocational education in the One Nation
statement of 1992, we put together the Australian National Training Authority,
which for the first time is putting together a national TAFE system, with
national accreditation. Now this was a big effort.
Joan Kimer is with us today. She was Premier then and I owe her a great
debt in supporting that initiative and we brought the other States to it. Wayne
Goss was ANTA is now based in Brisbane and he was, if you like, one of
the founding Premiers in it and the impact of it has been, I think, already
rather profound. And we are going to build a national vocational education
system and with it appropriate certification so that the standing of somebody
with a certificate from TAFE or ANTA across the country will be able to find
recognition as they find for a tertiary degree.
Now all of this, of course, fits the story of training and in Working Nation we
focussed on the longterm unemployed through this novel thing of a Job
Compact, where we say after you have been unemployed 12 months or more
we will give you a Case Manager, who then manages you and that person will
manage around 30 people and get to know you, your educational
attainments, your work experience, your aptitude, your family situation and
has the option of giving you a job subsidy and getting that person placed into
a job. But the essence of the Compact is they must take the job.
Now through that device we have had a lot of success in bringing longterm
unemployment down and that, in part, also means bringing the business
community into the picture. Because it can't be done only by the
Government, it can't be done by the CES. We are also trying to develop a
private training market and Joan is chairing ESRA, which Simon and I
developed to create a market for employment services so it is not just, again,
the monolith of the CES. But we have also got other private providers of
employment services out there, just as we are going to have private providers 
of training. It won't just be the AN1AITAFE monolith, but private training
providers. And just out at Canterbury-Bankstown this morning, a representative of a
construction firm was saying how they have set up their own training unit and
they are putting about 170 people a year through it. And we are supporting
that, financially, and we are supporting those sorts of activities financially
around the country to see a private training market emerge as well.
The other important thing, I think, we are doing is we are starting to try and
encourage young people in Years 11 and 12 to get some out of school work
experience and start to focus their career into TAFE and giving them TAFE
accreditation while in Years 11 and 12, through the Youth Training Initiative
of Working Nation.
So, in other words, instead of them finding at the end of Year 12 when they
have left school and all of a sudden they can't find a job and are not sure
what they do next and they are not quite prepared for the next step, we start
getting them thinking about what they might do and getting them prepared
and getting them focussed and streamed in Years 11 and 12.
In Working Nation we thought it was important to declare that we wouldn't let
any young people under 15 years of age slip through the system. We were
regarding 15 to 19 years as a period of vocational preparation. We don't
expect young people to be away from school, or away from structured training
and, if they are, we try and pick them up through the labour market
programs, or get them back into accredited training. At least they should
have the opportunity that, to 19 years of age, they can then come and say I
have had education to a certain level, or training to a certain level, or
post-secondary training of some quality and they can prepare themselves
better for entry into the labour market.
So this is a very great change and it all, I think, underlines this question
about what sort of society we want to be. Now as you know there would be
no place for Working Nation or One Nation in the Contract with America.
There is no way our friends in the Republican Party, there, would have a bar
of it because they say if you are out of work, bad luck. Bad luck, do your best
and get moving.
But what that attitude and state of mind does is, I think, damn a lot of people
to longterm unemployment. Their children grow up in the environment of
their parents being longterm unemployed and it produces a sub-culture which
is not only dispiriting and completely dismal for them, but starts then to erode
the whole egalitarian ethos of the country and the social cohesion we have
always had.
Employment in Australia has always been the way you got your hand on
some of the national cake. And if you are not employed or you can't get a
job, then those opportunities are denied to you. And we say that a target of
per cent unemployment is achievable. It means we have got to grow the 
economy a bit faster than Wewouldini the traditional structure. But with an
Accord we can grow the economy faster than we would say in Western
Europe or North America.
I mean you hear a few of my opponents talking about labour market reform,
which is just code for cutting wages on the bottom end of the labour market.
You look at America which has got an army of working poor on very low rates
of pay, exceptionally low rates of pay, and yet the American speed limit is 2
1/ 2 per cent GOP growth. It has not made the American labour market more
flexible. Or if it were to be more flexible, America could grow faster than 2 1/ 2
per cent. But it never does.
Yet we have been averaging around 4 per cent and we did this mostly
through the 1980s and any country that is growing at 4 per cent a year is
creating a lot of wealth and this economy of ours is $ 500 billion of GOP, 4 per
cent of that is $ 20 billion. So there is $ 20 billion of new value every year is
being created and it helps Humpty Dumpty to stay together if there is
billion out there of new real wealth being created.
Now there are bigger and smaller Humpty Dumpties all around the country
we all know that. There are a couple of big Humpty Dumpties in this city. But
the fact of the matter is we have got to have that sort of creation to get the
economy moving.
Now I think it is worth pondering, we had the National Accounts out last week,
and after 17 quarters of growth, we are now in our fifth year of consecutive
growth and growing. For instance, in the year to September last year at 6 per
cent, growing this year at 3.5 per cent. But, basically, around 4 per cent to
per cent you can say, on average, in these last three or four years. The
Non-Farm GOP Deflator, the broadest measure of inflation. The one that is
not messed up by weightings in the CPI basket, the broadest measure was
2.8 per cent in last week's National Accounts for the quarter. So after 17
quarters of growth and running at that speed and strength, we have still got
inflation at 2.8 per cent in the broad, which is a mighty achievement.
Now there was a time, of course, when if you said things like 2.8 per cent, or
2 1/ 2 per cent inflation we have been running between 1 1/ 2 per cent and
2 1/ 2 per cent really for the last three to four years. People are now getting a
bit blase about it. They shouldn't. Inflation is a scourge. It slows your
economic growth, it pulls peoples' assets down, it wrecks their savings, it
gives them big mortgages. But the reason we can run the economy faster is
the Accord we have with the unions and, essentially, it is that essential
undertaking: growth and employment growth for sensible wage outcomes.
The unions say give us growth and employment growth and we will give you
sensible wage outcomes. Now we are getting, now, quite strong growth in
real wages. But we are still protecting the inflation rate with good productivity
growth coming from the enterprise bargaining system. So we have got a
good strong economy on our hands. We have got good profits, good
investment numbers around. 
There is no reason why these strong employment rates can't stay up and if
they stay up we have got to pull the longterm unemployed into it. We just
can't take the new entrants the school leavers, women joining the workforce,
or rejoining it, or migrants and just let the longterm unemployed people
languish in the longterm pool of unemployment.
So that is why your Area Consultative Committees matter. That is why the
link to business matters because if we can't get you interested and to know
that you do end up as this chap this morning was telling us about his
construction company that is getting a good class of trained people coming
from longterm unemployed people. He is training them himself and then he
knows that he has got tremendous loyalty from them in the firm and they are
going on.
Now I know in these sorts of ventures people say oh well, you know, there is
a bit altruism required here. But it is not altruism. There is a bit of
good-spiritedness about it. There is a bit of compassion about it. But there is
also a lot of efficiency about it and good sense because, obviously, we will
never make the sort of growth rates we can and enjoy the sort of incomes we
expect if a large part of the country's resources are either under employed, or
unemployed. So we are doing something for all of us if we get the longterm unemployed
back to work and we are doing something particularly for them and we are
making our society more cohesive.
Now the other day, my Tory opponents jumped all over me for talking about
the rates of deaths in California amongst young people. And I read this
chilling statistic in, I think it was, Time magazine saying that in California
more young people die of gun shot wounds than die of car accidents and that
is pretty frightening. The main reason for t hat is because under these crazy
American laws, they let people carry guns around. But it is also part of the
social malaise of unemployment and disillusionment and rejection. It is all
out there and we don't want to see any of that cancer coming into the
Australian society. I mean some of that malaise has been there with the
longterm unemployed and as a society we have got to get in and do
something about it.
Now Working Nation is the most valiant attempt ever been made in this
country to deal with it and, as far as we know, while other countries similar
countries are into labour market programs, none of them have quite got the
innovation of Working Nation, we don't think, and we think we are a real show
of building on that 25 per cent reduction in longterm unemployment since it
was introduced and getting that down and making a very big difference into
the way Australia functions and the fact that people can share in it.
Now the Government has taken a very big interest in regional Australia
because now in some of the regions they are growing much faster than the
capital cities. A lot of the employment opportunities are in some of the
1 77 
regions. We are trying to get regional leadership, we are trying to give
regions focus and, at the same time, we are trying, in that, to get a focus on
Iongterm unemployment which is prone to be more difficult in the regions than
in the cities. And we are very pleased that so many of you are from the
regions of Australia and you have seen yourself committed and interested
enough to be in it with us, to do something about it. Because the whole thing
about One Nation is that we think of ourselves as one nation when we are all
pulling together and it is not just programs for the capital cities, but for the
provincial cities and the towns and the regions around the country as well.
So I would like to take this opportunity of thanking you for your interest in
work and training and I think we all know that when we give these people
training and work experience, even with a job subsidy, when the job subsidy
finishes the retention rates we are getting are so encouraging that people are
staying in the jobs and going on.
So we may well be able to fill those jobs which the labour market is requiring
us to fill with employment growth. The main thing is we fill them by taking a
good share of the longterm unemployed up into them as well. So we have
some real fairness operating in the system and we have the sort of country
that we have always believed Australia should be.
Anyway thank you very much for coming along today. Simon and I are
delighted with the progress of it. Simon has done a great job with Working
Nation, as Minister. He has got a great Secretary in Derek Volker and a
great team in DEET. We are absolutely delighted with it and pleased as
punch you can be involved with us.
ends 



I9 A
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ANNIVERSARY DINNER OF THE ISRAEL CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE, SYDNEY
MONDAY 4 DECEMBER, 1995
It is a very great pleasure to be here this evening to mark the 25th anniversary
of the Australia Israel Chamber of Commerce.
The Chambers achievements over that quarter century are substantial and Its
potential is even greater. So there are many reasons to celebrate tonight and! I
will cc-me to them shortly.
But I hope you will forgive me if I begin on a more sombre and personal note.
Only it month ago I made my first visit to Israel, for the funeral of Yitzhak
Rabin. They were the saddest of circumstances in which to make such a
joury. The number of leaders who had travelled to Jerusalem from around the world
was testimony to Yitzhak Rabin's remarkable life. He had physical courage, of
coursia and not only as a soldier, but as a politician too. But It was in his
moral courage that his true greatness lay. He was a man whose whole life had
been devoted to the survival and security of Israel. But when it mattered, he
had thie imagination, flexibility and courage to see that that same cause was
now served best by a policy of negotiation with the Palestinians.
The Image of King Hussein of Jordan, President Mubarak of Egypt, Prime
Minister Chemomyrdfin of Russia and President Clinton standing together In
Jerus. Wemn, In the Mount Herzl national cemetery and speaking of their shared
loss was, surely one of the most moving public moments of the late twentieth
century. But, in a way, just as moving for me as that ceremony was what the funeral
revealed about Israel Itself and about Israelis. The quiet, determined faces of
the thousands of young people lining the streets holding up peace signs, the
Informality and simplicity of the funeral and the memorial service solemn but 
without high pageantry or panoply all struck a powerful chord with me as an
Australian, because they were a signal of a deep sense of democracy and
equality which Is at the essence of both our countries.
I often think that immigrant societies, wherever they are placed, are closer to
each otlher in tenor and tone than they are to the countries from which their
populations originally sprang. I felt that strongly in Israel.
Yltzhatk Rabins assassin robbed Israel and the world of a life that mattered,
and punctured the dream of Jewish people everywhere ftht Israel, above all
other things, was a place of sanctuary.
But ho did not kill that dream. I came away from my short visit convinced that
the people of Israel would draw strength from the tragedy of Rabin's death.
And that this was a society which would come through the ordeal it now faced
strongier and more able to meet the challenges and they are profound
challenges which lie ahead.
Because the work of peace which Rabin supported has much further to go.
The interim agreement between Israel and the PLO was signed on 28
September but it now has to be implemented.
The negotiations still to come on permanent arrangements for the peace
settlement will be even more difficult. Above all else they will require goodwill
and generosity. And it will be very important, though immensely difficult, to
narrow the differences between Israel and Syria over the next few months.
All of -us hope tat reaction to Yitzhak Rabin's murder will constrain extremism
as these negotiations proceed, but we cannot be confident of that. People on
all sides both the malevolent and the frightened will no doubt continue to try
to derail the process.
My dis3cussions in Jerusalem with Prime Minister Peres left me In no doubt that
he, like Mr Rabin, sees no alternative for Israel or its neighbours to following
the path of peace, however difficult it might appear and however careful the
steps along it must be.
His objective, as he told the Knesset on 22 November, is ato arrive if possible
by the end of th~ s century at a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. To
create a Middle East without violence, without bloodshed, without terrorism,
without war and without the factors which lead to all of these, poverty,
ignorance, backwardness and prejudice%
It Is hardly credible for an Australian Prime Minister, from this distance and from
the security of our continent, to offer detailed advice on these vital issues of
security and peace to those who struggle with them daily and I will not try. I will 
only say as I said to Mr Peres that Israel can continue to count on
Australia's goodwill and practical support for the work of peace.
The sort of practical support we can provide is seen in our membership of two
of the working groups set up under the multilateral track of the peace process.
The areas we are working on arms control and regional security, and water
resources are ones where we have some expertise to share. In April this
year, for example, experts from Israel, Jordan, Egypt, the Palestinian Authority,
Morocco and Oman met in Terrigal for a workshop on rainfall enhancement.
This sort of Issue does not generate headlines or high drama, but it offers
avenues for practical cooperation which will be vital if mutual confidence is to
develop within the region.
Australia is, of course, also providing direct support for Palestinian autonomy
through our three-year $ 15 million aid program announced in October 1993.
And Australian defence force personnel continue to play a core role in the Sinai
peacekeeping force and to participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations elsewhere in the region.
In May 1994, I said in a speech to the Zionist Federation of Australia that
Australia had never wavered and would ne-ver-waver from our commitment to
Israel's right to exist within secure and recognised boundaries. But I added that
beyond those familiar phrases, we would never waver from a deeper conviction
that the international community is a better place, a more decent place, for
the contribution Israel has made and will yet make.
I hope in some small way that Australia can help it make that contribution.
Let me turn now to the reason we are celebrating tonight the 25th anniversary
of the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce.
Back In 1970, a sceptical joumalist from the Australian Jewish News asked the
founders of the Chamber whether it was anything more than an Impressive
set-up'.
Well, over the past quarter of a century you have certainly answered that
question decisively. We are here tonight to celebrate your vision and
achievements. As the attendance at this dinner tonight shows, the Chamber has become a
highly respected and influential organisation, with offices throughout Australia,
as well as In Tel Aviv. It has a national membership of over 800 companies,
and a list of Governors that reads like a who's who of corporate Australia. 
4
It has been a catalyst for the development of a very lively business partnership
between Australia and Israel. It has organised successful trade missions,
promoted joint ventures and commercial partnerships in third countries and
initiated academic and Industrial research and development agreements.
Earlier this year it was involved In the dedication of a plaque in Israel
recognising the heroism of the Australian Ught Horsemen who were involved in
the charge at Beersheba Wells in October 1917 as part of the advance that led
to Jerusalem's liberation from occupation. Some of the remaining veterans
were present. I thank the Chamber for Its part In arranging this ceremony.
But I suppose the main measur, of the success of a Chamber of Commerce
has to be what has happened to the commerce. AMd here the figures are
strikirg. In 1970, our bilateral trade was worth $ 8.5 million. In essence -as the
Chambers Executive Director, John Weiss, has pointed out Australia sent
Israel coal and wool and we got back oranges and bathing suits in return.
Now it is worth $ 30 million. Coal and wool are still Important, but Australian
exports of elaborately transformed manufactures have also started to make
inroadls into the Israeli market.
There Is no doubt that some strong synergies exist between the Australian and
Israeli economies.
Each of us has a strong research and technology base on which we want to
build. I will have some more to say about that from Australia's side when I
launch the Government's Innovation statement in Melbourne on Wednesday.
In Information technology and telecommunications, for example, both Australia
and lnral had more than 100 exhibitors at the CeBIT fair In Germany which I
attended in March this year.
Israel's privatisation of its cellular and International communications services
has provided an important Investment opportunty for Australian companies. I
am very pleased that Australian companies are now joining International giants
such as Intel, Motorola, IBM, Mitsui and Microsoft In working with Israeli
industry on building Information technology alliances.
Neither of us Is big enough to take on the giants of these Industries alone, but
we can probably Identify some highly rewarding areas of co-operation.
Cooperation Is expanding in other areas, too. The High Technology Trade
Mission to Israel which the Chamber organised In September was the largest
Australian business delegation ever to visit Israel. A number of joint venture 
agreements involving the exchange of technology have already come out Of
that mission.
One o~ f these was an agreement to grow in South Australia a new variety of
olive which, as a result of Israeli technology, produces more oil than any other
olive. This project is expected to generate a substantial olive oil industry in
South Australia which will export from Australia throughout the Asia Pacific.
Another source of potential economic partnership must come from our similar
climate and topography.
Solar energy, desalination and water management systems are critical Issues
for both of us and I am sure there are ways we can work more closely together.
Australia is a world leader in water management technology. The Snowy
Mountains Engineering Corporation, for example, has recently conducted
discussions with Israeli authorities over the Jordan Rift Valley project. And an
Israeli compary has successfully combined Australian waste-water technology
with Israeli engineering skill to provide municipal waste water treatment
througjhout Israel.
As wo each move to build our infrastructure to cope with growing populations
from Immigration, our tranisport, construction and service industries also have
great potential to work together.
The new terminal planned for Ben Gurion International Airport has attracted the
interest of Australian companies, as, I am sure, will the planned Cross-Israel
Highway project. Australian firms are being added to the lists of approved
vendors to the Israeli Electric Corporation.
Another real area of potential growth in trade and investment lies in the way we
can each use the other country as a base for regional operations.
Israel's free trade agreements with the United States and the European Union
are an Incentive for Australian companies. IPEX, for example, has chosen
Israel as its European headquarters for their software business and Is among
the fastest growing computer companies In Israel.
But, for the first time, it is also possible to imagine Israel as a potential base for
trade into the Middle East. We are not at that point yet but the signs are all
pointing in its direction. Over time, I am sure that will happen because It serves
the Interests of both Israel and Its neighbours.
The signature of the Israel-Jordan trade agreement in October this year and
the convening of the Amman Summit, in which Israel participated with Arab
courtries, are promising steps. 
.6-
In Australia, the first joint tourist promotion program involvng Israel, Egypt,
Jordan and Turkey, is scheduled for early 1996, and Is a very welcome sign of
things to come.
In the other directon, some Israeli companies have already sensed the
potenlial for operating out of Australia Into Asia and the Pacific. I know the
Chamber has been active in spreading that message in Israel.
For example, a leading telecommunications company, Teledata, has set up a
successful mnanufactuing facility In Brisbane which supplies the Australian
dome3tIc market but also exports to Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and
Indonesia
This brings me to a point I want to put firmly on the record.
I am sometimes accused of paying too much attenton to Australia's relations
with Asia at the expense of Australian economic interests elsewhere. This Is
a view you will sometimes hear from my political opponents and from the
stodgier sort of newspaper columnists.
It is not true, of course. But I want to make clear just what I do think becal se
R is vory important to all of us who live in this country and who care about its
fuure. I am convinced of this that unless this country gets our relationship-
Including our economic relationship with Asia right, we will not succeed
elsewhere. This does niot mean that we could not keep other bilateral trade links open. Nor
is it to deny that some of them might prosper.
But, over the long run, this fact seems undeniable to me: the degree of
AustraWlas Integration into the region around us and the experience our
business people gain In matching it with the most dynamic economies in the
world will determine, more than anything else, how relevant we are to other
global markets, and how successful and competitive we are in them.
So my view is simple: our business people should be looking to do business
wherever there Is a profit to be made and a mutual Interest to be served. But
we w~ ll only maximise those opportunities with Israel, for example, or Europe,
when we have shown that we are fully engaged In our own region.
That is why APEC Is important to all Australian business people, even those
whose primary interests lie In other parts of the world.
It is why the outcome of the Osaka leaders' meeting with its agreement on a
plan of action to Implement the commitments we made at Bogor for free trade 
in the region by 2010 for industrialised counties and 2020 for developing
countries was such an important development for Australia, but also for others
who want to do business here and In the region.
The O~ saka meeting firmly cemented APEC in place as the key regional body
for co-ordinating the development and growth of the Asia Pacific into the next
century. We e-stimate that the full results of the Bogor commitments will expand the
regional economy by about the size of the present Australian and Korean
economies combined, arnd that Austral~ a's real Income will rise by $ 40 billion
when all the effects have flowed through.
If the Bogor commitments are fully implemented, by 2020 APEC will account
for re than three quarters of global production and three quarters of the
worlds trade.
The effort we have put into setting up APEC and elevating its decision making
to the level of leaders has been directed to these very important alms to
getting Australia a seat at the -world's largest free trade table, and, by keeping
the region's development and growth going, better ensuring Its security as well.
That is good for all Australians and for those who do business here and In the
region.
That Is also why we have been working on the development of links between
the Australa New Zealand Closer Economic Relations agreement and the
ASEAN Free Trade Area.
We recently held the first successful meeting between CER and ASEAN trade
ministers. We agreed to complete a series of practical collaborative projects
which will address Issues of real concern to business people. And these
projects and these developing linkages with Southeast Asia will complement
and neinforce what the Government is working to achieve with APEC.
Anyone who suggests to you that we should be wary about over-emphasising
economic links with the Asia Pacific does not understand, in my view, just what
the causes of global success for Australian traders will be In the decades
ahead. Let me end this speech, not with congratulations-you already have them but
with a challenge.
Because although trade between Australia and Israel has been growing well, it
still falls short of its potential. If it is to reach that potential a sustained effort will
be needed. This will Involve Governments, of course. I know this Is a high
priority of Ambassador Moyal. And his enthusiasm will be matched on our side. 
But mainly it will involve the private sectors of our two countries. I can't think of
a more, effective organisation than this one to Identify new areas for trade and
Investment and to put together the people and companies who will be needed
to take the trade relationship between us onto a new level.
I wish the Australia Israel Chamber of Commerce every su cces over the next
twenty-five years.
Ends 



. i rL: PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO AN EMPLOYER BREAKFAST, CANTERBURYBANKSTOWN
RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB, BELMORE, SYDNEY,
4 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much Peter ( Moore), I am delighted to be here with my fellow
patron Kevin Stewart and my parliamentary colleagues Leo McLeay and
Daryl Melham and Janice Crosic and with so many other people who are
dedicated to this task, those associated with Canterbury-Bankstown Rugby
League Football Club, Brendan Priest ( Deputy Secretary of DEET) who is
with us today, Dave ( Rowland) and Shelly ( Taylor-Smith) who have just
spoken and ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here with Peter and
George ( Paciullo) as Chairs of the Southern Sydney and South West Sydney
Area Consultative Committees to be on this occasion asking some of you to
be part of this very substantial endeavour which we are all undertaking.
To see what we are doing in some sort of context let me just paint a little bit of
scenery for you and say that 10 years ago only three young people in
completed secondary school, Whatever hopes we have for this being a
clever country or a intelligent country or what have you, obviously if seven
out of 10 are not reaching secondary school standard, they can't obviously
reach tertiary standard and other vocational standards. In that 10 years we
have had a great revolution in Australian education. This year eight in 10 will
have completed secondary school. So, we have gone from three in 10 to
eight in 10. Ten years ago 40 per cent of young people then streamed
themselves into university and we still have 40 per cent streaming
themselves through, but you can imagine the increase in numbers required to
stream 40 per cent of three in to compared to 40 per cent of eight in
As a consequence, we have now added 60 per cent of places, more in fact in
1983-84 we were at 360,000 university places and we are now at 610,000
places. It has been a huge addition to the stock. So, we have got 40 per
cent being trained in a tertiary way, but then the problem is with the other
per cent and a lot of that 60 per cent was simply cascading into nothing.
Dave said earlier, when you find that people turn up with a saw and a
4 bU u e OU 
2
hammer and say they are carpenters, they were many people broadly
untrained. As a country we are not going to make the grade with low paid
jobs, with low paid labour. This is a relatively low labour cost country, but we
are going to make it doing innovative and clever things. We are going to
make it adding value, producing innovative products, getting into those export
markets. It is not our job to be competing with mass low labour cost countries
and yet that is the way we were set up in the post-war years, in the days of
tariffs, the days of protection, the days of neglect of the education system.
We in the Labor Party think one thing. That education is the great bridger,
the great bridging thing through the social stratas, the great bridge to
opportunity, the great liberator. It gives people a chance to break into all
sorts of fields and all sorts of incomes and all sorts of opportunities and, of
course, all sorts of excitement in their lives. So, education and training has
been the focus of much of what we have been trying to do. Not long after I
became Prime Minister we said in the One Nation statement, we put $ 1 billion
into TAFE and set up a National Training Authority for the first time ever the
Australian National Training Authority, ANTA to run a national TAFE
system. We have now put $ 1.25 billion into TAFE. What are trying to do is
to build vocational education beside the universities so when that 60 per cent
cascade out of school Year 12 but don't go to university, they cascade into
a competent vocational education system and they get certificates and they
get accreditation across the country and we get the standing of TAFE up.
That is what is basically on. But, you will still find quite a lot of young people,
particularly in the past, who have left school at 15 or 16 and are untrained
and have never had the opportunities to stay on to Year 12 or those who are
on the way to staying on, but find they can't make it and drop out. In Working
Nation which we did in 1994, what we have sought to do there is to pick up
those people who are untrained or who are part of the long term unemployed.
It is our aim in Working Nation not to let any young person under 18 drop out
of the system. If they drop out, we either get them back in school or back into
training with a job subsidy so that at least we get them back in the system
and we don't let them drift by the wayside.
So, the various programs we are building up are focussed on those things,
such as the Youth Training Initiative which comes to mind and where we are
now starting, as Dave suggested earlier, to take young people in Years 11
and 12 and give them some out of school, on the job work experience and to
give them some training in Years 11 and 12 for TAFE courses so that they
pick up credits while at school for the TAFE course that they will then
undertake. In other words, we start streaming them before they leave school.
And so we overcome that problem that Dave Rowland mentioned, that they
leave school and find they haven't got a job and they don't know what to do.
In other words, we start focussing them while they are in Years 11 and 12.
That Is the sort of broader educational and training picture. The labour
market is a different thing again. The labour market is very much like a pool.
You have people coming into It, staying in it for a while and then coming out
of it into a job. But, the time in the pool very much reflects the state of the
4 .1) eC ., is u : 01 10 U6 I i I" 
TEL: 4. Dec 5 u : ul1No . U
3
labour market and those who are untrained find that they are in the pool and
they gradually drop out of sight and people are no longer interested in them.
Yet the demands of the labour market are not so great as to be able to take
them from the depths of the pool, they will just take up the ones who have
come in at the beginning. So, the school leavers each year, women joining
the labour market, migrants, they come into the pool and very quickly go out
and get a job. But, the ones that have been in there longer in societies like
Australia are, in the main, forgotten because there is not enough sucking
power, if you like, in the labour market to take the new entrants plus the long
term unemployed.
What Working Nation is principally about, through the Job Compact, is to
make sure that the ones who go out, that there is a high proportion of the
long term unemployed in there. In other words, it is not just the ones who
have been unemployed two or three weeks who come in and then go out, but
the ones who have been long term unemployed, 18 months or two years or
so. This is where we came up with this novel idea called the Job Compact.
We actually case manage people, so we have one person who gets to know
or 30 people, get to know what they did at school, what their personality is
like, what their family situation is like, what accredited training they have had,
what work experience they have had and what they might to. And, we give
that case manager also a Jobstart subsidy in the main and then we say to
that person we will case manage you and find you a job and we will subsidise
that job with your employer, but you must take the job, you cannot knock the
job back. In other words, there is a compact here that operates.
Well, the success of the program to date is that we have reduced long term
unemployment by 25 per cent In the last 18 months and that is an almighty
change in a country like this because in the 1980s when we had massive
employment growth, I think, the long term unemployed went down by
something like eight or nine per cent over the whole period. Because once
you are out, you stay out. The system just takes the new people up and that
is the end of it. Now, part of the case management approach, developing a
private market in case management and employment services which we are
doing and finding jobs which we then subsidise, we are also trying to find
traineeships and Jobstart places for longer term unemployed people and
particularly for young people.
This is where the Area Consultative Committees come in and where business
comes in. We can't do this without the business community. This can only
be done if the society as the country itself decides that it is not acceptable to
have a stock of people young or not so young sitting around the labour
market not in jobs, mouldering away, all their aspirations being dashed, their
self esteem being dashed and this is a great problem. When people have
gone for jobs and been knocked back, gone again and been knocked back,
gone again and been knocked back, they think there is something wrong with
them. Their esteem goes down and after a while they don't apply, they are
psychologically out of it and that is why the work experience is so important.
Again, the points you can see with those three young men who came on the
stage earlier. Their experience is up and their confidence is up and they 01 P. 12/ 14 
T4E. L: D ec. 95 0: 01 No. 001 P. 13/ 14
4
have done some things. I thi'nk Dave * Rowland mentioned the high retention
rates. It is not when we stop the subsidy, the job stops. When we stop the
subsidy, most stay in work. We have a very high success rate with the
people who stay in work.
What I think this breakfast is about, the reason we have got the Bullfrog on
the job here and others is basically to bring people in and people have got
experience. People like George who have been in public life and now in local
wa--o% Ao go o t to i s%, J pay VVV I ICCQ Itv'U t0K. ~ i I
interest in this' and it is not just you doing something, but you will get
something in return. You will get a better trained person, you will get
tremendous loyalty from them and you will end up with a better community
around you, you will end up with a more fully employed community and a
happier one, I think the story that Dave Rowland mentioned also of training
on the job, the Government has also through our training policy, not simply
trying to build a vocational educational system in TAFE, but we also want a
private training market. So, when there is a big job or a big business and
employers are short of skills we will subsidise the building of a specialist
training facility in that plant or on that site and people with go through it. I
think Dave said 170 people have been through his.
We are doing this all around the country so we don't simply want a public
sector monolith in TAFE, but we also want a private training market out there
to train people on the job. So, let's say you are a small employer, it is the
TAFE training that will matter or maybe some training on the job. If you are a
larger employer, we could help you with a training facility and through DEET
the Department of Employment, Education and Training and the CES we
are able to pull people up under the case management system. If they have
been unemployed 12 months or more we know about them, we know what
they can do, we can give them a training place and the job start with you and
we can give you the subsidy to get them up there and you will find there is a
whole new source of employment open to you that wasn't opened to you in
the past.
In the end, we will be a better society, a happier one and a fairer one. Shelly
talked about being Aussies and it is great to be an Aussie, well one of the
great things about being an Aussie is the egalitarian sense of the country
the sense of fairness and equality and fair play and it is a very equal country
but will become less equal if a slice of the community are not in work. The
way you keep that social cohesion is to give people a job opportunity and to
give them a chance and to bring them up and to care about them.
We set up Working Nation to say we care. We won't let people fall out of the
system and stay at the bottom of that pool of unemployed people forgotten,
but rather we will make sure they get their chance to get up into the stream
again and back into the labour market. The difference will be a lot of harder
hearted societies where they say, as the Republicans now say in the United
States if you haven't got a job bad luck, bad luck, you are not going to get any
unemployment benefits perpetually either. Or in a lot of other countries in
Western Europe, well, they'll deal with young people on the streets, they'll
TEL 
ends EL z4 be C. U: HrOJu . uU, r i44/ 1-
deal with crime, they'll deal -with all th'e attendant p. r oblems which come from
that sort of approach, but in this country we have made a different choice. In
1993 when we were returned to office we were returned on a program of
getting the country back to work. We have 650,000 job growth since the
election 1993. Our target was 500.000, we reached that in two years. Last
year we had the biggest fall in unemployment in our history and even though
we have got unemployment around 8.5 per cent, it is still too high. With
Working Nation we have got a chance of getting it down. In the 1 980s when
we had that huge employment growth, we could never get below 6.5 per cent
and the reason was we never had a Working Nation program there and we
never had people like you there to actually tap into it and go through the
veneer into those long term unemployed people. So, when the labour market
was really running flat chat we were starting to complement it by skills
formation through migration. We were not getting into the long term
unemployed. That is what Working Nation now allows us to do and, of
course, the whole education system is producing a product which we didn't
have in the 1980s.
So, altogether whether it be the Government's employment programs or just
the raw employment growth from the growth in the economy and that is the
central thing, that raw demand for employment. But then who gets the jobs?
And we know that they are going to go to school leavers, to women, to
migrants, but they must also go to the longer term unemployed and that Is
what this breakfast is about. It is about going out there, helping those
people. It is about asking you people in business to think about it, not to do it
out of some sense of ultrulsm, but in the sense that it is more efficient, we will
have a more efficient labour market if those under utilised resources are not
under utilised and you will end up with a better workforce yourself and you
will live In a better society from the one you would otherwise live in.
That is what we are doing and that is why we are here. So, let me again, take
the chance of saying thank you to George and Peter, to the Area Chairs, and
to congratulate you again on that target f * getting over 3000 training jobs by
Christmas. We are already at 3400 as George told us. And that the training
pays program gives us the opportunity to do those things and to reach out In
a real way to those people who are feeling the despair and hopelessness of
unemployment. When, in fact, we can do the compassionate and the efficient
thing together, by picking them up, taking an interest in them, giving them a
job and getting a better employee and a better business. So, that is what it is
all about and I particularly thank our sports men and women for joining us
today, Shelly and our own Terry Lamb and all of the other people who have
come along, Mal ( Meninga) who is with us now, for coming today because
you people are important models for people in their hope because when they
are unemployed they look at you and they see, through your own dedication
arnd energy, what you can do for yourself and it is always a reminder. So, to
see you in this context is very nice indeed. Anyway, thank you all very much
for coming. 
TEL 6
There is no reason why these strong employment rates can't stay up and if
they stay up we have got to pull the longterm unemployed into it. We just
can't take the new entrants the school leavers, women joining the workforce,
or rejoining it, or migrants and just let the longterm unemployed people
languish in the longterm pool of unemployment.
So that is why your Area Consultative Committees matter. That is why the
link to business matters because if we can't get you interested and to know
that you do end up as this chap this morning was telling us about his
construction company that Is getting a good class of trained people coming
from longterm unemployed people. He is training them himself and then he
knows that he has got tremendous loyalty from them in the firm and they are
going on.
Now I know in these sorts of ventures people say oh well, you know, there is
a bit altruism required here. But it is not altruism. There is a bit of
good-spiritedness about it. There is a bit of compassion about it. But there is
also a lot of efficiency about it and good sense because, obviously, we will
never make the sort of growth rates we can and enjoy the sort of incomes we
expect if a large part of the country's resources are either under employed, or
unemployed. So we are doing something for all of us if we get the longterm unemployed
back to work and we are doing something particularly for them and we are
making our society more cohesive.
Now the other day, my Tory opponents jumped all over me for talking about
the rates of deaths in California amongst young people. And I read this
chilling statistic in, I think it was, lime magazine saying that in California
more young people die of gun shot wounds than die of car accidents and that
is pretty frightening. The main reason for that is because under these crazy
American laws, they let people carry guns around. But it is also part of the
social malaise of unemployment and disillusionment and rejection. It is all
out there and we don't want to see any of that cancer coming into the
Australian society. I mean some of that malaise has been there with the
longterm unemployed and as a society we have got to get in and do
something about it.
Now Working Nation is the most valiant attempt ever been made in this
country to deal with it and, as far as we know, while other countries similar
countries are into labour market programs, none of them have quite got the
Innovation of Working Nation, we don't think, and we think we are a real show
of building on that 25 per cent reduction in longterm unemployment since it
was introduced and getting that down and making a very big difference into
the way Australia functions and the fact that people can share in it.
Now the Government has taken a very big interest in regional Australia
because now in some of the regions they are growing much faster than the
capital cities. A lot of the employment opportunities are in some of the
TEL Dec .95 0 j1 NO. JJ0i F .08/ 1: 
i EL 7
regions. We are trying to get regio'hal leadership, we are trying to give
regions focus and, at the same time, we are trying, in that, to get a focus on
longterm unemployment which is prone to be more difficult in the regions than
in the cities. And we are very pleased that so many of you are from the
regions of Australia and you have seen yourself committed and interested
enough to be in it with us, to do something about it. Because the whole thing
about One Nation is that we think of ourselves as one nation when we are all
pulling together and it is not just programs for the capital cities, but for the
provincial cities and the towns and the regions around the country as well.
So I would like to take this opportunity of thanking you for your interest in
work and training and I think we all know that when we give these people
training and work experience, even with a job subsidy, when the job subsidy
finishes the retention rates we are getting are so encouraging that people are
staying in the jobs and going on.
So we may well be able to fill those jobs which the labour market is requiring
us to fill with employment growth. The main thing is we fill them by taking a
good share of the longterm unemployed up into them as well. So we have
some real fairness operating in the system and we have the sort of country
that we have always believed Australia should be.
Anyway thank you very much for coming along today. Simon and I are
delighted with the progress of it. Simon has done a great job with Working
Nation, as Minister. He has got a great Secretary in Derek Volker and a
great team in DEET. We are absolutely delighted with it and pleased as
punch you can be involved with us.
ends 4 Dec.~ u; Ui NO-oij U 



ILL 5 . eD ec .9,22:: 366 NN. 0. 0055 PP0-0110/ 07
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCH FOR THE PM'S XI v THE WEST INDIES, MANUKA OVAL,
CANBERRA, 5 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much indeed John ( Gallop). Can I just recognise Richie
Richardson and Michael Bevan, Denis Rogers, Wesley Hall, Andy Roberts,
Steve Bernard and ladies and gentlemen.
What a pity we are at this point in the day. I thought we would be going well
because my experience with these matches has been that we have mostly
had good weather. It is a pretty safe time of the year in Australia, but with the
weather patterns the way they are, nothing is safe any more it seems. At any
rate, the clouds have lifted somewhat and I am hoping against hope that we
might get five hours or something like that in. In which case, we would not
have seen the day go to waste.
I know this is an important day for the ACT Cricket Association because it is
one of its fund raising days amongst other things, but I know it wants to keep
up this tradition of the Prime Minister's Xl and so do I. Particularly for our
colleagues from the West Indies and this being their first match of the tour,
they pay us a great honour indeed in being part of the Prime Minister's Xl and
coming last evening and today to play our side and in doing that, of course,
they have done it quite a few times over the years. I was just looking through
the book " The Prime Minister's Xl" by Don Selth there on the table, we have
seen a number of them here in the past. Wes Hall, I think, back in the 1960s
and Richie, of course, was here in 1992. So, they are no strangers to this
place and we have kept the tradition going. Being the first fixture of the tour
for them, I hope that they can limber up in a sense this afternoon.
I would like to underline how important the West Indies are in the world of
Australian cricket of world cricket and, of course, a measure of their
greatness is the fact that only after two decades did Australia manage to win
back the Frank Worrell Shield. There is a great sense of euphoria here and,
I think, that they have set the standard in cricket by which other countries
judge themselves. That is, the measure of someones euphoria is really 
TEL 2
whether they can climb over th-e top of-you. When they know how hard that is
to do, they rate themselves by comparing themselves with you.
Australian cricket, of course, has been riding high over recent times.
Perhaps not yesterday, but mostly and our team has been performing very
well under Mark Taylor and we have got many and very talented cricketers
knocking on the door of the Test team. But we have got a long way to go
before we achieve that special status which the West Indies have had in
dominating international cricket so totally and for so long.
It has always been a great wonder to me that from the Caribbean, those
relatively small states and populations like Barbados with a population
roughly the size of Canberra or Antigua with a population roughly akin to
some of our provincial centres, yet it produces this huge number of
international ranked people and it really is quite exceptional. We were just
talking about my home town of Bankstown, how many cricketers we have
produced from there and how many swimmers and the rest, well, there is
Bankstown and the rest of Australia and I suppose there is Barbados and
Antigua and what have you. I know what it is like to produce all these stars..
Though we are very proud of our cricketing stars from that part of the world,
we have never turned out the number of fast bowlers that you have and your
success in the 1970s, 1 980s and 1 990s was founded on that magnificent fast
bowling. We have got Curtley Ambrose and Courtney Walsh here today, of
course, to show us some of their form if we get an opportunity.
It Is a great pleasure for me to be here as Prime Minister with Wes Hall and
Andy Roberts in our company as Team Manager and Coach. Of course, they
were household names in Australia and great draw cards and they kept that
contact with cricket and, of course, the other thing I have in common with
Wes is he is a pollie, a politician. So, he knows about all of the other
undercurrents going on out there too. We were just talking a bit earlier about
how politicians immediately pick up the pulse of a crowd or a circumstance or
a place and no doubt, this has put him in good stead with instinct it has put
him in good stead in cricket and in public life. At any rate, it is great to have
them both here with us and again we appreciate very much their commitment.
Could I express my appreciation particularly to the Australian Cricket Board
and to the ACT Cricket Association in organising what has obviously been a
well organised event, other than the weather. If my predecessor was still
here, he would have been a better chance on that too and a couple before
that could But, I am only an ordinary politician and so I can only say thank
you for the organisation that you have obviously displayed here and just in
the year since the renovations and the extra facilities out the front, of course,
are going to make it a much better place to organise cricket into the future.
I would like to thank the players, Richie Richardson and his side and Michael
Bevan and our side with many substantial young people coming through
cricket and the great opportunity for them to be up against such a quality side
and I thank them both. Of course, this stand has been called after the great
Don Bradman and 1, as a former finance minister and Treasurer of this
TEL D. ec 236 ' 40. u05 P -U2C/ K-
3
country, you get a bit of a penchant for statistics, but whenever the statistics
are brought out about Bradman, he distinguishes himself so obviously in
Cricket world history. It was nice we had a $ 5 commemorative coin in his
name punched and we were able to use it today. The Mint is still hanging on
to it though and they won't let them have it. They are very thingy about the
currency here. They make their money under a thing called seigniorage this
is a little trick they have about what it costs to produce the money and the
difference in its face value. So, given the fact that it never costs that much to
produce these coins, they could give a few away. But, I don't think we are
going to get hold of the Don Bradman coin today. We did ask Don to come
over on this occasion, given that the coin was struck in his honour. We all
take opportunities to remember his great life as a cricketer and his great life
as a world sportsman and as an Australian sportsman, but he wasn't able to
come for reasons, family reasons and others. It would have been nice to
have had him, but we understand.
So, can I just conclude by thanking you all the Australian Cricket Board and
the ACT Cricket Association particularly. I thank you for keeping up the
tradition of the PM's XI. I am glad also my parliamentary colleagues could be
with us, from the Opposition and also mine in the Government and we can
all of us Rwf e get some opportunity here, keep increasing the record book
that we have on the table and keep alive this very important tradition. I'd like
to propose a toast to our West Indies guests, if someone could pass over my
drink. To just say thank you and wish you all the best on this tour.
ends i cL t, Liec z ' Do NO uu U. 



6 Dec .95 ' I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE NATIONAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE, 6 DECEMBER 1995
I am very pleased tu be here to address this National Trade and Investment Outlook
Conference for the third successive year.
The innovative Minister for Industry Science and Technology, Peter Cook, was
instrumental In establishing the conference and the Australian Government is pleased to
sponsor It. NTIOC has become one of the more important conferences on the business
calendar. I thank you all for coming, arid In particular let me welcomne to Australia our visitors from
overseas. This conference is at once a manifestation of the change taking place in Australia and
throughout the world, and an agent of that change.
And that is what, primarily, I want to talk about today the change we are seeing, the
changes we can arid should make.
It is often said these days that we live In an era of unprecedented change.
In fact, I suspect politicians have been saying we are living In an era of unprecedented
change since politics was born. I'm sure I remember a former Prime Minister of ours,
Bob Monzies, saying we were living in an era of unprecedented change and Bob was
reluctant to change a light globe.
I'm equally sure that if anyone had kept an ear to the ground In the 1950s they would
have heard what we sormetimes hear now which is people saying they are tired of
change. These days the sociologists arid psychologists are warning us that people are
fed up with It, exh~ austed by it.
Yet we also see evidence of their willingness to embtrace change. The last decade bears
witness to that. In their workplaces and communities, on their farms and in their
businesses, In schools and universities, in their minds In the way they think about the
world and their country's relationship to It the Australian people have made changes.
They have made Australia a much more competitive country 40 per cent more
competitive than a decade ago. They have seen exports rise by one third in the last five
years. They have seen ETM exports grow by 17.5 per cent per annumn over the past
decade, so that they now make Up airTost 2~ 3 per cent of our total merchandise exports.
Put anotlii way. 17 out of the top 50 Australian export commodities last year were
ETM's In 1983 only 3 of them were.
All this is reason for optimism. So is the growth in Australian services exports 10 per
cent per annimun since 1988/ 89 w~ th the likelihood on current trends of a net surplus this
year. We have recorded national economic growth in every one of the last seventeen quarters.
TEL TEL No 6.. e0c 2925 4: P4?. 0 1 / C 
TE: 4L7:. 65. N Do. c0 22 P. 02/ 0
2
And we are looking to positive growth in the eighteenth quarter.
And of course we are becoming more closely integrated with the fastest growing region in
the world. By as early as next year, when our exports to Irdonesia and Malaysia will
each exceed our exports to the United Kingdom, all our top ten markets will be In the
Asia Pacific.
If all these developments give us cause for confidence, so does APEC. In fact few
developments in our recent history are such~ a cause for confidence and optimism as
APEC. The meeting In Osaka recently was an outstanding success. it cemented APEC as the
key regional body for coordinating the development and growth of the Asia-Pacific over
the next century. All APEC members will benefit fromn the liberalisation and facilitation
agenda. Once all the effects have flowed through, the Income of APEC members will
Increase by awound $ 1 trillion.
Australia's real income Is expected to rise by $ 40 billion, and growth of this order can be
expected to generate around half a million new jobs.
For Individual businesses the benefits will be substantial. For instance, differing
standards can add between S and 10 per cent to a new exporters costs. In OsakaIt was
agreed to harnionise and simplify customs procedures on an APEC-wide basis by 2000.
And within the next 10 years the requirement for paper work for key trade and transport
documentation will be entirely eliminated.
In a remarkable step, at Osaka the leaders demonstrated their seriousness of purpose
with down payments on their Uruguay Round commitments.
F or example, Japan accelerated its tariff reductions to the tune of $ 135 million; and
China brought forward to 1998 its WTO accession bid of reducing tariffs on more than
4000 items by an average of 30 per cent,
These were just two of many steps at Osaka which were unthinkable four or five years
ago. When some of them were mooted even 18 months ago, the cynics came out In
force. Seattle, Bogor and Osaka have proved the cynics wrong.
The APEC process has proved a triumph. The Leaders meetings have established a
unique degree of trust and good will and authority. And the decision to establish end
polits, and then move towards them with the weight of that authority arid the force of that
cooperation, gives the process much more momentum than the Uruguay Round and the
WTO could ever achieve.
That is why APEC should give us confidence: it has established enormous momentum in
a very short period of time, shorter than even its most passionate advocates anticipated.
Great as the economic benefits will be, there will hardly be a greater one than the lesson
about the potential for cooperation between countries. As I said after the Bogor
declaration this was not something which necessity demanded we do. It did not have to
be done, Instead, between us we Imagined what we might be capable of doing, and we
are doing It.
And, as I said before, once you create an environment for change and a framework for It,
change begins to grow of itself. Suddenly needs are recognised. Suddenly the solutions
are at hand. The advance on GATT commitments is one example. Another Is the
proposal we put to develop a working group on food security, which Is bound to become a
major Issue as the Asia Pacific grows. Another is our announcement of the APEC
business travel cardl to facilitate regional travel by accredited business people. Another is
the decision of the Leaders meeting to establish a permanent APEC Business Advisory
Council. TEL 6 Dec 95 
TEL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 03/ OS
3
One important way of Interpreting the policies and initiatives I am announcing today is
that I want Australia to be APECready: ready to respond to the challenges and to realise
the commercial opportunities of the free trade and investment environment we have In
the making.
The Initiatives In many ways reflect the new phase in our industry policy.
Our reforms In the early and mid 80s concentrated on opening the Australian economy to
the world and to global competition. Subsequent reform concentrated on building a
competitive domestic environment through microeconomic change. Neither process has
ended. They are ongoing.
But now we address the question of what it takes for the individual firm to maximise its
competitiveness, meet the challenges of open markets and take advantage of the
opportunities they present. And a key Is a commitment to innovation.
I can, perhaps, best Illustrate this by two very different industry examples. The first is
BHP, Australia's largest company. A little over a decade ago, BHP Steel was a
predominantly domestic producer threatened to the point of extinction by import
competition. In 1983, BHP, the Government and the unions agreed to a Steel Industry
Plan which saw BHP revolutionise its work practices and undertake almost $ 2 billion
worth of Investments, Including investment in new technology.
In a second phase of reform, since the late 1980s BHP has focussed on securing
productivity gains by improving skills, restructuring awards, total quality management and
encouraging a more customer oriented culture.
The effects have been dramatic and are perhaps best expressed this way: production of
tonnes of steel per person in 1982-83 was 175; in 1987-88 it was 257; last year it was
618. It now has one of the highest export/ production shares of any major steel maker in
the world.
In a sense, BHP Steel's story mirrors the story of Australia's reforms since 1983. And it is
not merely among big companies that versions of the tale are told.
Bllcon Engineering is a Victorian based manufacturer of quality precision metal
componenthy. After operating for 50 years, In 1990 it faced closure, but It re-made itself
through innovation and quality. Bilcon has achieved a 220 per cent turnaround in
profitability and more than 100 per cent employment growth and Bilcon components can
now be found in Europe, Asia and South America.
Good policy like good company management Is a process of continuous improvement.
Australia already has the Ingredients of a dynamic and effective innovation system,
ranging from the tremendous national asset of our excellence In science, to our very
strong propensity to take up new technology, to the surge of our companies including
the crop of export-oriented small and medium enterprises towards best practice and
commitment to quality.
So the policies we announce today are not the first word; and, certainly, nor will they be
the last. They represent steps along the road of continuous improvement.
In fact, today's statement provides for measures that will raise $ 353 million more in
revenue over the next four years than will actually be spent.
In this way, the Government Is making room for a range of other initiatives which also
build on success In other areas.
What we are about today Is good public policy and good government.
The Government has already done much to foster innovation by creating a more open
economy and a better macroeconomic environment where competition is more vibrant
and the rewards of Innovation easier to capture. There have also been significant
Investments In education and training and in our basic research effort. 
TEL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 04/ 08
4
Today we take the next steps to strengthen Australia's capacity for innovation by which
we mean: generating ideas
a commercialisIng and using new ideas
linking Australia even more closely into ideas elsewhere In the world
0 encouraging new ideas in business and the work place
accelerating the application of ideas by using the Information super highway, and
promoting access to information technology for all Australians, Including people
with disabilities, those in remote areas, people on low incomes and women.
Put simply, Innovation Is about new products and services and new and better ways of
producing them.
For a company, innovation provides a key to Increased competitiveness.
In today's world, tastes and technology change rapidly information moves fast. And
good ideas are quickly copied or superseded. There is constant pressure to come up with
something new and better.
Success depends on being able to meet the needs of more discerning customers.
The firms that will prosper will be those committed to continuous renewal through
innovation the ones which are enterprising and skilled enough to differentiate their
product and create a distinctive competitive edge.
For the economy as a whole, Innovation lies at the heart of productivity growth. And at
the heart of Innovation lie Ideas. Innovation in putting Ideas to work.
It Is not just the skills of the workforce or management, or the capital they have to use,
but how these are used In ever more productive combinations, which Is the central driver
of economic growth and rising living standards. Fostering an environment which rewards
Innovation Is therefore a powerful lever In raising productivity and growth.
But Imperatives of innovation go beyond the economic. A sophisticated and just society
will be Information rich. It will be enterprising In Its response to new ideas and challenges
and It will utilise technology to its full capabilities. This will ensure the highest quality of
life for all Australians.
There Is no simple model of innovation. It can come from different sources, It can come
from basic scientific research which produces a result capable of commercial
exploitation. It can come from changing the way a workplace is organiised to improve
flexibility and responsiveness to customer needs. It can come from utilising existing
equipment In a novel way, not envisaged by the original manufacturer.
Innovation is a complex process of Interaction and Information transmission which is
strongly Influenced by a nation's culture, particularly Its willingness to rewarr enterprise
and risk taking.
Ideas can emerge from anywhere within such a system. Turning Ideas Into maximum
economic benefit depends primarily on a competitive and responsive private sector and
strong lines of communication between all parts of the system.
These outcomes will only materlalise where Information flows freely within the system.
The most successful firms are those that are highly attuned to the needs of the market,
have access to leading edge technology to convert market needs Into commercial
products or services, and the management and the financial resources to facilitate this
process. 
6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 05/ 0:
Australia already has the basis for building an Innovative and enterprising society. For
many reasons among them the quality of our education, our Investment in world class
science and research, our cultural diversity, our capabilities In technology and
engineering, our first class communications we can build an Information rich society
which complements the advantages which our natural resources and environment
provide. I do not say we have reached optimal levels In these. Indeed, I am very much aware that
we need to work on all of them. They are relative strengths, but collectively they provide
a very strong foundation.
So let me summarise the measures we are announcing today.
First, we need to keep generating new ideas.
The Government has chosen seven visionary science projects which will boost our
science infrastructure and link Industry with large scale collaborative research to keep
Australia abreast of the world's most advanced technologies.
The Government will continue its support for industry research and development
through the 160 per cent R&amp; D tax concession, which will be fine tuned to improve
accessibility, management and cost effectiveness. Change will reduce uncertainties
for companies, while closing all opportunities for abuse.
The Government will renew the $ 40 million a year competitive grants scheme for
Industry research and development. The grants target high quality projects by well
managed companies, recognising that high-technology start-ups are the nurseries for
new Industries.
The Government will fund five new Cooperative Research Centres ( CRCs),
bringing the total to 67, and has decided to establish the CRCs as a permanent
program with new CRCs approved on a rolling two year basis. New CRCs are to be
supported in the areas of advanced engineering, sports science and medicine,
intelligent transport systems, textile technology and building and construction
technology. Next year the Government will contribute around $ 140 million to the CRC
program.
The second category of Initiatives will Improve the flow of finance into business
Innovation and our capacity to commerciallse our scientific research.
A new package of measures designed to help finance the Innovation process will be
implemented. An important source of ' patient' or ' growth' capital will be opened up
with the new ability of the banks to provide equity capital to their clients needing to
fund business expansions. Initially the Investments are likely to be directed to firms
with strong growth potential and tumovers between $ 1 million and $ 50 million. New
programs will upgrade the financial management skills of SMEs to prepare them
better for raising debt or equity finance to make them ' investment ready'. Through
an education campaign, the Govemment will also help Increase the understanding of
the Investment community, particularly superannuation trustees, of the
opportunities for profitable Investment In Australian companies.
Three new Innovation Flagship Projects will bring science, Industry and user groups
together to speed the development of new products, processes and services. The
new projects, costing $ 23m, will comprise a mineral technologies pilot plant, a
hydrodynamic testing facility, and a facility for the development of magnetic
resonance in the advanced diagnosis of cancer.
An additional $ 20 million will be spent over four years to encourage greater access
to, and uptake of, new technology by Australian firms. More Technology Support
Centres, which were established to help SMEs with technical advice and access to
R&amp; D facilities and skills training, will be established. Experience with institutions like
Germany's Fraunhoffer, and the Queensland Manufacturing Institute clearly
demuiinotiate the advantage of these centres to Innovative firms.
TEL: 
TEL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 06/ 08
6
A new Research Commercialisation Program will help get the high quality work
which is done in our public sector science agencies into the market. Tile
Government will also encourage the establishment of new companies as business
spin-offs from the research sector.
0 The Government will strengthen Australia's Intellectual property system to better
protect ideas developed in Australia.
A broad-ranging Innovation Culture Program will raise comnmunity awareness of the
Importance of science, engineering, technology and enterprise to Australia's future
economic and social well-being.
Third, the Government will spend $ 17 million over four years to expand International
science and technology links and cooperation and establish an International panel for
CSIRO to help promote Australian science to the world.
* Subject to private sector participation, the Government will provide funding for an
Australian Trading Company In Osaka, Japan, to help firms, particularly In the food
sector, sell to Japanese retail outlets: and, In addition, support stronger collaboration
between Australian companies and R&amp; D agencies and partners overseas through
strategic alliances, joint ventures and consortia.
Fourth, we will stimulate Innovation In business and the work place.
9 Demand for new and better products Is a potent force for Innovation along the supply
chain. The Government will devote $ 6 million to a pilot Leading Edge Customers
program. Major commercial and Government customers, Including BHP, will
participate. The best Australian managers are equal to the best in the world, but there are nlot
enough of the best. Better management will help generate both employment and
productivity. The Government will support a range of management Initiatives In
response to the recent report of David Karpin's Committee on leadership and
management skills.
We will establish a National Centre for the Workplaces of the 21st Century, and a
Benchmarking Information Service to conduct and sponsor research projects and
spread best practice.
The fifth set of measures relates to information technology, probably the dominant force
Already in Australia the national digital broadband network Is being roiled out. By 1999
Teistra will be servicing 4 million homnes and Optus 3 million.
We are seeing Australians embrace the new on-line services In their schools, their work
places and their homes.
The number of Internet users is currently doubling every three months.
And only the United States has more Internet users per capita than Australia.
Of course, this Is not really surprising because Australians have always shown an
enthusiasm to adopt new technologies.
For example, we have the third highest number of personal computers per head in the
world, 
EL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 07/ 08
7
Australia, as a sparsely populated Island continent, has everything to gain from
Instantaneous flows or Information and the capacity to do business anywhere In the world
at our finger tips. The comnmunications revolution also suits our social ambitions our
egalitarian and Inclusive ambitions.
The Government has created a national strategy for Information and communications
services and technologies.
Today's statement takes the strategy a step further, ensuring wide access throughout the
community to information services, developing content for the Information networks and
providing the support ot information technology to Australian Industry.
The starting point for access must be to ensure that all our school children have the
opportunity to benefit from the new Information services and the confidence to use them,
This will be vital to their future. That is why we have been working with the States and
Territories to establish the Education Network Australia ( Ed NA) to deliver a wide range of
services to every school, technical college and university.
It Is also why Teistra and Optus are spending $ 185 mnillon to provide the Infrastructure to
link our schools to Information services. By 1999, 97 per cent of schools will have ISDN
digital links and half of them Broadband links.
The Government appreciates the Importance of assisting the wider community to be part
of this revolution as well. Homes and businesses are the key platform, but community
facilities must be Included, not least as a safety net. Accordingly, we will:
0 Ensure that every public library Is linked to on-line services.
Extend the comnmunity Information network, which provides a network of computers
In public locations, to all States and Territories by the end of 1998.
And provide a national Indigenous radio and news service and extend the Tanami
network.
The greatest benefits to flow from the new technologies will accrue to those countries
which create the content.
In the Government's cultural policy, Creative Nation, we Identified three waves of content
production, namely material for CD-ROMs, on-line services and broadband Interactive
services. The measures Introduced today will help see this momentum carry on to the second
phase, namely on-line services.
Ten million doiiars will be committed to a new program called " Australia's Story" to
digitise culturai material from our national collections and make them availabie on-line.
The ABC wiil be funded to digitIse Its radio and TV science archives to establish an online
science service for schools. Support wiil be provided for curriculum materials
showcasing Australian science, and for career education materials covering science,
engineering and technology-based employment.
As a result, all Australian schools and libraries will have access to a very rich array of
cultural and scientific material.
School chiildren wili be able to read the journals of Captain Cook, or explore Australian
flora or fauna, or view an Arthur Boyd painting by clicking on a few ( cons.
Information technology has Itseif become an Important Australian Industry. The
Government's decision to extend the computer bounty will secure Australian manufacture
of the computer and communications hardware to underpin development of new products
and services, Including software.
TEL 
TEL: 6 b. Lie 9 t 4 4 No. 22 F U U.
But more broadly, Information technology Is vital to our Industry performance as a
pervasive enabling technology. It is, Itself, a key to Innovation across the range of
Industry sectors. Accordingly, we have decided to;
establish a $ 3.8 million Superhighway Ready Scheme to show how businesses,
Including SMEs, can use network information services.
support the new information system, Tradeblazer, to help Australian firms Identify
opportunities and do business by accessing information through the Internet.
accelerate Australia's effective use of High Performance Computing and
Communications through $ 24 million for broadband communications between
existing supercomputers, including between Australia and Japan. Centres of
excellence In supercomputing applications for example, in environmental modeliing
will be established.
I appreciate that many of these announcements today are of domestic Australian
government policy. However, to those of you visiting us from overseas, I say this all
these measures which encourage the Innovative thrust evident in Australian industry will
make us an even more attractive business partner In the years to came.
Innovation whether at the national level, the Industry level or the level of the firm Is a
matter of continuous creativity, adaptation and change. So Is good policy.
Which Is why over the past three and half years we have kept up the momentum. Not
because we think we wiil ever complete the task: we know you never get to the last
chapter in the story of change.
Not that we should find this too odious a fact of modern life I can't think of anything
more pointless than governing without a mandate for reform.
Our objective has always been not only to institute change, but to create an environment
In which change will breed change, and Indeed a greater capacity for change.
The same goes for our efforts Australia's and those of other nations In the GATT
Round and with APEC. The aim Is to create a world and regional environment in which
the great economic forces we are seeing unleashed, and the great revoiution in
technology and global communications, become waves we can all ride in the 21st
century. The emphasis must be on " all". We will meet less resistance, we will grow less tired of
change If we make it with the collective interest at heart. We will generate more
momentum and we will get more far-reaching reform, If we take up the challenge as a
cooperative enterprise one in which all may engage and from which all can benefit.
What is remarkabie about these times is their potential for cooperation. And what is
remarkable about cooperation is its potential to create more general prosperity, more
opportunities and better lives for more people.
Sceptical as Australians by nature are, I think the last few years have deepened our belief
in the potential of the times in which we live.
We recognise a much greater capacity to trade and constructively engage with our region
and the world, a much greater capacity to grow and manufacture products and services,
to work In more productive, creative and satisfying ways, to use technology in ways which
bring to our lives more knowledge, more security, more satisfaction to innovate in ways
which will bring us closer to realising our personal and collective ambitions.
This statement we have released today will help increase the potential of our times and
deepen our faith in it.
So will this Conference and I thank you for inviting me today. 



I J
(. oP U\)
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE COMMONWEALTH HOUSING POLICY,
COMMUNITYAND NATION -BEENLEIGH, 11 DECEMBER 1995
It is a real pleasure to be here.
A nation's success depends on adapting to change and preparing for future
needs. That is why there could be no more appropriate place to launch this
Statement than here in Beenleigh.
Everywhere you look around here there is change. Yet there are also
unmistakable signs that traditions are continuing and that a sense of
community has been retained.
This is a community centre, after all, and it sits between two old landmarks, the
Power Brewery and the famous Yatala Pie Shop which has been an institution
in these parts since World War 11.
Cities need traditions and a sense of continuity because people need these
things. We need to be part of the story. And we need to be part of
communities. We need to belong.
But we need to balance these needs with the need for change. Because we
need investment and growth to create opportunities and jobs, we need the sort
of change which is happening here. And because Australia and the world
Australians live in is changing all the time, we need the sorts of change this
Statement brings.
Last Wednesday in Melbourne I launched the Government's Innovation and
Information Statement. Today, we launch this housing Statement. We have
called it Community and Nation. Both of these Statements are essential steps
on the way to a stronger, more secure and more dynamic Australian social
democracy. The Innovation Statement described major new investments in Australian
industry, technology and telecommunications. It recognised that to keep 
Australia in the first rank of nations we need to be at the forefront of technology
and ideas.
The Statement was an investment in ideas: it contained strategies for making
Australian ideas, and world ideas, work for Australia.
It was also an investment in best practice, in making Australian business and
industry as efficient and productive and creative as any in the world.
It was an investment in small business, because it is in small and medium
sized enterprises that ideas become products, Australian products.
We also invested in markets, particularly in the great markets of our region,
because it is on overseas markets that the success of these small businesses
largely depends.
And it was an investment in jobs the jobs of the future which will increasingly
come from these knowledge-based industries and the entrepreneurs who
provide their energy.
The Innovation Statement went much further than questions of technology,
industry and finance. It was a Statement about the kind of Australia we want,
the kind of society we want.
We were concerned with the application of telecommunications technology in
ways which will bring benefits to the greatest number of Australians; including
those for whom this technology creates an opportunity to escape from social,
economic and personal disadvantage. It was a Statement, as I said, to bring
us all closer together.
And so is this housing Statement, Community and Nation.
In so far as the Innovation Statement was an investment in the wealth of the
nation and jobs and opportunity for the Australian people, it was investment in
Australian social democracy. It was done to help provide the foundations of
our future prosperity and strengthen the bonds between us.
Community and Nation expresses the same ambition. It comes from a different
angle, but the ultimate goal is the same.
If it is not already obvious, the example of other countries should make it clear:
we cannot have a fair and just society, one in which opportunity and freedom
abound, if we do not have a strong, flexible, world class economy. But it is just
as true that the most dynamic economy does not guarantee fair and just social
results.
Those social results depend on the willingness of governments to
imaginatively and sensibly intervene. It depends, not just on good intentions
and good feelings, but on good policy. It depends on applying ourselves to 
social policy with the same rigour and intelligence we bring to industry or
telecommunications or the economy.
And that is what we have done, I believe, with Community and Nation.
Housing is fundamental. Cities are fundamental.
We are talking about the environment in which Australians live. In which we
work and raise families. There are no better measures real or symbolic of
how well we are succeeding as a nation and as a society than the quality of
our housing and the nature of our cities.
Cities symbolise our economic and social ambitions and measure how
earnestly we pursue them. They are essential repositories of our continuing
traditions and community values, yet they are also a measure of our dynamism
and modernity.
Look at some of the richest countries in the world even the richest and you
see the results of inadequate planning and infrastructure, all of it ultimately
reflecting inadequate responses to social and economic change and ordinary
human need.
Look and you will see stark evidence of the fact that poor quality housing and
poor urban environments mean greatly reduced opportunities, greatly
increased crime and other social problems.
Not only do such cities inflict environmental hardship and deprivation on large
numbers of their inhabitants, they entrench poverty and disadvantage, they
entrench crime and despair.
You see the manifestations of poverty and crime, but what you don't see is the
economic, social and human cost. You can count the cost of law enforcement
or drug programs, or social welfare; but you can't count the cost to the nation's
social cohesion and self-esteem. And you can't count the cost of wasted talent
and ambition.
When poverty is passed on from one generation to another we all lose. When
we condemn generations to poverty the loss of human energy and creativity is
immeasurable.
As this Statement says, in Australia we have largely avoided the worst of these
problems. However, there is no denying they exist. There is equally no doubt
that the potential for them to multiply is real and immediate.
That is the principal reason for this Statement. If we are to maintain our social
cohesion and keep faith with our traditional egalitarian ambitions, we need to
respond to economic, social and demographic realities. If we are to break the
poverty traps and broaden the fight against unemployment particularly youth
unemployment, we need to respond now. 
This is a Statement to meet modern realities and future needs. It proposes a
long term reform agenda which will go a long way towards ensuring that in the
21 st century Australia's characteristic way of life will be maintained.
This Statement provides for a fundamental reform to housing assistance for
Australians on lower incomes. We hope to enlarge their realm of opportunity
by providing accommodation which meets their family needs and puts
education, training, employment and services within their reach. We aim to
give them better housing and more choice, more options.
Housing is one of the largest components in most families' budgets. Yet the
benefits provided by public housing are the smallest component of the social
wage. While the benefits to a few people may be high, the average benefit is
low because few people can get into public housing.
Under these reforms the Commonwealth will take a much greater responsibility
for providing housing assistance. The reform package will underwrite:
substantial increases in rent assistance for about 500,000 people on
low incomes in private rental housing who might otherwise have to wait
years to get into public housing
the maintenance of a strong public housing sector without financial
disadvantage to existing tenants
subsidies for new tenants in public housing to guarantee that they pay
no more than 25 per cent of their income in rent
a wider choice in housing and location for people on low incomes
the renewal of old public housing estates
the development of benchmarks of affordability for low income renters,
and in consultation with the States, the creation of a new Consumer Code of
Practice.
The linchpin of Community and Nation is a radical reform to the
Commonwealth/ State Housing Agreement indeed we propose to negotiate
with the States a newagreement, one which addresses present and future
needs.
The first Commonwealth/ State Housing Agreement dates from 1945 when it
was introduced to provide public housing for people working in expanding
post-war industries. In the fifty years since that first Agreement, nearly
400,000 houses have been built. 
The people who designed that first agreement had ambitions not unlike our
own. To quote from a report of the Commonwealth Housing Commission at the
time: We consider that housing is essentially an expression of the way of
life of people and that, therefore, it is impossible to separate housing
from a consideration of the broader aspects of the life of the people
from such questions as how and where they earn their living and how
and where they spend their leisure.
These were enlightened sentiments, but the old approach to public housing no
longer delivers what we need.
Many of our housing estates are ageing. The houses are ill-suited to the
composition of families today. They are not located where the jobs are.
And waiting lists which now stand at well over 200,000 continue to grow.
Despite major increases in rent assistance, over 40 per cent of recipients still
pay more than 30 per cent of their income in rent.
The time has clearly come for a reform as basic as that first Agreement.
What the Commonwealth is proposing today is a package to help people live
where the job, training and other opportunities are.
These reforms are about providing greater flexibility in the provision of public
housing. And they are about making housing more affordable for those renting
private houses. The housing reform package we are putting forward today is
about providing opportunities for a better future for many Australians.
The Commonwealth today proposes a package to help Australians live where
the jobs, training and other opportunities are.
These reforms will provide greater flexibility in the provision of public housing
and they will make renting private houses more affordable.
Accordingly, we will seek from the States a fundamental realignment in roles
and responsibilities. We will offer to take over full responsibility for housing
support for people on low incomes, including responsibility for the subsidy
implicit in public housing rental rates. In turn, the States will be asked to
vacate the public housing rental subsidy arrangements and to take
responsibility for the supply and management of public housing.
This increase in Commonwealth responsibilities will require a transfer of funds
from States to the Commonwealth. That is, those funds now employed by the
States in the provision of these subsidies would be turned to the hand of the
Commonwealth. The reforms will be budget neutral across the
Commonwealth, State and Territories. 
The Statement contains a set of key principles for service providers including
the development of a Consumer Code of Practice.
It is important to stress that people currently living in public housing will not be
affected financially by the proposed reforms; and in future, public housing
tenants will pay no more than 25 per cent of their income in rent for
appropriate housing.
However, the principal target of this Statement is a group of Australians who
far outnumber those in public housing. There are 400,000 Australians in
public housing. But there are around 976,000 people receiving assistance for
private rental.
In recent years, we have significantly increased assistance for people on low
incomes in the private rental market. In 1986 we extended rent assistance to
the unemployed, and in 1987 to low income working families. And we have
increased the rates of assistance. For a couple with one or two children, rent
assistance has increased by almost $ 21 a week in real terms since 1983 an
increase of more than 100 per cent.
Nevertheless, there is a huge gap between those receiving rent assistance
and those in public housing, even for people on similar incomes. On average,
rent assistance is worth $ 1,500 per annum for a household. But the public
housing subsidy is worth an average of $ 3,800.
Under the reforms we propose the Commonwealth will use the funds flowing
from the realignment of roles and responsibilities not only to pay directly for the
subsidies of public housing tenants, but also to substantially improve
assistance for those renting privately.
But the primary aim of this Statement is to substantially improve the choices
open to those people on low incomes. There is no doubt that the current
arrangements make it difficult for people to get the housing that best suits
them. There are people in public housing who want to move closer to job
opportunities but are frightened of losing the security and financial support that
public housing provides.
There are others sitting it out on long waiting lists for public housing because
they cannot afford to pay the extra costs of private rental.
The fact is that many Australians take up these advantages, even though it is a
long way from their families and communities and from employment and
training opportunities.
The great change the Government seeks is that people on low incomes get
access to housing that is appropriate to their needs meaning principally
employment, education and services, which are the sources of opportunity. 
The implementation of these reforms is contingent on successful negotiations
with the States. If they are to proceed, we will need to agree a satisfactory
adjustment to financial assistance grants to reflect the Commonwealth's
increased responsibilities on the income support side.
My colleague, Brian Howe, has already advanced discussions with the States
through meetings with State Housing Ministers.
We will also need to agree on a new results-based approach to public housing,
with clear performance indicators.
And the States will need to undertake the responsibility for providing an
adequate supply of affordable housing in appropriate locations.
The Government has proposed to the States and Territories an Interim
Agreement for up to three years from 1 July 1996, based upon existing
arrangements and funding levels, during which many of the building blocks for
the new model can be put in place.
Under the reforms, the States and Territories will have much greater flexibility
in the provision, financing, pricing and efficient management of the public
housing stock. The States and Territories will have more autonomy in
managing their housing programs within an agreed needs framework, a
change which will provide more accountability in property and tenancy
management arrangements.
As I said, the States will be required to supply appropriate housing where it is
needed and that will mean increases in the supply to some areas. However,
the States will be able to consider alternative suppliers and commercial
financing options.
These key changes will allow them to provide more appropriate assistance to
the needs of public housing renters. They will be able to respond to client
needs through a wider range of mechanisms, including leasing in the private
market rather than constructing purpose-built dwellings. This will provide a
substantial and continuing boost to the housing industry. The States and their
authorities will be able to develop a much closer relationship with tenants and
that should mean better results for everyone.
We will seek a better standard of service for people in public housing. At
present, most public housing authorities fill a dual role: they manage the
public housing stock and help potential clients with their accommodation.
As part of the microeconomic reform process, we will seek the separation of
these roles in order to provide a more concerted focus on client needs and
more efficient property management practices. T 
In Sydney, Better Cities is creating the Parramatta link and Blacktown
station. In Melbourne, it is electrifying the rail in Melbourne's South East and
South West corridors.
That is to nominate just some of the projects.
And of course here in Beenleigh, just over three years ago I had the pleasure
of launching the Beenleigh to Robina rail project under the Better Cities banner
in the company of my colleague, Premier Wayne Goss. So I hardly need tell
you that it is a matter of great satisfaction to travel on this railway today.
I also hardly need to say that it is even more satisfying to announce another
million in capital funds for the Better Cities program over the next three
years. This funding will be used for projects in three priority areas.
We will continue to pursue programs of urban renewal, particularly in some of
our older public housing estates.
Our second priority is to improve the links to those international gateways
which connect us to the world. As part of this strategy, the Commonwealth will
contribute to the acquisition of land for a rail corridor to Sydney West Airport.
This contribution will be subject to the New South Wales Government meeting
certain conditions, including agreement on land use around the new airport,
and a timetable and strategy for the rail and road links.
The third priority is to make a better fist of managing development in our major
urban growth corridors. Brisbane to the Gold Coast is an obvious one and
hence our commitment to the railway.
Another example is Mandurah, south west of Perth, where rapid population
and industry growth has put great pressure on infrastructure and services,
particularly transport and water.
Under Better Cities, an integrated approach to management is developing a
rail transit system to service half a million people and clever ways of handling
water, sewerage and urban runout, to improve coast and river quality and
reduce demands for scarce water.
There have been a lot of mistakes made over the years, there has been a lot of
neglect and myopia. These projects prove not only that we have learnt from
our mistakes, but that we can rectify them.
Better Cities has proved just what its name says after generations of
indifference and thwarted good intentions we can build better cities. 
By the same means we hope to eliminate the poverty traps and the alienating
and dispiriting environments in which too many Australians live.
We agree with the remarks made by Father David Cappo of the Australian
Catholic Social Welfare Commission last week when he said that we need to
provide not just houses for people but homes.
And I sincerely hope that the States and Territories will come to the
negotiations with this in mind and in this spirit.
We have an opportunity to make a fundamental and profound improvement not
only to our housing and our cities, but to the quality of our society and the well
being of a great number of our fellow Australians.
At the same time as we pursue this reform we must continue to renew our
urban environment.
Of course, we were not the first to believe in the planning and renewal of our
cities. The Whitlam Government made a concerted effort to solve the
problems. And there were sporadic attempts in the years separating that
government from the original Commonwealth Housing Commission. The
Commission itself was insisting on planning back in 1945, even going so far as
to say that the States should receive no financial assistance unless they had
enacted legislation for regional and town planning.
There have been many successes, but it is safe to say that neither the States
nor the Commonwealth have consistently lived up to these good intentions.
The Better Cities program provides evidence that we can live up to them, and
repair some of the damage.
I have visited any number of major projects in the past couple of years and I
have to say it has been one of the more inspiring experiences. Better Cities is
quite literally revitalising city centres and urban environments around the
continent. In doing so it is conferring very considerable benefits on the
Australian people and on the Australian economy.
In Newcastle, Better Cities' funds have helped restore historic buildings,
construct sea walls and realign roads and build bridges to link the city centre to
major residential developments.
In Stirling, in Western Australia, an electric rail link to the Perth CBD,
constructed with Better Cities funding, has made local businesses more viable
and life more convenient for residents.
In Elizabeth and Munno Para in South Australia, Better Cities funding is
helping to create affordable housing close to centres of employment, education
and community services. 
The Taskforce, working in consultation with State, Territory and local
governments, will seek the means of increasing competition through a
coherent national approach to regulation.
The national approach to regulation will allow consumers a wider choice of
builders, more affordable choices in designs and materials, better quality
homes and a more efficient building industry.
There is some indication of the potential benefits of a national approach. The
Australian model code of residential development, which was released in 1990,
has been widely accepted and is helping people design and build attractive
affordable housing in well planned communities.
The name of this Statement, like the Statement itself, originated in Brian's
office. It suits the man as much as it suits the statement.
Brian Howe is leaving the parliament at the next election and it will be a
distinguished record of public service he leaves behind him. If this is not his
crowning glory it is at least a very big and bright last feather in his cap.
I know that it has been one of Brian's great ambitions to correct that inequality
in our national life which sees a very large number of Australians in private
rental accommodation living with an unwarranted and quite unjustifiable
disadvantage. In the end the justice and the wisdom of his proposal was
irresistible. Brian Howe has been an outstanding member of this Labor Government. He
is, of course, a man of the left but more than that, a man of passionate
conviction. He is also and just as importantly a good politician and a
conscientious and responsible Minister. History will show that he never put his
great desire for reform ahead of what was-on the day practical and necessary,
both for the Government and the nation.
That's why I say the title of this Statement is so appropriate. It is an
expression of Brian's belief in the community of men and women. He believes
in the values of ordinary people; in their capacity, if they are given a chance, to
lead good creative lives and collectively do great things. And he believes that
it is Labor's mission and a government's duty to give them that chance.
Brian also believes in the Australian nation. He believes that for all the vast
distances and cultural differences which separate us, we are, in the last
analysis, all Australians living in one nation; and we do best when we adopt a
national approach and put the national interest first.
He is a communitarian and a nationalist. In this he gives expression to a great
tradition. He has been a proud bearer of that tradition in the Commonwealth
Parliament and he leaves it knowing that in no small way this Statement will
continue to bear it for him. 
And there are many good reasons for building them. Good urban design has
profound benefits for the community, for the environment and for the economy.
Good urban design can remove stress and difficulty, maximise efficiency and
provide the essential " glue" for a community. It can link us both to the future
and our past. It can express our values and ambitions.
Good urban design is also an essential element of good environmental
practice. With good design we can protect natural habitats, prevent
contamination of land and water, improve micro climates and raise community
awareness of environmental issues.
And good urban design also is a powerful force in economic activity. Good
urban design can be a decisive factor in attracting investment. It can give
cities a significant comparative advantage. An OECD report recommends that
cities wishing to stimulate economic activity should invest in infrastructure and
the quality of their urban environments.
These are powerful arguments and cities which have heeded them in Europe,
like Lyon and Munich, are reaping great benefits. In Australia it may be we are
inclined to take our relatively comfortable and easy way of life too much for
granted. If we are to maintain these comforts into the 21 st century and
compete effectively in the front rank of nations we are going to have to take
urban design and planning much more seriously than we have so far in our
history. We hope that this Statement will in time be seen as a turning point in the way
we think about our cities.
Housing is one of our most important industries. It contributes over five per
cent of GDP. In 1994-95 about $ 22.9 billion was spent on new houses,
renovations and additions.
Over the next ten years we will need to add another 1.5 million dwellings to the
6.9 million presently in existence. The fact is we will not be helped in this by
the complex and contradictory web of housing regulations which afflicts the
national housing industry.
The Industry Commission has estimated that reform of building regulations and
building approvals has the potential to deliver an increase in real GDP of one
per cent. If that estimation is correct, reforms to the housing industry have the
potential to deliver more than reforms to water, rail and road combined.
In other words, the housing industry constitutes an area of the economy in
need of major microeconomic reform. To do this the Government will establish
a high-level Taskforce to develop a comprehensive national reform strategy. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MVP
SPEECH, CAMPAIGN LAUNCH FOR THE HON MARY CRAWFORD MVP,
WINDAROO COUNTRY CLUB, BEENLEIGH, QUEENSLAND
I1I DECEMBER 1995
EXTRA C T-REPUBLIC/ IDEN T/ TY
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Now, this election coming up is going to be about what sort of country we are,
what we have become and where we want to be, And you know what the
Government has been doing now for ten years opening Australia up, we
have been seeking to looking for these things, opportunities and equity at
home and enterprise abroad. And we're now going out to the world as we
have perhaps never done before, but not only are we going out there, we're
actually putting into place the structures that will receive us. When I came
back from Osaka a couple of weeks ago, Australia was a part of by the
adoption of that Action Plan the largest free-trade agreement in the world,
and will be an integrated part of the largest whole of any economic
organisation in the world. We are now an integrated member, and we will be
when we get our action plans adopted next year, of a body which is
responsible for the production of 63% of the world's GDP and half the world's
population. So, it's larger than any other body the European Union, or
NAFTA or any other economic grouping. And we're not just sitting on the
outside looking at it, we are an integral part of it. And that's been done by a
Labor Government that had the vision and the wit, and the belief that not only
were we good enough to be in it and to participate in to, but we were open,
stripped down, competitive and ready to be in it, and we have then put the
organisation together so Australia has that sort of place in the world.
Now, these sorts of changes and going out there as a community proud of
what its done, proud of itself, clear about who it is, strong about its culture
it's why I believe that in the end, we can't approach the community around us,
or be an integral part of it as we would like to be, by saying here we are a
unique country, proudly Australian, but by the way, our head of state is the
Monarch of Great Britain. It might have worked for us in the past, it won't
work for us any more. It's why the change to an Australian republic is not 
TEL 2
simply an important thing for our identity and our culture, an affirmation of
what it is to be an Australian, but rather as well that it's going to be part of
better economic integration of Australia in the Asia Pacific, as a consequence
of this. And I don't * have any time for John Howard's view he says " oh, I'm a
traditionalist, I believe in the Monarchy". What he is saying is no Australian
is good enough or smart enough to be our head of state. That's what it really
means down in a nutshell, what it really means is that he believes someone
with a hereditary title can be and should be head of Australia, our head of
state, can best perform the responsibilities of head of state, rather than any
one of us. Any one of us, And that's a terrible indictment I think on a country
such as this.
An indictment of a view that I believe he has on a country with such promise,
and such vitality, and such individuality as Australia has. So, it's going to be
about these things about who has faith in Australians, and who believes in
us as a society. Who will back Australians in. Who knows they can do all
the smart things that any other country can do, and has the confidence to let
them go and do it, and build the structures within which they can do it. These
are the things that I think Australia needs now, and not a trip down the time
tunnel of s ome derivative society that believes that as he said in his foreign
policy speech we have let the US Alliance go. As if the United States
Government wants another mendicant state turning up saying oh, will you
please protect us? What they want are allies that can stand on their feet and
make structures that actually help them, as well as ourselves, in the
management of world issues, world trade issues etc. And that's the sort of
ally I believe Bill Clinton wants not someone with their hand out looking for
some gifts strategic client status some gifting from the United States. And
that's why, again, it gets back to whether you have faith in yourselves,
ourselves, to relate to the old societies around us, to find our place in the
world, to feel comfortable here, and to become part of the community of
nations here. Or whether we say, look, we want security from Asia, rather
than security in Asia, because that's John Howard's message he wants
security from Asia, not security in Asia. The Government is after security in
Asia, he wants security from Asia. And when he said in his speech that
defence capabilities and defence collaboration and all of these things, good
though they may be, present at once an opportunity, but on the other hand,
an issue of conflict. That is, whether it will actually help us protect ourselves.
In other words, our friends in Asia might be our enemies in Asia, and we
should be wary of them, and that's why we need to keep our bet covered by
this sort of unreconstructed, if you like, alliance with the United States.
Now, that's not the way we will prosper. We will prosper in this country with
security in Asia, not from Asia, because 18 million of us occupying this huge
continent, but holding it in fear of the neighbourhood around us is, I think, for
us untenable. But that's essentially his view. Now, he's doing a statement on
Wednesday about what he calls identity and these things. But all of it will be
covering his tracks, about what he really thinks. He says " I'll give you a
republic, too but at that referendum, I will actually be voting for the
Monarchy". Now, to get a republic referendum through, you have got to get a
majority of electors in a majority of States, and if the Government isn't going
T1E2L:. Dec. 95 19: 03 No. 026 P. 02/ u. 
TEL 1z -bDc ., JI NO. C
3
flat out for it absolutely flat out for it there is no chance of it succeeding.
Imagine what chance you would win with the Prime Minister running around
saying " well, we have got a republic referendum on, but actually, I'm in favour
of the Monarchy". Now, this is his proposal. You see, because basically, his
whole world started at Whitehall, and finishes at Pennsylvania Avenue.
That's his view of the world, and the fact that we are here is just a sort of
inconvenience you know, likes the country, but doesn't like the location.
Likes the house, but doesn't like the neighbourhood. And I just can't see how
there is any profit in Australians supporting that sort of view. And the other
things, I think, are going to be important too. And that is, the things that
underpin our society, like a decent social safety net, or Medicare, or a fair
industrial relations system, or superannuation. He's saying now after saying
for years Medicare, we are going to rip it up, we're going to go back to before
Medibank, bulk billing is a rort, and we are going to make deep cuts in
Government expenditure, and talking about a structural surplus in their first
year, which implies cuts of $ 9-10 billion, he's now saying ' oh, no I don't
believe any of that any more". He now says he is in favour of Medicare, of a
decent social safety net, fair industrial relations. Well, as I have said to other
audiences don't believe him. He doesn't mean it. What he means, is what
he said for so long. And when he goes around the country saying " people
know what I stand for I have been around for a long time in public life, they
know what my values are, they know what I stand for Yes they know what
he stands for ripping Medicare up, pulling the social wage apart, running on
a contract basis with no protection no Award protection's in the industrial
arena. These are the things which he believes in, and also cutting back
Government spending in important services.
ends. 



01
PRIME MINI1STER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF AUSTRALIA MALAYSIA SOCIETY
WEDNESDAY 13 DECEMBER 1995
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
It is very good to be here to launch the Australia Malaysia Society.
And it is good to have so many old friends of Australia from Malaysia present.
I particularly want to welcome again the Chief Minister of Sarawak, Tan Sri
Taib Mahmud, who is Chair of the Malaysia-Australia Foundation and his
colleagues from Malaysia.
The establishment of this society and the formation of the Malaysia
Australia Foundation which Dr Mahathir launched in KL last year are a
reflection of what it is that really underpins the relationship between Australia
and Malaysia that is, the level of contact and depth of friendship between
the people of the two countries.
This is not a relationship which exists only between Governments. It is one
which is nourished and sustained by all the links which individual Malaysians
and Australians have been built up over the years. That is what motivated
people in both countries to establish the Society and the Foundation.
Substantially, of course, those ties have grown out of the experience of
students. The figures may be familiar, but they are worth repeating. Over
120,000 Malaysians have been educated in Australia and many of them, like
our guests today, have gone on to hold influential positions in the Malaysian
government, public service and business community.
At any one time, more than 10,000 Malaysian students are studying in
Australia. Another great area of strength has been the relationship between our
defence forces. These ties go back even before Malaysia's independence.
They are formalised through the Malaysia Australia Joint Defence Program
and the Five Power Defence Arrangements. Australia is the major overseas
provider of training for the Malaysian defence force and we have regular
discussions about defence and security matters. No-one who has any 
contact with the military in either of our countries can doubt the close
personal bonds which have grown out of these professional links.
The trade and investment relationship has been another key source of
people-to-people contact, of course. As we have seen with the establishment
of this society, the Australian business community has been a keen supporter
of the bilateral relationship over the years.
By next year, Malaysia should overtake Britain to become one of Australia's
ten largest export markets. It is now our eleventh largest trading partner, with
two-way trade of $ 3.5 billion in 1994-95. Australia also ranks as Malaysia's
eleventh largest trading partner, showing how evenly the relationship benefits
us both.
Bilateral trade grew at a remarkable 22 per cent last year and has grown at
that rate for the last three years. And Malaysia's strong growth, predicted at
almost nine per cent this year, and its program of privatisation and
infrastructure development, provide excellent opportunities for Australian
exporters and investors.
Prospects for trade in services are equally good. Total services trade was
worth over one billion dollars in 1993-94 and it has been growing at 17 per
cent a year.
Tourism is a significant part of this trade and another way in which people-topeople
contacts are growing. Almost 60 000 Malaysian holiday-makers came
to Australia last year, and up to 100 000 Australian tourists visit Malaysia
each year. The recent expansion of air services between us is a further good
move which will help tourism.
Australia and Malaysia have also been working closely together on global
and regional economic developments. We have used the Cairns Group to
press for greater liberalisation of world trade in agriculture and we have a
very cooperative relationship in APEC and in the dialogue on trade facilitation
between AFTA and CER.
So this is a very healthy relationship and we have a very good story to tell.
But to maintain it at this level we need to work on it. Because, paradoxically,
there are dangers in our very closeness and familiarity with each other.
It can make the familiar views we have of each other harder to discard when
they are no longer relevant. We can get stuck with images of each other
which are out of date.
Precisely because this relationship is so old, it brings with it a lot of
preconceptions which can impede a clear view of each other.
I have no doubt that Australia needs to see Malaysia in a new way and that
the same is true in the other direction. 
Australians need to look at Malaysia, not through the prism of the Emergency
or Confrontation or the Colombo Plan connections, but in the context of the
dynamism and change which have made it Southeast Asia's fastest-growing
economy 9 per cent this year and an average of 8.5 per cent per year over
the past seven years.
And during that same period, Malaysian exports have grown each year at
double-digit rates.
This economic growth has been almost entirely driven by the expansion of
Malaysia's manufacturing sector which contributed 20 per cent of GDP in
1985 but 31 per cent in 1994.
This is a remarkable national achievement.
Looking the other way, I hope Malaysians will see a modern multicultural
Australia which is not an outpost of Europe or North America, which is not
trying to be Asian or American or African or anything other than what we are,
but which is economically strong, technologically sophisticated and endowed
with resources which complement the needs of Malaysia and the other rapidly
developing countries of Asia.
Future success for the Australia -Malaysian relationship depends on our
recognising that these changes are underway and building on them. We can
continue to do the sort of things we have been doing, but we need to do them
in new ways. And we need to take advantage of the economic and social
changes in both our countries to find new things to do together.
For example, Dr Mahathir and I agree that technology and research will be an
important new area for cooperation. We discussed in Jakarta last year the
opportunities for us in environmental technology. Australian Cooperative
Research Centres and Malaysian institutions like the Standards and
Industrial Research Institute of Malaysia, are already pursuing these those
opportunities, and discussing collaborative research into polymers and
aeronautics. In the field of education, where our relationship has been so close, we need
to think less in terms of Malaysian students coming to Australia for their
education, and more about new approaches such as opening Australian
campuses in Malaysia or twinning Australian and Malaysian educational
institutions allowing Malaysian students to share their tertiary degree
between the two countries.
But I have to say that I hope that, in these changes, we will not lose the
opportunity for students from each country to live and study in the other. And
I am pleased to note that some Australian students are now beginning to
pursue their studies in Malaysia. That has been a source of the remarkable
strength in this relationship, and we need to preserve it. 
In the area of trade we are already seeing the results of the changes in our
two economies.
Fully one quarter of our trade now comprises Elaborately Transformed
Manufactures. This reflects both Australia's increasing competitiveness in
manufacturing, and the sophistication of the Malaysian economy.
And our long standing investment relationship is one of the healthiest in the
region. We each have investments worth several billion dollars in the other
country. Malaysian investment in Australia has been growing quickly by 34
per cent in 1994 and diversifying into new areas. And while Australian
investment in Malaysia is growing well with over 200 businesses now
represented there I would like to see more growth.
These are some of the matters I hope to discuss when, as I can now
announce, I visit Malaysia officially on 15 and 16 January. I am very much
looking forward to the opportunity of talking to Dr Mahathir and his colleagues
and to seeing developments in Malaysia for myself.
Few relationships between countries have such a base of goodwill as this
one. It has a flying start.
I am sure the Australia-Malaysia Society's activities will complement the work
of the Malaysia-Australia Foundation and other organisations which have
been established to foster people-to-people links between Australia and
Malaysia including the Canberra based Australian/ Malaysian Society in
deepening this relationship. The Society's first project a photographic
exhibition on multiculturalism in Australia and Malaysia, to be shown
simultaneously in both countries is an excellent way to start. I understand
that Dr Mahathir's daughter, Marina Mahathir, proposed this project, following
her own very successful exhibition " Eyes on ASEAN" in Australia last year.
It only remains for me to congratulate all of you, and Ric Charlton in
particular, for the work which has been put into establishing the Society.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the Society formally and to wish it well for
the future. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LUNCH HOSTED BY NEVILLE NEWELL MP,
TWIN TOWNS SERVICES CLUB, TWEED HEADS, 20 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well we are going to run a little quiz. Why do you think we are here? You
guessed it. We are here for the thing that Neville [ Newell] and Harry [ Woods]
and Bob [ Home] have been on our backs now for about three years and that
is the Pacific Highway. And it is, of course, the major civics works project of
the East Coast of Australia and it has been in its current state the major
inhibitor to development and, of course, the cause of so many deaths.
Now we have reached a point in our history where we are now as a
Commonwealth Government doing things with the States. We have
recognised, all of us, that the responsibilities to the nation, the communities,
the regions, go beyond anyone's sphere of Government. And in the Council
of Australian Governments, we have put together a tri-partite body which is
the Commonwealth, the States and Local Government. And, today, we are
working that same model across the sectors to do another great public work
and that is to modernise and renovate the Pacific Highway.
You understand the Commonwealth has now for many years, as a result of
the Council of Australian Governments processes, divided our responsibilities
between the national highway system and the urban and arterial roads which
were formerly, in part, managed financially by the Commonwealth. So that
they are the responsibility of the States and we carry the national highway
system. And the national highway running between Sydney and Brisbane is the
New England Highway and it is the highway for which the Commonwealth has
taken responsibility. But the development and the movement of people, of
course, in this State and in Southern Queensland, is along the coast. And
while this Pacific Highway has been the responsibility of the States of
Queensland and New South Wales, the financial responsibility and cost of
bringing it to the status of a major highway, are beyond the financial capacity
of any one State. 
So my colleague, Laurie Brereton, brought to the Cabinet a proposal to fund
a dollar for dollar funding arrangement with the States of New South Wales
and Queensland, an augmentation of the national highway responsibilities
and road programs of the Commonwealth, in a way where we could attempt
to undertake this major work.
Now you might recall that the NRMA published a report, I think it was in July
this year, about the Pacific Highway and I understand it is about to publish
another. And it talks about the highway being the spine of the continent's
East Coast and the need to upgrade and renew it. And I think, by and large,
given that the Bureau of Transport Economics has now published quite a lot
of data on this project, that we will find probably in a reflection in the NRMA
report our own understanding of the costings of the project.
Essentially, what the Commonwealth is proposing today is that we will offer
$ 750 million in ten annual instalments of $ 75 million each to the States of
New South Wales and Queensland for the fast tracking and duplication of the
highway over ten years.
The offer is conditional on New South Wales and Queensland maintaining
their existing levels of commitment to the Pacific Highway and agreeing to
match the Federal Government's contribution dollar for dollar and we have
indications from both Governments that they will so make those contributions.
And just to make sure they will, we have got their name on the maker's, label
here. We have tied them right in.
Now what this will mean is, of course, that we will see $ 750 million from the
Commonwealth and $ 750 million from the two States and that will mean an
additional $ 1.5 billion will be spent on the highway over and above existing
State commitments. So there is already a State program. This will be rolled
together with this new program, but rather than simply dealing with black
spots and some of the more difficult areas, with the current program and
maintenance we would be looking at, of course, a complete rebuild of the
highway. New South Wales and Queensland will retain responsibility for the Pacific
Highway and we will maintain our commitment, of course, for the National
Highway system including the New England. But we realise, I think, that the
reconstruction of the Pacific Highway is a national transport priority and we
are prepared to pull our weight in it. We are very pleased by the indication of
cooperation from the two States.
This represents one of the largest public investments in the Commonwealth,
an investment especially in the future of Queensland and the north coast of
NSW. The Pacific Highway reconstruction project will develop a world class
highway up the Pacific edge of Australia. Currently only about 16 per cent of
the highway features dual carriageways and even if we continued funding at
present levels for the next 10 years, coverage would be less than 20 per cent.
So, even if we carried on as we are, we would only have 20 per cent of it as a
dual carriageway in a decade. But, under this new proposal 81 per cent of 
the highway will feature dual carriageways by 2005 and 2006. All 192
kilometres of poor alignment and all 206 of narrow pavement will be removed
all of it removed. All 63 narrow bridges will be eliminated and all major
towns will be bypassed by the highway. This, of course, will make them more
safer and more pleasant places in which to live, which will increase tourist
potential. They are, of course, Nerang, Coolangatta, Tweed Heads,
Chinderah, Brunswick Heads, Ballina, Woodburn, Cowper, Ulmarra,
Woolgoolga, Coffs Harbour, Uranga, Kempsey, Kew, Taree, Bulahdelah,
Karuah and Raymond Terrace. None of them will have the highway running
through them.
In other words, we can get on with, essentially, recognising the needs of a
dual carriageway highway, a safe road for conveyance and one which will be
an artery which provides the building of greater communities along the coast
as the natural shift to the coast takes place. As we see the growth in
population and the growth in demand, we will be able to put this major
national asset into place.
There are, I think, many people have been supportive of this being done for
many years. My colleagues have made an enormous difference in this
debate and I want to acknowledge that. There are things said in public life,
people say things about members of Parliament in the due course of events,
but let me assure you that Neville, Harry and Bob have made this, I suppose,
amongst all of the things in which they have been involved perhaps the
principal thing which they knew the Commonwealth had to be involved with.
So, the point of electing local members of Parliament to take their place in the
national Parliament and in the government is to be able to decipher what is
needed, what can be delivered, what should be done by the Commonwealth,
what other things should be left by the States or how we do things
collaboratively. They have worked together and as a consequence of their
membership of the government, this project is going to happen. I would like
to acknowledge that. I would like to also acknowledge Laurie Brereton's role
in this. Laurie has put down more cubic metres of concrete, built more
bridges, more roads and had more local and regional arguments than anyone
in the country I think. Maybe I could rival him, but the fact is I need to say, in
NSW, " Mr Builder, thank you." I actually think that is going to be the case
here again. Of course, he has seen the need for this to be done and neither
he or I are into the semantics of what is a national highway and what isn't.
There is a major need here and that is what we are responding to. We are
not trying to find characterisations. I'd like also to acknowledge the work of
the NRMA. I am delighted that Don MacKay could be with us today, for the
conscientious effort as a Roads and Motorists Association, you represent the
interests of people in the most difficult stretch of road in the country. They
have done that consistently and conscientiously and their views about this
have been material to the way in which the government has responded. I
want to take this opportunity to thank Don and the Association.
But, I think, what it means, more than all of the technical things, is an
endorsement by the Commonwealth, again, of the importance of this region of
Australia. It is such a beautiful area. We were sifting in the plane coming up, 
we were just to the landward of the coast on the way up, looking at all of the
coastal towns as they came by and also the river mouths. And you see what
a wonderful stretch of coast it is. It has got to be one of the most naturally
beautiful places in the world and what a great bequest we have been left as a
nation, to manage this coast line well, to give people their enjoyment of it and
at the same time secure it as economic assets for the States and for the
country. This is, I think, where we have seen a very big change in the
government's policy with Better Cities. I was here just a week ago taking the
first ride on the train from Robina back towards Brisbane were it will link up
with the main electrified line out of Brisbane and I'm sure we are going to see
a time too when that railway will come down here to Tweed Heads.
This is another thing that both Neville and Harry have been talking about now
since under the Better Cities program we join with Queensland in the funding
of the railway from Robina and given that this area of coast, particularly from
Brisbane to Coolangatta, is the fastest growing area of Australia and, of
course, the area from Tweed Heads down through Grafton et cetera has also
got the same buoyancy of growth. What we do need to see in place are the
appropriate bits of public infrastructure and the good thing about the railway,
for instance, is that it is actually going to design the way in which the
development moves around it. In other words, it is not coming simply at the
end of the process, even though we have seen a lot of development in the
Gold Coast and the hinterland, it is going to define, in fact, the way in which a
lot of this development occurs.
So, there is a role for the Commonwealth. We see it under Better Cities. We
have seen it where we have introduced stimulatory statements like
One Nation, where we have put funding into various projects that are beyond
a municipal government's capacity or the states's capacity and we have got
now some very large rolling programs running as well. The main message is,
I think, that we are very interested in the north coast of NSW and this area
between Tweed Heads, Coolangatta and Brisbane. We have been happy to
join with the Government of Queensland and now the Government of NSW in
doing these things.
The one bit left undone was, of course, the highway and, with this
announcement today, that will be done as well. As a consequence we can
start thinking in a unitary way of the whole region. That has come by virtue of
the fact that the Commonwealth recognises and has a role in these regions
with the States and with local government.
So, I think, this is a very big change and it also recognises the urbanisation of
the coast and how important it is for us to get it right and how the devotion of
public assets can be important. There is a place for private growth and
private assets, a place for the public ones and invariably where the public
ones are set, it will set the pattern of development which then follows it and
this is what we have been seeking to do. As well as that, can I just mention
that you might recall our Working Nation program which is a statement
designed to deal with long term unemployment. Simon Crean announced
recently under our New Work Opportunities project that we are going to see 
1750 jobs created in the region here under that program and also we
supported under Working Nation, Regional Economic Development
Organisations. We have established one in northern NSW and the point of
that is to focus on what the region needs and how best it should develop. We
have found in the McKinsey study that the regions doing best and there are
many regions of Australia growing faster than the capital cities the ones
doing best are the ones that are locally led by the Federal members, by State
members, by local government, by the business organisations, by unions, by
non government organisations coming together and providing leadership.
In other words, if a community knows what it wants itself then it will draw its
own investment to it and what we find happens is that most of the investment,
in fact, doesn't come in from outside, it actually comes from the region, that
existing businesses grow faster and it is giving a signal to the State and to
the Commonwealth governments about what they might do with the area.
One of the great challenges, but I think one of the most exciting prospects for
us, is to do all these things but to do it with an eye to nature and a beauty.
The first thing you always think about flying in here is the nature and the
beauty of it because it is an absolutely exceptional part of the country. It
doesn't matter where you go in the world, when you come back here it always
strikes you.
Just three weeks ago we made key decisions about the forests of this
country. In what must be the biggest public decision in respect to the forests
ever, six million hectares of Australian native forests have been reserved
under Deferred Forest Areas for broader assessment into Regional Forest
Agreements. In doing this, we will see I hope, the dual commitments to the
environment, to representative stands of native species of trees and to the
forest products industry, so we can have a sustainable forest products
industry. And where those two objectives clash, we are going to have a very
large reconstruction package of financial measures to support those
industries and the people in those industries who have got difficulties dealing
with the reconstruction of the forest industries arising from that package. But,
I think we can do it and, in doing it, I know there are two things here: there is
substantial environmental conscientiousness, as naturally you would expect,
given the beauty of it and the forest resources in this region of Australia.
I think, people should be assured that no government has ever done more
and more conscientiously something to actually keep important
representative stands of forests in this country. But, we are also conscious of
the jobs and the employment and the costs of reconstruction of these
industries. And on this occasion we have been, I think, very cognisant of that
and the financial commitments and adjustment packages we have announced
recognise that too.
So, if you take the region as a whole, just looking at the difficulties of, say,
development from Newcastle up to Brisbane, all the demands for population
growth, all the demands for traffic, the settlement difficulties along the coast,
the importance of the preservation of the hinterland, the importance of 
agriculture and timber industries, what we are seeking to do is to do it
together as a whole policy, and to focus that on the whole region. I think,
what we are talking about today, the transport spine, the link that runs
through it, important as that is going to be to all of these communities, what is
I think, important beyond that is how we approach the whole region and we
underline the beauty and preserve it, we secure the prime natural assets and
we develop the place for the quiet enjoyment of those who have chosen to
live here.
Can I thank you very much for coming to lunch today, to be here at this
important announcement and let me again thank my colleagues Neville
Newell, Harry Woods and Bob Home for their interest in this and say that
when communities get serious about their own needs and prospects, and
they get serious members who know they have got to earn their freight and
are not sitting there with some sort of God-given right or to be hearing voices,
of being tapped on the shoulder by some supernatural force to represent the
rest of us, that people are actually out there working and doing, this is the
result of that sort of representation.
Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



Is
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF MALAYSIA,
KUALA LUMPUR, 15 JANUARY 1996
Prime Minister, thank you for the honour you do me and my country with this
dinner and this visit, the fIrst by an Australian Prime Minister since 1984.
The friendship between our two countries Is old and runs deep,
50,000 Australian servicemen and women have served in Malaysia, and many
lie burled In Malaysian soil. 120,000 Malaysians have studied In. Australia.
200,000 Malaysians and Australians come and go between our two countries
each year.
Prime Minister, I know Australians hold your country In warm regard. I know
they want Australia's relationship with Malaysia and the Malaysian people to
thrive. And it should thrive. Our shared past provides a strong foundation,
but increasingly the strength of our relationship derives from the future we
share. Whatever the benefits of our relationship In years gone by, there are
more many more to be gained in the years head.
The past can no longer be the primary source of understanding between us.
We must work hard to understand the modern face of our two countries.
Consistent with the changes being made In both countries, and with the fluid
International environment In which both countries live, Australia and Malaysia
need a fresh, contemporary appreciation of each other.
Change Is something we have In common. It Is fundamental to our
contemporary existence as undeniable as any fact In our history.
Under your leadership, Prime Minister, Malaysia has set Itself the goal of
becoming a developed country by 2020. And anyone who has watched your
progress In recent times will be In little doubt that you will succeed.
Malaysia Is now one of Asia's most rapidly growing economies, with a rate of
growth consistently better than 8 per per cent, and this year at 9.5 per cent.
Your country Is a dynamic force for prosperity in the region, and this modem
city of Kuala Lumpur Is emerging as a major regional business centre. 
It is a quite remarkable economic transformation, a remarkable national
achievement and, Prime Minister, It Is, Indelibly, a remarkable tribute to your
personal vision, leadership and energy..
Malaysia's economic revolution is watched with admiration in Australia, where
the necessity for economic change and the rewards and difficulties which
accompany It, are well understood. The process has been different In Australia,
but the ambition has been the same. We recognisedmore than a decade ago
that our future depended upon sweeping economic change.
The changes we made turned Australia Into one of the most open economies
in the world: open, Innovative and diverse, forty. per cent more competitive than
it was a decade ago and growing consistently.
Our mining and rural industries remain great strengths and continue to
complement the needs of rapidly developing countries in the region, including
Malaysia. But our fastest growing exports are manufactures and services, and
elaborately transformed manufactures are growing faster than anything else.
This is why we say, Prime Minister, that we understand the need for change
and the realilis of it.
And because this change In our economy has been made contemporaneously
with the new dynamic growth In countries like your own. we also say that this
Is the region where Australia's future lies.
The facts speak for themselves. Sixty per cent of all our exports go to the
countries of Asia. Forty per cent of our Imports now come from those
countries. By the end of this year all of our top ten export markets will very likely be In the
Asia-Pacific region.
The level of our engagement with Asia Is unprecedented and I believe
Irreversible. And not just In economic terms. We now seek our security In the
region not from the region.
We continue to participate in the Five Power Defence Arrangements, which
contribute directly to the defence of Malaysia and Singapore. We are an active
participant in the ASEAN Regional Forum. We have just signed an historic
security agreement with Indonesia, which signals the complete confidence
each of us has In the strategic intentions of the other. And our alliance with the
United States constitutes a dependable pillar of security In the region. 
Our cultural links with the countries of the region go back a surprisingly long
way. Australia has long been one of the " universities of Asia" and that tradition
continues with nearly 70,000 Asian students around 10 per cent of the
Australian student population now studying in Australia.
At the same time, Australians are increasingly learning from Asia. . In no other
country in the world, in fact, is such a high proportion of the population studying
the languages of Asia as second languages. And in ten years' time we aim to
have 60 per cent of Australian school students studying an Asian language.
At a less formal level, the last decade and a half has seen an extraordinary
growth in our awareness of Asian countries and their cultures. Travelling In
Asia is much more common. For many young Australians, the countries of
Asia have replaced Europe as the place to go and see and learn.
At the same time, of course, Asian migration to Australia has radically
increased our understanding of Asian cultures and values. And with Asians
comprising the largest proportion of new migrants each year, this Is a pattern
which Is bound to continue.
Prime Minister4 none of this is to say that we are In the process of becoming
" Asian". Weocinnot be Asian any more than we can be European, American or
African. What we can be, and what we are determined to become, Is a society
which is rare In Its cultural diversity, richness and tolerance, and a country
which Is strong and Integrated with the region around It.
Prime Minister, there are almost limitless opportunities to develop what Is
already a very healthy relationship between our two countries... Last-year trade
between Malaysia-and Australia increased by 22 per cent. Tomorrow, when I
talk to business people from both countries, it will be with a view to Increasing
that growth still further.
Technology and research, including environmental technology which you and
I have talked about in the past, Is one important new area for cooperation
between us. Education will be another: the finalsatlon of your new
Education Act will broaden the range of our cooperation enabling the
establishment of twinning arrangements between Australian and Malaysian
Institutions, and the opening of Australian campuses In Malaysia. Of course,
as I have said before, I sincerely hope that even with these changes students
from each country will still have the opportunity to live and study In the other.
As Malaysia prepares for the Commonwealth Games In 1998 we are preparing
for the Olympic Games two years later. The conjunction obviously creates the
potential for cooperation on matters relating to sport by which I mean
everything from youth development to building infrastructure. 
For these and many other reasons, I believe the last few years of this century
hold out the chance to deepen and expand the relationship between our two
countries. In addition, we can continue to work together in a multilateral environment: in
APEC and in the development of links between AFTA and the
Australian/ New Zealand Closer Economic Relations agreement.
We have common views about the world. We agree that the end of the
Cold War creates a unique opportunity to address the threat of nuclear
weapons. We welcomed the signature of the South East Asia Nuclear
Weapons Free Zone treaty at the ASEAN Summit last-December. And next
week we will welcome Datuk Ronald McCoy from Malaysia when he joins a
group of outstanding international statesmen, scientists and military strategists
In the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons.
Prime Minister, we have great Interests In common and we share great
opportunities commercial opportunities, opportunities In science and
technology, education, tourism and much else. Above all, * we have the
opportunity to create a new level of mutual understanding between--the peoples
of Australia a id Malaysia, and to forge a rich and rewarding friendship which
will endure ihitb the 21st century.
Prime Minister, I believe you will agree with me when I say that these are
opportunities we cannot afford to let pass.
I thank you once again for the honour of this visit and this dinner, the. warm
welcome and the gracious hospitality you have extended to me,. my wife and
my party. 



i I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA-MALAYSIA BUSINESS FORUM
TUESDAY 16 JANUARY 1996, KUALA LUMPUR
Thank you for your kind Introduction and thank you for Inviting me to address this forum.
It Is a great pleasure to be here. That Is partly because It Is always a pleasure to be In a
position to tell a story of success, and speak with confidence about the future. It is also a
pleasure because I know I am among people who, by their actions, are writing the story
and shaping the future.
I want to begin by acknowledging your effort and your faith In the future of our two
countries. Your presence here Is a reminder of the strength of the commercial relationship between
Australia and Malaysia. It should also remind us of the wider picture.
Australia and Malaysia are both part of the fastest growing region In the world. That is our
great good fortune.
We are also living in probably the most competitive business environment In the world.
That Is our great challenge.
Yet It is precisely that openness to competition which is so much a key to the dynamic
growth we are seeing in the region.
Malaysia, of course, has risen to this competitive challenge with extraordinary verve and
success. The Malaysian Government has committed Itself to deregulation and exportorientation
as the keys to long-term growth, and has shifted the base of the economy from
resources to manufacturing. The results of these reforms have been remarkable.
The economy has grown at better than 8 per cent per annum over the past seven years.
Manufactured Items now represent over 60 per cent of exports. Exports of goods and
services are now equivalent to around 90 per cent of GDP. And Malaysia Is now one of
the world's top twenty trading nations. 
Australia has faced a similar challenge and has undertaken a process of economic
transformation along broadly similar lines.
The Inefficient, inward-looking, highly protected economy which lingered Into the last
decade Is now a closed chapter In our history. We used to rely on our commodities to
support an uninspired industrial structure sheltered behind a wall of protective barriers. We
tried to shut ourselves In and the world out.
But we changed. Radically and fundamentally. Over the last decade we have laid the
foundations of a diverse, dynamic and Internationally competitive economy.
We put in place a program of unilateral tariff reductions which will bring Australian tariffs on
manufacturing down to an average of about 3 per cent by the year 2000.
We let the market set the most important price In the economy the exchange rate.
And we deregulated our financial market.
We opened the economy to the world.
The results speak for themselves.
Our economy is mruch more sophisticated and diverse. Our reliance on exports from our
traditional mining and pastoral industries has been balanced by dramatic growth In
manufacturing exports and services: manufacturing and services share of total exports
has risen from less than a third of the total to almost a half.
Manufacturing exports have grown at a trend rate of 15 per cent per annumn at almost
two-thirds of these are Elaborately Transformed Manufactures. Exports of ETMs have
grown by over 17 per cent per annum over the past decade and noi ' account for almost
one quarter of our total merchandise exports. In 1983, only 3 out of the top 50 Australian
export commodities were ETIVe: in 1994 17 were.
If current growth continues services and manufactures will, by the year 2000, constitute
almost half our total exports to Asia.
We exposed Australia to the global competition and Australia has responded. We are
per cent more competitive than we were a decade ago and this is reflected In a dose in our
trade to GDP ratio from 14 to over 21 per cent. Our exports have risen by one third In the
last five years.
Labour market and microeconomic reform is building a more competitive domestic
environment and bringing Australian Industries up to world best practice. 
The Australian economy Is now on a path of robust and sustainable growth. The economy
grew by a strong 4.8 per cent In 1994-95, and is expected to grow at 3 and a quarter per
cent in 1995-98.
This process of Intern ational islng our economy Is very much Integrated with our foreign
policy focus on engaging the Asia-Pacific as the region where our future lies.
Forty per cent of our Imports now come from Asia and we direct 80 per cent of our exports
there. Our merchandise exports to East Asia grew by more than seven per cent last year
and are now worth $ 41 billion. More than one million Australian jobs have been created by
these exports.
By the end of this year all of our top ten export markets should be in the Asia-Pacific
region.
And, if Asia is Increasingly Important to Australia, Australia is increasingly Important to
Asia. We provide almost half of East Asia's coal, iron ore and beef, and well over half Its
wool and aluminum ore. And our exports of manufactured goods, Including ETMs, and
services are growing as a proportion of our exports to Asia. We are also a growing market
for Asia: our imports from Asia nearly tripled In the decade to 1994.
Our support for APEC flows naturally from this process of rapid Integration of the
Australian economy with the Asia-Pacific region.
But APEC Isn't just a perfect fit for Australia. All APEC members will benefit from APEC's
liberalisation and facilitation agenda. Australian modelling shows that the Income of APEC
members will, once all the effects have flowed through, Increase by 3.8 per cent or around
SUSi trillion more than the current size of the Australian and Korean economies
combined. As I am sure you are all aware, Australia has been avid In the pursuit of APEC and
delighted by its. extraordinarily rapid development.
And APEC Is delivering real benefits for business around the region.
Differing standards discourage trade and can add up to 10 per cent to exporters' costs
when they enter a market for the first time. APEC members have agreed on greater
harrmonisation of members' standards with international standards and mutual recognition
of testing and certification. Even a modest liberalisation of trade restricting standards In
the region is estimated to Increase regional trade by 20 per cent.
At Osaka we also agreed on an ambitious program, to be Implemented by 2000, to
harmonise and simplify customs procedures on an APEC-wide basis. And within the next
years the requirement for paper-work for key trade and transport documentation is to be
eliminated entirely. 
These are just some of the steps APEC Is taking to address the challenges Australia,
Malaysia and other members of the region need to meet to ensure growth continues In the
Asia Pacific.
In many ways the trade and Investment relationship between Australia and Malaysia Is a
model of the sort of spectacular economic integration we are witnessing across the reglon.
The commercial ties between Australia and Malaysia are both diverse and substantial.
Merchandise trade was $ 3.5 billion In 1994-95. Services trade Is over $ 1 billion. And we
each have several billion dollars invested In the other's country.
These links are growing.
Merchandise trade jumped by 22 per cent In the last year, and the rate of Increase has
been around that figure for the past three years.
Services trade is growing at 17 per cent.
Malaysian investment in Australia Is growing strongly and showing welcome signs of
diversification. The strength of our economic relationship Is, of course, underpinned by the performance of
the Australian sn4 Malaysian economies.
Apart from Its size and diversity, our commercial relationship is marked by the similar
weight It has for both countries.
Malaysia Is Australia's eleventh largest trading partner as Australia Is Malaysia's eleventh.
This year Maiaysia should overtake Britain to rank as one of our ten. la'rgest export
markets. And. Australia Is Malaysia's twelfth largest export market.
Our investment Is also very much a two-way flow.
The growth of our economic relationship reflects the profound changes which have taken
place in both countries over the past decade.
The fact that ETMs now make up over a quarter of our exports to Malaysia up from just
13 per cent ten years ago reflects Australia's increasing competitiveness In
manufacturing. These days we are exporting components for the Proton car, rail carriages
for new urban transport systems, electricity transformers, harbour cranes, computer
software for Bank Negara and medical equipment such as the bionic ear and these are
only a few examples. 
At the same time the pattern of Malaysia's exports to Australia reflects Malaysia's rapid
ascent of the technology ladder for example, these days Malaysia sells computers to
Australia, $ 80 million worth last year and this from a minimal base Just five years ago.
From this base of diversity, growth, mutuality and adaptability, the commercial relationship
will go from strength to strength.
But in this competitive international environment, we must work hard on our relationship to
Identify new opportunities for cooperation and capitalise on emerging complementarities
between our economies. I am sure you will know better than me which areas are the most
promising. Nevertheless let me make a few broad suggestions.
We expect tourism to become an increasingly important part of our services trade. About
100,000 short-term Malaysian visitors came to Australia last year. By the year 2000, we
expect the figure to reach 250,000. About 100,000 Australians visit Malaysia as tourists
each year and there is every reason to believe that the number might increase just as
dramatically. There are more than economic benefits in this exchange: tourism maintains our invaluable
tradition of close people-to-people contacts, it keeps our mutual understanding
contemporary and fresh, it spreads awareness and cultural understanding at the same
time as it fertilises the ground for other commerce.
The recent agreerent to expand air services between Australia and Malaysia will help
expand the tourism trade, and our commercial relationship overall. Capacity for each side
will increase by 90 per cent by April 1998. This will allow MAS more direct flights to
Brisbane, Adelaide, Cairns, Darwin and Perth, and a dedicated freight service. We are
pleased that MAS has immediately announced increased flights to Perth and Brisbane.
Malaysia's hosting of the 1998 Commonwealth Games and Australia's hosting of the 2000
Olympics will provide a particular focus for the bilateral tourist relatioship. And both
countries can expect to benefit from the increased flow of visitors to the region. For
example, the Commonwealth Games offers Malaysia an opportunity to promote itself as a
stop-over for visitors to the 2000 Olympics.
Each country needs to be alert to the media opportunities for promoting our countries that
both events present. And we should be thinking now about attracting future uses of the
world class sports facilities we are developing in Malaysia and Australia.
Education a mainstay of the services trade between our countries, and the principal
source of the people-to-people links between us also has great promise. Australia has
provided education to over 120,000 Malaysians: now in an era when the development of
our human resources is more critical than it has ever been before, we are developing with
Malaysia more flexible and sophisticated arrangements. 
In future Malaysian students will Increasingly be able to share their tertiary degrees
between the two countries. We are also enthusiastic about the opportunities presented by
Malaysia's decision to allow foreign campuses to open here. And we are confident that we
can provide the high-quality, tailored tertiary courses which Malaysia wants under this
scheme. Skills training is another area where we can see new synergies in education cooperation.
Australia has recognised the importance of skills-based training, and has made historic
improvements to its training system particularly through the establishment of a National
Training Authority. As Malaysia's demand for a highly skilled labour force grows In tandem
with the sophistication of the economy, Australia can share its experience in providing
quality and cost-effective assistance in human resource development.
As Malaysia expands its private hospital facilities and upgrades the quality of health care,
Australia can offer the benefits of experience in health service planning, design and
construction of hospitals, hospital management, clinical services and pharmaceuticals.
I know the process has begun, with Malaysia making use of Australian services to plan,
build and run medical facilities; and planners like Health Solutions, architects like Thomson
Adsett and Woods Bagot, and IT companies like Working Systems all finding opportunities
to deploy their expertise.
Australia has an IT and telecommunications industry worth $ 40 billion and It is growing
rapidly. On a percapita basis only the United States has more computers and processing
power. We are decidedly competitive in IT&amp; T and this has been recognised, I am pleased
to say, by Malaysian companies like MMC and Mesiniaga [ MESSING-NIAGA].
Commercial cooperation in these high-technology industries has the added advantage of
providing a skills and technology transfer for Malaysia. For example, an Australian
company, Techcom, has supplied 30 staff to one of Malaysia's new telecommunication
carriers to help them develop marketing and customer service functipns.
Proof of the complementarity between advanced Australian technology and the
development of Malaysia's infrastructural base can also be found In the STAR light rail
transit system. This high-profile project is designed to meet the challenge of commuter
management in the booming environment of modern Kuala Lumpur.
An Australian company, Evans Deakin Industries Limited, has won the contract for the
design and manufacture of the 90 carriages which will run on STAR System 1; and another
company with a substantial Australian connection, John Holland Asia, is building the tracks
for the project.
As Malaysia continues to privatise and build up its infrastructure Including the new
international airport and the facilities for the 1998 Commonwealth Games great
opportunities will present themselves to Australian firms. 
And I am sure Australian firms will grasp them. There is a very long list of recent success
stories. There is a very long list of recent success stories, including major investments by BHP,
CSR, and Boral in. the building materials sector, a major joint venture by Wilson
Transformers for the manufacture of transformers in the State of Negri Sembilan,
investment by Davids Holdings in substantial warehousing facilities in Shah Alam,
contracts won by Transfield in Sarawak for electricity transmission lines and for a harbour
project, commitments by Village Roadshow to the development of cinema complexes, a
major contract won by the Australian operation of the ABB Engineering and Construction
group, for the rail electrification project, a major water management project won by John
Holland in East Malaysia and a significant investment by Westfield in the retail shopping
complex in the Kuala Lumpur City Centre project, the twin towers of which loom over us
today. Just as satisfying is the evidence that the institutional base of the commercial relationship
is keeping pace with the development of the business links. The Malaysia-Australia
Business Council and the Australia-Malaysia Business Council are both playing important
creative and supporting roles and I want to formally acknowledge their contribution.
Today I am pleased to be able to announce that the Australian and Malaysian
governments have decided to take another step to ensure that these opportunities do not
pass us by. Our joint trade commission will be made a ministerial level trade commission,
which will mean that ministers are directly engaged with the private sectors of both
countries in identifying and pursuing opportunities for further cooperation. It is planned
that the first meeting of this group will take place when Minister Rafidah leads an
Investment mission to Australia in May this year.
When profound change is occurring when we talk about the achievement of APEC and
the potential of it, or the relationship between Australia and Malaysia and the future of it
unless you are actually Involved, consciousness tends to lag behind reality.
You are here in pursuit of the commercial oppoitunities. Yet there is a sense in which you
are doing more than that. You are pushing into a new age call It the Asian century, or the
Pacific century, or simply the 21st century whatever you call it, It is without precedent or
parallel.
And so unmistakeable are the signs of success, scepticism barely has a chance. There is
no time for cynicism or indifference to set In. The tide has turned quickly and irreversibly,
the world is understanding the magnitude and meaning of what is happening in countries
like Malaysia. Very rapidly it is leaving the realm of the remote and the abstract: it is not
mere words, but fact manifest fact,
And for making it fact you and people like you must take a lot of the credit. 
Australians and Malaysians alike, I thank you for coming today, and I wish you every
success. And let me also thank those in the Asian Strategy and Leadership Institute and the
Malaysia-Australia Business Council for organising this business forum. It Is yet again an
example of the initiative displayed by the business communities involved in the relationship
between Australia and Malaysia. 



TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 01/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 6PM AEST
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE SINGAPORE LECTURE " AUSTRALIA, ASIA AND THE NEW
REGIONALISM" SINGAPORE, 17 JANUARY 1996
It is a great honour to have been asked to give this lecture and I thank Professor
Chan Heng Chee and the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies for the invitation.
Australia has had a long and productive association with the Institute over many
years. I also want to thank the Government of Singapore for Its support for the lecture
and, especially, Deputy Prime Minister Tony Tan for his courtesy to me In
chairing it today.
This is my third visit to Singapore as Prime Minister and It is always a pleasure
to come here. There Is an energy about Singapore which flows from people
who are conscious of the Inevitability of change and who are trying to shape that
change for the better.
I admire that. Singapore, perhaps more than any other place in the world,
teaches the vital lesson that we cannot prepare for the future until we know
what we want it to be.
This has been the distinctive principle guiding Singapore's modern history: the
same principle that some time ago began to guide Australia through the present
era. When you face things and begin to do what must be done, you liberate
ideas about what can be done. This great era of change has meant that as we
approach the centenary of Australia's nationhood a new, stronger and clearer
vision of our future has begun to emerge. And It now goes without saying that
much of the future we see we see in the Asia-Pacific.
The vision of a future for the region, and of the potential for our relationship to
serve our separate and mutual interests, has been the Inspiration and the guide
for the joint efforts between Australia and Singapore over the past four years,
and it is the reason why I have so much enjoyed working with Prime Minister
Goh and his colleagues on Issues like APEC and regional security. 
TEL: 1( Janj 156 NoD. U12 P .02 / 1'
2
And although this lecture Is not about our bilateral relationship, I want to begin
by saying how pleased 1 am that the Prime Minister and I were able this morning
to issue a major declaration on the Austral! ia. Singapore partnership which will
help ensure that this old relationship between us remains relevant and creative
into the next century.
And it Is an old relationship. In Singapore, of all places, the provenance of
Australia's engagement with modem Southeast Asia Is clear. Indeed, for the
generation of Australians before mine, Singapore was interchangeable with
what we then referred to as the Far Fast, although It was really the Near
Northwest. Singapore's history and Australia's have been closely linked throughout this
century. You need only go to the cemetery at Kranjl where so many
Australians are buried.
After Singapore's Independence. the links between us grew through our
partnership in the Five Power Defence Arrangements and the bilateral defence
ties which merged from It Today, our bilateral defence cooperation is
extensive. The Singapore armed force train in Australia and the RSAF has
established a Flying School at Pearce Air Force Base in Western Australia.
Our close engagement was strengthened through the people to people links
establshed under the Colombo Plan and since. Last year nearly
10,000 Singaporeans studied In Austraria.
And, of course, our growing trade and Investment ties underpin an economic
relationship which is Important to both of us. Singapore and Australia are
consistently among each other's top ten trading partners.
We have also developed a strong habit of cooperation on regional Issues where
our views so often coincide APEC most recently, of course, but earlier with
ASEAN, with which Australia was the first country to estabrish a formal dialogue
relationship. Now in the declaration we have signed today we have affirmed the strength of
our partnership and established a framework to support our continuing
cooperation In all these areas.
For me this partnership is especially important because, as Prime Minister, one
of my central goals has been to see that Australia Is better Integrated with the
rapidly changing region around us, that we have an opportunity to play a role in
shaping it and are better prepared to meet whatever challenges the 21st
century may offer. -A N 
TEL: 1?. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 03/ 1,
3
1 have said more than once before* I Australia does not succeed In Asia It will
not succeed anywhere.
But success clearly requires more than the traditional tools of foreign policy.
For Australia, as I suspect for most countries, our external relations can no
longer exist in a separate box marked " foreign relations" or " foreign policy"
largely unconnected with the domestic policies which are needed to build a
society which Is both open and competitive and cohesive and strong.
That was why it was imperative for Australia to dismantle the ring fence of tarffs
and protection to open our economy to competitive breezes, and in so doing, lift
our gaze to the world.
We deregulated our capital and exchange rate markets and opened them to the
world for the same reasons.
As a result, In the decade to 1 994/ 95, Australia's export to GDP ratio Increased
from 14 percent to 21.5 per cent. The level of direct foreign investment In
Austrlia Ns increased eight fold and the level of direct Australian Investment
abroad has increased seven fold.
Rt was all there, waiting to be unlocked.
It is also why it has been necessary for us to address other challenges thrown
up both by our history and the imperatives of the future. One of those has been
the Injustice done to Australia's Indigenous people, not least through the
lingering pretence that before Europeans arrived on our oontinent it was a terra
nuthlus a land of nobody. We have undertaken a huge effort In social justice to
see that historic wrong put right.
I think It will be equally good for our long term national cohesion and sense of
ourselves If we make the leap to a republic. The time has come for an
Australian, rather than the monarch of Great Britain, to be our head of state. I
want Australia to be, a3 Singapore is, a Republic and a Republic within the
Commonwealth.
The change will not make us what we want to be, but It will help describe us to
ourselves and to others. it will help define our complex Identity, help articulate
our ambitions and values, help fuse the links between the old Australia and the
new. 
TEL: 17. Jan., 96 15: 58 No .012 P. 04/ 1'
4
Much the same desire to preserve Australia's egalitarian values and traditions
arnd maintain cohesion and harmony ted us, as we made the structural changes,
to intensify our efforts to strengthen Australia's social fabric. Our economic
effort has been matched by an effort to develop sophisticated social programs
which deliver equity and encourage tolerance. The path we have taken leads
towards a modem multicultural Australian social democracy, one that Is dynamic
economically and socially fair,
All this change, economic, social and political, has set Australia up for the
future. It Is also divining our path in the Asia-Pacific.
I have always said that the nature of Australia's relationship with Asia has been
long and for the most part honourable.
But Australian Governments and the Australian people have recently come to
recognise the impflcatlons of living In and with the region which Gareth Evans
describes a~ s the East Asian hemisphere.
Australia's closer relationship with Asia Is partly driven by economic realities, of
course. Already two-thirds of our trade is with the APEC region, more than half
of It with East Asia.
But our engagement with the region around us Is not just commercial. And It is
not just the result of some crude economic determinism.
It goes and must go much deeper than that
Rt goes to a genuine desire for partnershIp and real Involvement.
For example, it has changed our thinking about our defence on the basis that
Australis needs to seek its security In Asia rather than from Asia.
That is why we have so strongly supported the development of the ASEAN
Regional Forum. It Is why we have worked hard to develop strong defence links
with our neighbours like Singapore and Malaysia, as well as new partnerships
with countries like the Philippines and Vietnam.
And It Is why we recently signed with Indonesia a new Security Agreement
which builds on the development of our bilateral defence inks, 
TTEELL 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 05/ 1'
This agreement sets out formally for the first time the reality that neither
Australia nor Indonesia threatens the other and that we have common interests
In the stability and security of the region around us. And it goes further than
that, to make it clear that we are prepared to consult If those interests are
challenged. The agreement marks a major step not only In Australia's relations with our
largest neighbour but also In the outlook for regional stability. It expresses a
common understanding that we are stronger together and that we should affirm
a common interest.
Similarly, Australia's engagement with the region extends much more freely to
people-to-people contacts. Language and capacity in language Is central to
this. Accordingly, the Federal and state governments have committed
themselves to a language strategy which aims to have by 2006 sixty per cent of
all Australian school children from years three to ten studying one of four Asian
languages Indonesian, Japanese, Mandarin Chinese or Korean.
And this change is already well underway. Already more people are studying
Japanese1 Australia than in any other country apart from China, Korea and
Japan Itself. And more schoolchildren from Australia spend time studying In
Japanese schools than children from any other country.
At the same time there can be no doubt that the course of closer engagement
with Asia on which Australia Is now embarked is having its impact on our culture
and outlook as well.
The nearly forty per cent of Immigrants to Australia who now come from Asia
are playing their part in changing the way Australians think about the world and
their country; In just the same way that earlier waves of Immigrants, ever since
1788, successively shaped and re-shaped Australia's sense of itself.
And, It goes without saying, Australia Is shaping them and their descendants as
It shaped those who have come before.
I don't want to enter the debate about ' Asian values' here but I do want to say
something about Australian values.
Although it Is often described as a young country, Australia is one of the oldest
democracies In the world. We had universal suffrage and secret ballots well
before the United Kingdom and before almost any other country. The
democracy is old and runs deep. Our sense of ourselves Is imprinted with ideas
of equality and equity among them, the conviction that all members of our
society not only have a right but a duty to have their say. That is why voting in
Australia Is compulsory. 
TEL: TEL 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 06/ 1'
6
And despite deep imperfections in our record, including the racism inherent in
our immigration policies until a quarter of a century ago, Australia has also been
a very tolerant community, absorbing settlers from all parts of the world with
remarkably little tension.
In many perhaps most respects, the values I believe In and most Australians
believe in are precisely those that are often referred to in this debate as " Asian".
The importance of family, the benefit of education, the need for order and public
accountability, the inherent value of work most Australians I know would
describe these as Australian values. Indeed the word most Australians would
very likely choose to describe as the core Australian value is ' mateship' and
' mateship' expresses an ethic of communltarianism and mutual obligation which
in other contexts Is called " Asian".
In other areas respect for authority, the Importance of ' face' and the
preference for harmony and the avoidance of conflict the differences between
Australia and some other Asian countries is dearer, but the degree to which this
to a debate about values, as opposed to cultural practices, Is less clear.
More Impqant over time, I think, will be where we stand on the larger debate
not about" Asian' or western values, but about values themselves and what the
role of government should be In shaping them.
Fundamentally It will be a debate between those who believe the main role of
government is to get out of the way and let the market rip and those who
consider that government provided it is operating with the consent of the
governed has a role in shaping and expressing the values of our community.
Defined this way, the debate cuts across Asian and western societies alike.
I have never believed that Australians should describe themselves as Asians or
that Australia is or can become part of Asia.
We are the only nation In the world to Inhabit a continent of our own. I have
said more than once before, we can't be Asian any more than we can be
European or North American or African. We can only be Australian and can
only relate to our neighbours as Australians. Our history, Including the 40,000
year history of our indigenous people and the histories of the 150 different
cultures from which Australians derive, make us unique in the world.
Our somewhat unlikely history and geography should not change this
fundamental conviction and this irrevocable commitment that Australia Is and
must always be an integral part of the region around us.
Let me turn now from Australia to the issues of this wider region, and to the
question of regionalism itself. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 07' i:
7
1 want to use this lecture to say some things about the region, about what
regionalism means in the post-Cold War world, and especially for the
Asia-Pacific. Finally, I want to look ahead at some of the issues we will have to
address in the next decade or so.
The fact that we describe the present International scene as the post-Cold War
world in terms of what came before us rather than what we have become
underlines how fluid the International environment is at present and how
uncertain we are about the shape it Is taking.
We are living through the greatest period of change In the world since the
emergence of the nation state, arnd we have a very limited time in which to
shape the new international structures before nations and institutions settle into
new grooves from which It will be very difficult to dislodge them. What we. 1
mean all of us do now will lay the foundations for prosperity and security In the
21 st century just as fatefully and Inevitably as the actions of Europe's leaders
did a century ago.
And unles~, get it rght now, our failure might be no less calamitous then
theirs. When the Berlin Wall came down, when President Yeltsin and his supporters
later stood on the tanks outside the White House In Moscow to defy the coup
plotters and brought down the Soviet Union, they also brought down the post
war international order.
The expectations of a new International order, based on a concert of powers
opetating to a large extent through a revived and renewed United Nations, have
not been fulfilled.
In part. I believe, this Is because our global international structures are
Incomplete and immature. They still reflect too directly the world into which
most of them emerged at the end of the 1940s.
Japan and Germany. the world's second and third-largest economies are selfconstrained
from playing their full part In the International system.
Russia will always be one of the world's great powers, but now and over the
next few years it will be preoccupied with the consequences of the end of the
Soviet Union.
China is emerging into the world, and the way that happens will dominate the
Asia Pacific like no other Issue over the coming decades. But for the time being
China, too, is largely preoccupied with domestic issues and especially
developing t economy. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 08/ 19
Meanwhile, in the United States, the world's only remaining superpower, the
struggle goes on as it has since the foundation of the Republic between those
who believe the United States should avoid foreign entanglements and those
who want it to be engaged with the wider world. This, as always In the United
States, is not only a debate among the politicians and the political elite. Its
outcome depends, In the and, on what t American people think. and we
should not be surprised If it is harder to engage them with foreign policy now
than it was for the high moral struggle of the Cold War.
At another level, too, global structures are often too large and rigid to permit
productive discussion. The sheer weight of numbers In the United Nations, for
example, means that complex negotiations often have to be conducted through
increasingly out-of-date groupings which often fall to reflect current economic
and political realities.
Australia can speak with feeling on this matter. For United Nations purposes,
we are relegated to the category of ' others', as part of a Western European and
Others grouing.
it Is not Juit the absurdity of this classification which Irritates but the practical
consequences. More and more clearly, Australia's Interests cannot be properly pursued in such
framework. It Is a structure which emphasises North/ South divisions. This
tends to generate on the side of the North a strongly Eurocentric perspective
on global problems. But the ' South' is where Austraria's neighbours are, and it
Is with the ' South' that our Interests often coincide rather than diverge.
For all these reasons, the present global structure is inadequate.
This is not an unchangeable state of affairs. There is much that can be done
about it.
For example, Australia supports permanent membership of the United Nations
Security Council for both Germany and Japan, a position for which Japan's
excellent chairmanship of the Osaka APEC meeting further justified It.
And we believe it is essential to encourage the United States to play an active
and engaged role In the world not just in the Asia Pacific, but globally. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 09/ 19
9
We hope that such outside encouragement like the Joint declaration which
Singapore and Australia issued this morning will strengthen the position of
those Americans who share our conviction that US Interests, as well as ours,
are advanced by their continuing active engagement in East Asia. Nothing is
more likely to generate security tensions In this part of the world, or threaten the
region's continuing economic and social development, than uncertainty in
countries like Japan and Korea about the continued US security commitment.
One of the main reasons behind Australia's support for APEC has been our
conviction that closer American economic engagement in Asia and the Pacific
win reinforce the essential political underpinnings of Its security relationships.
The other great uncertainty about the interational situation In the coming
decades, as I said earlier, is China.
The economic reforms introduced by Deng Xlaoping and President Jiang Zemin
have brought profound benefits for the international community as a whole, not
just for China. There have been few more significant developments in the past
half century.
I do not bel( eve China is an expansionist or aggressive power, or that it is likely
to become so. It is an essential and central part of the regional community.
However, the sheer size of its population and economy raises questions for the
rest of us about how we deal with it,
For my part, I think there is little doubt about what the broad approach should
be. Above all, the answer Is to ensure that China is engaged comprehensively in
global and regional institutions. This has been a major aim of APEC and the
ASEAN Regional Forum to engage China, not to contain it or Isolate it.
But the answer also lies In China's neighbours making their own way in the
region and taking responsibility for their own future. It Is the responsibility of all
of us to build what ASEAN calls our national and regional resilience: a region
which is self-confident and cooperative, rather than apprehensive and self.
absorbed, will be better for an of us including China.
And, In part, that means building institutions and structures which engage all the
countries of the region in a dialogue about the future.
ts ar hrIin ht hnOk fram the to the regional. It Is a sign of
the times the most important sign oI the oeneve. 
TEL 1-. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 10/ 19
For the time being, at least, the role of the great powers in shaping the
development of the International system Is less dominant than it might otherwise
be. And this, as I said earlier, 13 happening at the very time when we are
moulding the Institutions and processes and ways of resoMng problems which
will form the pattern of the next period In International relations.
I think that one outcome of this situation 1s that regionalism and regional
approaches will come Into their own as never before.
This century, was dominated by global struggles. Imperialism and later
Communism were of their nature global. Two world wars and the Ideoiogical
struggle of the Cold War taught us to structure our ways of thinking about the
world In essentially global terms.
Regional approaches were usually subordinated to this broader competition.
The multilateral defence pacts of the 1950~ s were an example. Even the
development of the EEC was driven in part by the need to strengthen western
Europe economically and politically against the Soviet threat
But with the-breakdown of the bipolar structure of the Cold War, regional
problems nI&amp; longer automatically form a metaphor for a wider global and
Ideological struggle as they did In Afghanistan and Angola and Central America.
Instead, it Is easier now to address regional Issues on their own terms.
And a degree of flexibility Is possible In regional Institution building which has
never been possible before. Vietnam's membership of ASEAN and the
common membership of APEC by the three Chinese economies are Important
examples. So, for alt these reasons, I think that In the Immediate future regionalism offers
the capacity to generate new Ideas, subsume old enmites and provide new
ways of doing things. It can let the light in in a way which global structures are
too large or unwieldy or rigid to do.
Thi3, In turn, means that the opportunities for small and medium sized countries
to shape the International agenda are greater than they have ever been In the
post. So long as they know what they want and where they are heading.
I am sure that one of the reasons for the success of the Asia Pacific In global
terms Is the creative way In which regionalism has been embraced in this part of
the world.
It Is not a new phenomenon. of course. ASEAN has been an enormous
success in transforming the tensions of the confrontation era In Southeast Asia
Into a habit of working together. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 11/ 19
11
But the next burst of regionalism, including within ASEAN, is growing in range
and ambition.
APEC has made huge strides In a few short years.
When I first proposed the idea of meetings of APEC leaders In 1992, I did so
because I was convinced that unless APEC could begin to draw upon the
executive authority of national leaders it would remain a modest and essentially
peripheral organisation, making progress only at the pace of Its slowest officials.
It Is leaders who have the political authority to commit a country to a certain
course in pursuit of certain outcomes, and leaders who are charged with the
responsibility to recognise the bigger picture and the bigger opportunities that
come with it.
Once leaders were involved In the development and formulation of policy in
APEC, a different dynamic evolved and the pace of action quickened.
Most leaders believe that any event In which they participate should deliver a
good result so, from Seattle on, the pressure was on to formulate a strategy
and then dive it.
At the same time, once the leaders met and don't forget that the Seattle
meeting was the first time leaders from across the Asia Pacific had ever met
the pressing reality of our interdependence generated a new momentum for
cooperation. The very feeling of co-operation generated even more goodwill.
This happened in Seattle, where we set out the vision of an Asia Pacific
community. Then the following year in Indonesia. President Soeharto gave this
vision a concrete form in the Bogor Declaration's historic commitment to free
trade and Investment in the region by 2010 and 2020. And finally, last year, In
Osaka, where we put together the plan of action for reaching our objective as
well as offering specific downpayments on our Bogor commitments.
APEC was conceived as an organisation of economies and It is vital that its
main function continues to be economic. If the East Asian economic miracle is
not to run out of steam to end up, as some European commentators wishfully
predict, as a short-term and unsustainable phenomenon It Is essential that the
trade and Investment arteries within the region are kept open. It is essential that
we do all we can to help the activities of our business people, who make the
trade happen.
So the pressure on APEC will not diminish. Every meeting, every year has to
make progress. Later this year in Subic Bay we will need to take the first steps
to implement our Individual plans of action. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 12/ 1_
12
Such progress is critical not only for the Asia Pacific's continuing economic
growth, but for its security as well.
Because, although APEC's purpose Is economic, It will have, like ASEAN before
it, important political and strategic consequences.
It is already having them. No-one who has participated in those three
successive leaders meetings, or in the Ministerial meetings, can fail to notice the
increasing ease with which leaders representing half the world's production now
deal with each other. And no one can be blind to the amount of business which
Is now conducted In the corridors and related bilateral meetings.
APEC is in many critical respects a new model for regional cooperation and I
believe It shows the way forward. It is " new" in at least three ways.
First, its development has been driven as much by the small and medium
powers as by the large ones a fact that has been one of its strengths given the
global situation I described earlier. Of course President Clinton's decision to
invite APEC leaders to the informal meeting in Seattle was critical, as was the
support wh) ph the Japanese Government and Prime Minister Murayama gave
the free trade agenda during their chairmanship of the Osaka meeting. But
ideas and energy have come just as powerfully from economies like Korea and
Singapore and Indonesia and Australia.
In other words, the sense of ownership and participation Is broadly spread
throughout the organisation. APEC gives the smaller and middle sized
countries of the region a very direct say in shaping its future.
Second, APEC is possibly the best practical example the world has yet seen of
cooperation between countries at different levels of development.
Developing countries are not just participants, they are at the core of the
organisation's activities. President Soeharto's chairmanship of the Bogor
meeting was a critical moment for APEC, but it was also an example to the
world of the new sort of partnership between developed and developing
countries which will be essential as the process of globalisation and
Interationalisation proceeds. The world's fifteen most dynamic trading nations
between 1980 and 1993 were all developing countries.
Third, APEC has offered an approach different from the formal structures and
legalisms of other regional approaches like the European Union or NAFTA or, at
the global level, from the Uruguay Round and the WTO. Unlike earlier models of
trade liberallsation. APEC first announced its end point that is, free trade and
investment by 2010 or 2020 and left the getting there to a process of
concerted Ilberalisation between members rather than to direct negotiation. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 13/ 1
13
This approach is not only new, it has aroused considerable scepticism,
especially from those whose experience of International trade negotiations has
been in the heavyweight boxing ring of the Uruguay Round and its
predecessors. I can understand this scepticism, but I am also convinced It is misplaced. The
drag out/ knock down approach to trade negotiations has surely reached the end
of its useful life In an environment where almost every country in the world,
rather than just a handful of industrialised countries, has a stake in global trade.
Few even among the hardiest trade negotiators can relish the idea of another
seven year Round conducted like the last one. And one where the real offers,
the real impetus to llberalisation, were too often left in the negotiator's pocket to
take back home.
So I remain an optimist that APEC will be able to deliver on the promises it has
made, and that, in doing so, it will offer an example which will be useful to the
rest of the world.
Drawing on these experiences with APEC, as well as other regional
organlsatior it Is becoming possible to draw up a number of rules for the new
regionalism in the Asia/ Pacific. Let me try to enumerate them.
The first rule; there are no rules. Or, at least there are no fixed approaches and
as far as possible we should avoid the nightmare of a bureaucratic and legalistic
approach to what we are doing. The Asia Pacific needs to be a small ' c'
community If It Is to succeed.
For the approach to work, however, a high degree of trust will be required not
a commodity which is thought to flow freely through intematlonal discourse.
The best way of encouraging trust as ASEAN has shown and APEC will Is
through close personal contact between leaders and Ministers and with officials
and, beyond that, their counterparts in business.
As 20th century European history vividly testifies, contact does not rule out
conflict but it Is certainly impossible to develop trust between countries and
cultures without It.
The second rule is that we need to avoid closing Asia and the Pacific off to the
outside world.
My argument in favour of regionalism is not an argument against global
multilateral approaches when these are most appropriate, as they often will be. 
TEL: ~ 17. Jan. 9b 15: 58 No. ul 14i
14
Indeed, they are often essential. A comprehensive test ban treaty or a chemical
weapons convention, must be negotiated globally. And although Intra-regional
trade in East Asia has grown much more rapidly and Is of greater volume than
extra regional trade, we all have a deep anid growing Interest In the world
trading system. We need a regional approach which can be reconciled with the
development and strengthening of that system. This Is one of the challenges for
the first WTO Ministerial meeting, when it meets, very appropriately, In
Singapore lsaer this year.
The final rule Is that the region must not become complacent with success.
The challenges to economic growth and to security In this part of the world
remain serious. We will only have a chance of overcoming them If we confront
them directly and with a clear-eyed sense of what they mean for us.
Let me end by speaking In particular about two of those challenges which I
believe should be placed more prominently on the agenda of regionalism In Asia
and the Pacific.
The first of them Is the environment.
Sooner thian many people expect, environmental problems winl begin to affect
not only the degree to which people in Asia and the rest of the APEC region can
enjoy the fruits of recent economic growth, but, more fundamentally, will begin
to impede the extent of that growth.
Demand for food and energy in the region will grow disproportionately as
standards of living rise and expectations Increase. China's demand for food, for
example, is growing so fast that Its shortage within 15 years could be three to
six times Australia's total annual wheat production: just feeding chickens to
vatistY China's demand by 2000 will take more grain than Australia currently
produces. World food production will have to Increase by more than 75 per cent over the
next 30 years if global food security is to be assured.
But significant questions exist about whether the green revolution responsible
for 90 per cent of the great growth in food production over recent decades can
be sustained, and whether we can afford environmentally to sustain It. Heavy
use of fertilisers, Irrigation and pesticides has caused major problems In many
countries. Soil erosion, sallity and pollution of water resources Increasingly
accompany pressure for greater agricultural productivity. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 15/ 1' I
The region's ability to sustain high levels of economic growth will also depend
on its capacity to meet the growing demand for energy. By 2010. electricity
demand across the APEC economies Is expected to Increase by between
per cent and 80 per cent. East Asia's demand for energy is doubling every 12
years, compared with 28 years for the world as a whole.
Few people now question the judgement that we are seeing a discernible
human influence on global climate. While to date developed countries have
contributed disproportionately to this problem, by the year 2000 developing
countries are expected to contribute more than half of global C02 emissions,
And much of this will be in Asia.
Today's global population Is expected to grow by 2.6 billion 45 per cent-by
the year 2025. 90 per cent of this increase will take place in developing
countries and 90 per cent of this will be urban. By the end of the century for
the first time in history more people will live in cities and towns than In rural
areas.
The absolute growth of urban environments will be greatest In Asia. The United
Nations estinates that cities in the region will gain 500 million Inhabitants in the
next ten years. By 2025 the Asian region is expected to be predominantly
urban.
This demographic shift will put huge strain on basic services such as water,
sanitation and shelter. Only half the urban populations In Asia currently have
access to water supplies and 42 per cent to sanitation.
The growth of urbanisatlon is being accompanied by a disproportionate growth
in the incidence of poverty In urban areas. Across the Asia-Pacific region,
some 25-35 per cent of urban dwellers are thought to be squatters. To
compound the problem, marginalised urban dwellers often live in ecologically
vulnerable areas.
The environment has become a sensitive Issue in Asia because environmental
arguments have sometimes been used as a disguised form of protectionism by
developed countries. And developing countries have understandably resented
being told by developed countries that they should not do what developed
countries did namely, pass through their period of industrialisatlon without
having to consider the impact on the environment
But we cannot deny the reality of the environmental challenges facing the
region.
We must see protection of the environment in the Asia-Pacific not as an
alternative to economic growth, but as the only thing that will ensure its
continuation. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 .61
16
Sustainable development was neatly defined by the Brundtiand Commission on
the Environment and Development as ' meeting the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs'. At its
heart this is or should be a very Asian Issue.
Because if there Is one characteristic which has underpinned Asia's recent
economic growth it has been the willingness of current generations to work for
the future good of the community and postpone Immediate reward. So the Idea
of Inter-generational equity a key to the environment debate is very Asian.
With the environment, as with economic liberailsatlon, we will get further In this
part of the world if we use a flexible and cooperative approach which takes
account of the particular development needs of all the countries In the region.
With its mix of developed and developing country members which have already
demonstrated the political Wil1 to cooperatively tackle some difficult Issues,
APEC may help us find a way through the developing/ developed country divde
which has t Indered progress on environment issues at the international level.
The advalntge we have Is a set of goals and aspirations shared by both
developed and developing countries.
A regional approach to environmental management will also help us to respond
effectively In International forums to European approaches which, while
appropriate to their economic and environmental circumstances, too often
ignore the environmental differences In the Asia Pacific and the different
demands of Industrialising and fast growing economies. It Is important that we
work together to ensure outcomes on International negotiations reflect not only
northern but southern hemisphere realities.
APEC has already adopted framework principles for integrating environmental
considerations into Its overall program and Into the activities of its working
groups and committees. This integrated approach Is essential If environmental
Issues are not to be marginalised,
This was the thinking of the leaders at Osaka when they decided on joint action
to deal with the demand for food and energy and the pressures that will be put
on the environment. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 17/ 1l
17
The region's economic expansion and accompanying high rates of Investment
are taking place at a point in history when energy efficient technologies and
processes are widely available. This presents a unique opportunity to get it
right the first time to put in place up-to-date technologies that use materials
and energy efficiently, minimise emissions, improve product quality and reduce
costs. Developing APEC economies currently use 50 per cent more energy to
produce a unit of GDP than developed APEC economies. So, clearly, the
potential gains from Improving efficiency are very substantial.
And significantly, If the region doesn't take up this opportunity It will face not only
an investment bill exceeding SUS1.6 trillion to build the Infrastructure for Its
growth in energy demand by 2010, but the additional costs of fixing avoidable
environmental damage.
Australia is committed to working with countries in the region to avoid this for
example, by addressing emissions, including through the use of energy efficient
or renewable energy technologies. One area with considerable potential Is the
replacement of fossil fuel-based power with photovoltaic ( solar) energy systems.
We are already cooperating with Indonesia on solar energy and the feasibility of
using Aus ralia's leading edge clean coal technology and HI Smelt technology
for its future steel plants.
Integrated management of our natural and urban environments will become
more important as urbanisation intensifies, particularly where hazardous and
Industrial wastes have the potential to Impact on marine and coastal
environments and fisheries. Managing urbanisation in a way which is
ecologically and socially sustainable is one of the key challenges confronting
the region. If we succeed, we will see continued Improvements in our quality of
life. If we fail, we risk slowing economic growth and having to divert resources
to deal with waste and pollution, increased vulnerability to natural disasters and,
eventually, social unrest.
In preparation for the UN's Habitat II conference in June, Australia Is looking at
how we can better utilise our aid program to address the challenges of
urbanisation. Key issues include low cost housing, assistance for squatter
settlements, land use planning, human resource development, support for
micro-enterprises, and Infrastructure development
We need in general to have a much better sense of what is happening to our
land cover. The preparation of Australia's first National Greenhouse Gas
Inventory showed that we were still clearing substantial areas of native
vegetation for agriculture, and thus contributing significantly to our greenhouse
gas emissions. This came as a surprise. It would not have had we been
monitoring overall changes in land coverage. 
18
We have now embarked on a major project to monitor agricultural land cover
change using remote sensed data from the Landsat satellite. As far as I know it
Is the biggest project of its type undertaken anywhere. The data, including
maps, resulting from this project will improve our greenhouse gas emission
calculations, providing a basis for better catchment planning, dryland salinity
management and conservation of biodiversity. This is something that should be
done region-wide If we are to improve the quality of global data and provide a
more accurate and comprehensive Information base for global policy making on
climate change.
No Australian Prime Minister is going to claim that getting the balance right
between the Immediate needs of economic growth and the longer-term
requirements of the environment is easy or painless. We have been wrestling
with it In many areas, most recently in our forest policy. But It has to be done
and it will be easier if we can cooperate regionally not just because so many
environmental problems have no regard to national borders, but because we
can make greater progress if we lear from and draw on the experiences of our
neighbours.
A second cfallenge the region faces is in meeting its human resource
developnient needs. President Ramos has already spoken of his hope that
APEC will address this challenge directly during the year of his chairmanship.
The Asia Pacific already faces serious shortages of skilled workers who are vital
for economies that are moving Into export-oriented manufacturing and service
Industries. Thailand, for example, produces only half of the 10,000 engineers it requires
each year. Malaysia estimates it has a shortage of 9,000 engineers and 18,000
engineering assistants. China needs to find two million technically qualified
workers each year, but produces only one million.
Many APEC Governments are already addressing these problems Individually.
Malaysia, for example, is reviewing its entire education structure. And
Hong Kong and Singapore as well as Malaysia are giving higher prionty to
vocational training In secondary schools.
Australia, too, has dramatically increased its investment in education. More
than three quarters of young Australians now complete twelve years of
schooling, and since 1983 we have Increased the number of students at
university by 70 per cent. We are linking education much more closely to
Industry through a new nationwide vocational education and training system.
A regional approach can help strengthen what each of us is doing nationally.
1?. Jan. 6 15: 583 NO-012 P. 18/ 1 
15 NO U 12
19
We can make the temporary movement of professional people easier.
We can strengthen existing exchange schemes and cross-accreditation
arrangements for students In different countries.
We can Improve the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, and
Australia has proposed the establishment of an APEC regional skills centre to
facilitate this.
More fundamentally, the resources Invested in education and training will need
to grow throughout the region. And this will be easier If we can encourage cross
investment in education and training among APEC members, as Malaysia Is
doing now.
As I noted eariler, I am quite convinced that we are living through the period of
the most fundamental change in the world for the past century and a half, and
possibly longer,
We may IlVe at the end of the millennium, but we do not live at the end of
history.* And that history the world in the twenty first century the structure and shape
of its International system, the nature of its conflicts, the forms of its cooperation
is being decided now. And here. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION UNION ANNUAL FEDERAL CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE, 19 JANUARY 1996
" CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you for Inviting me to address you today. I spoke at this Conference three years ago and then, as
now, we were facing an election. It was a profoundly Important election then and it will be just as important
this lime.
Some peopie are saying the lines are not as sharply drawn: that without the deeply ideological Mr Hewson,
and the deeply iniquitous GST, Australians this time will have some kind of tweedle dumn tweedle dee choice
confronting them.
Nothing of course could be further than the truth. Last time we faced a right wing Ideologue, a man who put
his policies and Ideas on the tabie and challenged us to persuade Australian voters that our policies and
ideas were better.
This time we are facing a right wing Ideologue who will not put his policies and ideas on the table.
John Howard has been shadowing me for a quarter of a century: we are the oldest political opponents still
practising, I know him so well and his beliefs so well that if I close my eyes I can hear them playing like a
broken record In my head and it is the voice of the most conservative politician in the last quarter of a
century.
Or, to use his own words, the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had. And if anybody tells
you that John Howard has suddenly become a cuddly small Liberal who has seen the error of his
reactionary ways, you can tell them that I am a Rastafarian and Tim Fischer is a Trotskyist,
So iet's be in no doubt about this sometime In the next two or three months Australians will make a
decision about the basic nature of their society and the basic direction it will take into the 21 st century.
Tndi: y I arldrarc ynei in a Irv% 14I onvironmont whki~ to undamontolly tho camo oo it woo throo yearo Q89.
What hits changed Is that we have moved on as a nation. We have moved on as a community. We have
moved on in our social policy, our foreign policy, our Industrial relations policy, our labour market programs,
our cultural policy, our Idea for an Australian republic, our superannuation policy, our policy on the
environment, our policy for Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders. The economy has moved on.
In everyone of these areas we have made5 dramatic strides In the past three years.
And, with your cooperation, we have made them in education.
Now you will remember that when I was here three years ago, Mr Hewson had committed the Opposition to
shifting resources to wealthy private schools, introducing vouchers for vocational education and fees for
undergraduate courses, and slashing $ 10 billion from the social wage, Including education.
Today Mr Howard says nothing about those nasty things. He offers none of the specific policy details, just
nebulous policy directions things he believes In, he says. 
You don't have to be a political genius to know why John Howard is not giving us any details. My dog knows
why. John Howard is giving us no policy detail because as we found with John Howson and Jeff Kennett
the devil is In the detail. And John Howard hopes that if he leaves the detail out, and just keeps smiling as
cutely as he can, Australians won't see the devil lurking.
I know what he will say there's that Keating trying to scare people, talking about lurking devils and John
Howard being just like John Howson. " Massive scare campaign", he will say.
Well let's look at just one of John Howard's policy principles. Let's see if there Is a devil lurking in what he
says he'll do about education.
John Howard has committed a Coalition Government to winding back specific purpose grants to the States.
The States, he says, " will have greater freedom of choice when deciding their programs and priorities".
Now the Commonwealth Government provIdas over $ 4 billion in funding for school and vocational
education In the form of specific grants to the States -nearly one quarter of all specific purpose payments to
the States goes to education.
These grants help meet the costs of teachers' salaries, curriculum development and the professional
development of teachers. Grants to build and maintain schools and TAFEs. Grants to improve educational
opportunities for Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders, students with disabilities, children living in isolated
regions and children who suffer sodao-economic disadvantage. Grants to Improve the quality of schooling
and access to vocational education.
Mr Howard says he would wind back these grants.
And what would he put In their place?
The State's " programs and priorities".
So where is the devil lurking in this? Well, it just could be recognisable In the " programns and priorities" of
certain States.
Victoria, for instance, where the education " priorities" of the Ken nett Government have closed nearly 300
schools, reduced teacher numbers by 8,000, and cut the level of spending per student by
Or Tasmania, where real spending per student has fallen by 7 per cent.
And South Australia. The South Australian Government's priorities have seen the education budget
slashed by $ 40 million.
Where is the devil lurking in this particular Liberal Party policy " principle"? Answer in getting the States to
do the details. In getting the States to do the dirty work.
A little later I will be talking about another fundamental area of national policy where the Liberal Party is
similarly attempting to impose their old agenda by new means.
In fact, the more of these policy " principles" we look at the more we will see that, under John Howard's
leadership, the Liberal Party Is attempting to do by stealth what last time they attempted to do by open
debate. For the Australian public, not getting to see the detail means not getting to see the fundamental difference
between the Government and the Opposition. It means they don't get to see the choice.
In fact the choice is very much the same as It was the last time John Howard led the Coalition in an election
campaign. It is very much the chioice Australian voters have faced ever since the Liberal Party bought the
Idea that " small government" and a market free-for-all is the best means of governing a country.
For a decade or more, John Howard has been chief spokesman for this position and in successive elections
the Australian people have rejected him and his ideology. This election is his last stand this is John
Howard's Little Big Horn and there is nothing he won't do to escape the fate of Custer. 
If it means renouncing policies he has espoused all his political life, he will do it. If he can hide them he will.
And if he can get the States to practise them on his behalf well, what could suit him better?
Why you would give the States more responsibilities when many of them are walking away from their
existing responsibilities is beyond me. It is beyond Labor,
We say education is too important to leave to the States.
We say that the interests of our children are the Interest of the Commonwealth Government; the Interests of
those millions of Australians who need vocational training are the interests of the Commonwealth
Government. The interests of social equity and economic efficiency are the interests of the Commonwealth
Government. We say all these issues concern the national Interest and the national interest is the interest
of the Commonwealth Government.
Through its funding decisions, a government demnonstrates its priorities and interests and where it believes
Its responsibilities lie.
Through the provision of real Increases in funding for school education 54 per cent since we came to office
the Labor Government has supported access to education for all Australians.
In establishing the National Professional Development Fund, we have worked with teachers to strengthen
and widen their professional knowledge and expertise, acknowledging that teachers are the main agents of
educational reform.
Through support for EdNa, we have Identified the national significance of ensuring our schools are equipped
to take advantage of new technology.
In our suppoit for Aboriginal education, students from disadvantaged and isolated areas, students with
disabilities and students from non-English speaking backgrounds, we have put a premium on access and
equity. With funding for the new civics and citizenship education program, we are recognising that our young
people should understand our democratic institutions and participate in the civic life of the nation.
In Implemreniting the National Strategy on Asian Languages and Studies, we have recognised the need to
improve Australia's capacity to understand, interact and trade with our key Asian neighbours.
Through our $ 1.5 billion Increase in funding tor vocational education, we are signalling that a world-class
vocational education system is essential for building a competitive nation, and we are demonstrating that
this Government has a rock solid commitment to a public vocational education system which creates life
opportunities and allows access for all.
The Federal Labor Government has a deep interest in the shape of the nation's education system and the
education of our young people. But this interest would be hollow if it were not backed up by funding to
sustain and improve the education system. This is just what specific grants to the States are for. And this is
just what the Liberals would hand over to the States.
I have said before that education and especially public education is a wealth transfer. It is a profoundly
democratic and just investment and it is essential to the maintenance of the social fabric. It is also
essential to a healthy economy. A better trained workforce Is a more productive and innovative workforce.
Because education Is fundamental to our aspirations as a nation and as a people, because It goes to the
core of our egalitarian values, because it is an essential means of creating social cohesion, because it is a
basic right of all Australians, the Commonwealth Government has a duty to provide for it.
As teachers I expect you will have some sympathy with this attitude. As teachers you have professional
aspirations and interests an Interest in the people you teach, the quality of your schools and colleges, the
quality of curricula, the standards of your profession. 
But you also have aspirations as citizens as Australians with ambitions for yourselves and for your
children, with expectations that the reward for the work you do will allow a reasonabie amount of time for
leisure and recreation, and a reasonable salary to buy a reasonable life style now and in retirement. As
people who dedicate your labour, skills and knowledge to educating others, you expect, and have a right to
expect, decent pay and conditions of employment, including security of employment.
That is why as well as your interest In what Governments do about education, you have an interest In what
they do or propose to do about industrial relations.
When we talk about Industrial relations we are talking about more than the level of wages and salaries
although we are certainly talking about them too. When we talk about industrial relations, we are talking
about the welfare of individuals and families and their children. We are talking about the distribution of
wealth and opportunity in our society.
The Industrial relations system, broadly speaking, is the framework in which opportunity and wealth are
delivered. It is the basic mechanism of social justice. And, like education, it sets the boundaries for the sort
of society we are and want to be.
That is why, like education, It is an arena in which governments have a proper Interest. In education we
accept our responsibility to provide schools, equipment, technology, teachers. In industrial relations we
accept responsibility to provide a system that works fairly, efficiently and delivers security. That means we
accept responsibility to provide a safety net and an umpire.
And If you look at how our Industrial relations system has worked in the last decade and a half, and consider
the improvements which are still being made, you would have to ask why anyone would want to tear it down.
Why you would want to walk away from your responsibility to provide the umpire and the safety net?
The systemn we presently have and the one we have been developing for the last twelve years or so has
delivered results which were unimaginable in the days when the Coalition was in office.
It delivers a safety net for all workers. It delivers real wage increases. It delivers more than twice the labour
productivity of the country whose Individual contract system the Coalition most admires, New Zealand. It
delivers the lowest rate of strikes since 1940. It delivers employment growth. It delivers low inflation; and
Increasingly It delivers flexibility, skilling, and work place reform.
It delivers an Industrial culture of cooperation rather than conflict. It delivers an environment In which
fundamental, and fundamentally necessary, economic reform can take place without the social damage
which has accompanied such reform In other countries.
It delivers the means by which Australia has become a competitive and open economy, and yet retained its
social cohesion and the social values which have traditionally underpinned it.
In view of all this, you have to ask why would you tear it down?
Because despite their most recent efforts to pretend otherwise, tear it down is what the Coalition would do.
Labor market reform has been John Howard's passion for a decade.
What's tihe first thing the Coalition would do? They would throw away the Accord.
John Howard yearns for the pre-Accord days. We should remember what those days were like.
Australia was strike-prone.
The best measure of Industrial unrest, working days lost per 1000 employees, stood at 590 per annum under
Fraser and Howard in 1994 the number was 76. The average under the Accord is 67 per cent lower than It
was pre-Accord.
The change since 1983 has not been a slight variation to the industrial weather It has been a major change
In the climate.
But in the last resort, thle umpire still prevails. 
In the CRA conflict of last November an industrial disaster was averted because the system worked: the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission stepped in.
The same Commission that John Howard wants to do away with. " We will stab the Commission in the
stomach" he said in his braver days of 1992 when the Coalition thought they would win by being honest
about their intentions.
John Howard supported Comaico the same John Howard who last week said he believed in equal pay for
work of equal value!
Ask yourself, whiat would have happened, without the Commission.
Comalco was paying workers up to $ 20,000 less than their feliow workers performing identical tasks, just
because the latter signed individual contracts.
Ask yourself how long that dispute would have gone on, and what the casualties would have been If it hadn't
been fixed quickly. The country would have been brought to its knees.
The costs would have been extreme, and the consequences would go on for a long time.
Our reputation as a low strike country has taken more than a decade or mature perseverance. But it would
all be lost in a few weeks with the Howard hostility to unions and without an umpire to sort it out.
Our Industrial stability is under even greater threat from the Coalition than first appears. The deplorable
strike record delivered under John Howard in 1975-82 occurred under relatively favourable circumstances
compared to what will happen under the Coalition of the present.
At least in the 1975-82 period the Liberal Government did not directly seek conflict with the union
movement, as Its current policy does. It was more an approach of benign antipathy; today it is one of
aggressive hostility they talk about " breaking" union power.
At least in the 1975-82 period the Liberal Government did not sideline the umpire, the Industrial Relations
Commission, as Its current policy does.
So under the Coalition there would be a much bigger fight than before, and there would be no referee.
The Accord processes are more than about cooperation and Industrial peace. They reflect a consensual
view on the importance of the link between labour cost changes and national economic performance.
When the Government came to office In 1983, we Inherited double-digit inflation and double-digit
unemployment an Australian first.
In the period of the Accord we have had macro-economic outcomes foreseen by no economist and
unimaginable under the previous approach.
Real GOP growth has averaged 3.7 per cent growth per year under the Accord. It was 1.9 per cent In the
seven years before the Labor Government. That is, the Accord has delivered nearly a doubling of growth.
And It's continuing we now have had a record 17 successive quarters of GDP growth.
Economic growth means jobs growth. The Accord has delivered average employment growth of 2.3 per cent
per year; when Mr Howard was Treasurer the figure was 0.8 per cent.
In absolute numbers, the job growth figures are even starker: 184,514 per year under the Accord, 50,199
per year under Mr Howard.
If employment had continued to grow at the same rate as it did under Howard, there would be 1.4 million
fewer jobs today. 
Inflation has been reduced to an average of 5.2 per cent a year under the Accord: Mr Howard's record: 9.9
per cent. For the last 4 years It has averaged 2.25 per cent, a figure that 13 years ago would have been
Incredible. Real average weekly earnings for full-time adults has Iricreascd by 8.8 per cent under the Accord. The
Coalition says wages have failcn, but that's because they are using shonky data a point explained In the
document I am launching today.
The rapid employment growth and the higher real wages have influenced the best total measure or
economic welfare: real disposable household Income per capita. Under the Accord it has increased by 22.3
per cent, or nearly 2 per cent a year. For the previous pre-Accord period the total increase was only 6 per
cent less than 1 per cent a year.
Moreover, the Accord has provided a mechanism for transforming workplaces. It is not an accident, nor Is it
an international phenomenon, that our workplaces are being transformed significantly In terms of skiling
and flexibility.
And Is not an accident, nor Is It an International phenomenon, that the transition Is being accomplished In a
cooperative and peaceful way.
it is the Accord.
The Accord has delivered and it is continuing to deiiver.
In Accord Viii the partners committed to the creation of 000,000 additional jobs up to March, 1999. This
promise builds on the Accord VII commitment of 500,000 jobs in the three years after the 1993 election.
The time Is nealy up and already 720,000 jobs have been created.
In this Accord the ACTU and the Government also committed to a 2-3 percent rate of underline Inflation on
average over the course of the cycle. It Is unprecedented to have a union movement endorsing an Inflation
target of the Central Bank.
This Accord also supported a Special Case being brought before the Commission for teachers and nurses
who had been unable to obtain wage justice from conservative State Governments.
What would have happened to teachers' pay without the Accord and capacity Of the Commission to
Intervene when pay and conditions are being eroded by Governments not sympathetic to teachers? A large
number of people in this room would be much worse off without this process.
We shouldn't forget the micro-economnic reforms underway In Australian workplaces, with an emphasis on
collective bargaining at the enterprise level. Well over half of all federal omployoes are now on
agreements, many of them extremely Innovative. And the number Is growing quickly.
Workplace agreements collectively bargained are only possible If the total value of the award conditions
Is not reduced.
This Is the real " no disadvantage" test, In which the agreements are closely scrutinised by the highly expert
and respected Industrial Relations Commission before they become law.
The process of certifying agreements Is a public one. Agreements are negotiated collectively; union
representation Is welcomed; no Individuals have to bargain by themselves with the employer. There Is not a
large powor imbalance and industrial relations inspectors are checking that agreements are fair and legal in
practice. Every worker Is protected. The system looks after those whose bargaining position Is weak. It Is fair and Is
seen to be.
These Issues and more are described, explained and analysed In the Government document Flexibilty and
Fairness at Work, which I am launching today with the minister for industrial Relations, Laurie Brereton. 
Flexibility and Fairness at Work is a broad statement of the Government's Industrial relations stance. We
are very proud of it. We are confident it will reassure Australians that there is every reason to maintain our
Industrial relations approach and institutions because this system delivers flexible change and protects
workers. So, in summary, what do we get with the Accord? Industrial stability, a highly effective macro-economic
Instrument to deliver low Inflationary economic and employment growth, a framework for protected
workplace reform. A tested and proved way of operating.
Why would we want to put our social and economic security at risk by throwing it out?
What else does John Howard really want in Industrial relations?
One thing is not In doubt. He has been absolutely consistent in advocating radical change for the Australian
labour market.
It has been one of the few things we could rely on. As he said himself in July last year:
" As you know, of all the Issues I have been committed to over the last ten years, none has boen
more important, none has been more prominent, than my absolute commitment to the need to free
Australia's Industrial relations system."
If he's said It once, he's said it a hundred times. He must have said it a dozen times last year.
When economic policy reforms have been accepted as being good for the country, he has always said
things like, " yes but they won't do the most important thing they won't change our inflexible wages system".
John Howard has always stood for one thing: he wants Australia to be a low labour cost country. He wants
employers to have the upper hand with workers, because he says work contracts should be negotiated
Individually and not collectively.
Any fair assessment of his record leads Inexorably to this conclusion only: he wants workers' pay and
conditions to be cut.
How do we know this to be true?
As Treasurer in 1982 he Initiated the wages freeze which ensured that the real value of workers' pay would
fall. He has opposed riot been quiet about, not Ignored, he has opposed every proposed wage increase for
Australian worker's since 1978, bar two.
He wrote Jobsback! for the last election in which there were no protections for workers, and no way of
guaranteeing workers' pay and conditions. Hie has said on several occasions since the 1993 election that
Jobsbeck' was the right policy. He said it right up until I11 days ago.
He has referred to overtime and penalty rates as " absurd job destroying imposts", and told us for a decade
or more that labour market flexibility is the modern approach for Australia. Not having Governments, or
unions, Or Commissions Involved in industrial relations Is his panacea, his holy grail.
He looks with envy and admiration to the New Zealand changes in industrial relations which have totally
removed the awards and pushed workers into individual contracts.
The Victorian approach to Industrial relations, In which there have been significant pay reductions for
Victorian State award workers, he describes as excellent policy.
When 400,000 Victorian workers chose to move to the federal award system to escape, he has said less
and less about how good the Victorian model Is. But Jeff Kennett has said that with a Howard government,
these people would have " nowhere to hide".
John Howard has said that the Western Australian State industrial relations system is his preferred model.
For West Australian workers there are individual contracts with just a few minimum conditions, and the
certainty that employers can reduce pay legally. 
8
He advocated a youth wage of $ 3 an hour in the last election, and has only dropped it now because he
argues that it Is hard to explain the benefits. Nevertheless, he says that it is right.
He continually attacks the Government for its active support of the Accord, the Industrial Relations
Commission, and bargaining processes that protect workers.
And, with these views and this line of attack, he is essentially saying two things: that ' flexibility" meaning
pay cuts Is the solution; and that he is not prepared to support a system which genuinely protects the pay
and conditions of workers.
The finest policy contribution that could be made by government in John Howard's view is the " freeing up"
of the labour market with its attendant pay cuts and loss of conditions.
Simply, he wants another, way.
It Is his deepest philosophical commitment, the definition and framework of his policy position his reason
for being.
But then a strange thing happened just 11 days ago.
In the speech to the Young Liberals Annual Convention on January 8 he announced a complete change in
his direction. He said things he had never said or thought, or felt, or countenanced for a moment in his
entire political career.
What was his oldest anathema suddenly became his newest desideratumn.
He said things that he had fought against in the Liberal party back rooms for a decade. Among young
Liberals at least the very young it might not have raised a youthful eyebrow. But old Liberals must have
been reaching for the smelling salts, and in boardrooms across the country the level of whiskey bottles fell
by an average 8 centimetres.
Had their man gone mad? They give him one last chance and this is what he does.
" Under a Howard Government you cannot be worse off but you can be better off", he said. " I give this rock
solid guarantee", he said. " Our policy will not cause a cut in the take-home pay of Australians", he said.
He then went on to outl ine some changes to the Industrial relations system, including listing 10 so-called
minimum conditions of employment. One of these was that take-home pay would be at least the same as
the value of the award conditions.
How could this amazing turn-around be understood?
Has he radically changed? Have his previous commitments and principles now gone?
Is he entitled to be believed?
By the time they got the corks back In the bottles In the boardrooms and the beter clubs, they knew the
answer and were reassured.
They knew that this new system of his can't and won't actually deliver what he says. They knew that he still
wants radical changes and his new system will deliver this.
That instead of being straight, like Dr Hewson was, it can all be achieved by stealth. That his speech was a
ruse. The truth is, he still wants radical change.
It i5 simply not credible that John Howard, by his own definition the most conservative Liberal leader ever,
has now become an advocate of worker protections in the labour market.
He Is not entitled to be believed. 
And if he is not entitled to be believed he is weak, because he doesn't have the courage to stand up for and
argue his beliefs.
And if he still wants radical labour market reform but seek it by Stealth, then he is sneaky.
John Howard won't be the first Liberal leader to promise no reductions in workers remuneration and then cut
pay and conditions Immediately on winning government. In fact, It's becoming quite fashionable.
Jeff Kennett was the first in recent times. He said Victorian workers will not suffer " any loss of wages and
conditions", but then abolished all State awards and took away holiday loadings.
Richard Court was next, saying he was no Jeff Kennett and that workers had " nothing to fear. When
elected, he out youth wages to $ 3.77 an hour and removed all Income guarantees from the Western
Australian system.
John Howard's promise that " under Coalition policy... . employees cannot be worse off* has a very familiar
ring. Kennett, Court and Howard have one thing strongly in common: an absolute conviction that labour mariket
change for which read lower wages is essential.
It is more than just the comparison with his fellow Liberals that tells us that Howard is not entitled to be
believed. It is the process of his new system that will make It Inevitable.
Under the proposed system the Industrial Relations Commission will be made redundant. There will be no
public testing or assessment of the fairness of contracts. Workers will have to bargain, as Individuals, with
the employer.
The Australian Workplace Agreement will be filed and that just means put in a cabinet with the new socalled
Employment Advocate, It will not be looked at unless the worker asks for this to be so.
Let's think about the circumstances in which a worker would ask for an inspection of their contract.
If asked to sign an Australian Workplace Agreement would a job applicant say, " let me show It to the union,
or to a lawyer first", when they know that some other more compliant applicant will then get the job? The
answer is, of course not. Job applicants will have no effective choice.
Thus job mobility will ensure that the system must quickly and Inevitably reflect the law of the jungle. Under
the Coalition's approach new workers will be forced onto agreements that will not be scrutinised by an
effective or even expert body.
And job mobility is a huge Issue. Over 1.7 million workers face a new employer each year. 400,000
married women returning to work; 250,000 tertiary education graduates; several hundred thousand year I11
and 12 leavers; and 600,000 workers who change jobs every year.
In 1994 a total of 28,258 school teachers took a job with a new employee 7675 men and 18583 women.
Some of them might be sitting in this room. That's over 10 per cent of all teachers each year without any
effective protection.
The system will change radically, and quickly, because somebody wanting a job will sign up even if they are
unhappy with the contract. And no one apart from the worker and the employer will know what has
transpired because, as In Victoria and Western Australia, the contracts will be secret.
Existing employees are also not going to challenge their employer if they think the contract Is unfair. This
would amount to publicly questioning the employers honesty and credibility.
The employer can make this costly in all sorts of ways by not offering overtime hours, by not all owing
holidays when they are wanted, by not giving promotions, and even by the sack under the Coalition's
changed unfair dismissals laws. You'd have to be a mug to want to take on the boss publicly In this way. 
And why would an Individual worker bother to bring a complaint to the Employment Advocate when it has no
judicial power, and no way of enforcing a decision, other than to take it to court where it Gould stay for many
months, and where the outcome is uncertain?
Even if the Workplace Agreement seems unthreatening at first, the Coalition has no process to up-date
them, and says that even if the awards are Improved this will not effect tihe Workplace Agreement. So over
time the Agreements must become of lower value, with no mechanism to alter this, and no right for a worker
to strike if an employer changes any aspect of them.
John Howard knows all this. And so do his political supporters.
It is instructive that neither the BCA nor the ACCI took John Howard to task for his appaient conversion to
the cause of worker protection. It is instructive that Jeff Kennett and the WA industrial relations Minister,
Kierath, both applauded Howard's policy announcement even though on paper It contradicts much of what
they stand for.
The reason is that conservative business groups and other Liberals know what John Howard knows: he can
achieve by stealth exactly what he and they have always wanted.
The conservatives saw the meaning of John Howard's speech, knowing It to be a ruse, camouflage from a
leader without the leadership to admit where he wants to take Australia.
Camouflage from a leader who won't stand and articulate that which he passionately believes.
The bottom line is that John Howard Is committed to radical labour market change nothing Is clearer. But
he has now also revealed himself as someone who is prepared to publicly repudiate his most strongly held
position because he knows that, properly understood, his industrial relations policy would lose him the
election. He Is willing to wear the charge that he stands for nothing because he hopes to win by cunning what he has
never won by advocacy.
Under Howard's system wages must fail. Conditions must be lost. And It will all happen quickly because
the labour market has so much mobility, and it is the new job takers who will be most disadvantaged initially.
But, over time, everybody will be affected.
The question Is why do it? Why throw away the Accord and put in place a system that must cut pay and
conditions and take away basic rights of workers?
It can't be for profits. Industrial peace, jobs or Inflation. And it's not for productivity as the dismal
performance of New Zealand has shown,
It can only be because he wants a radically different Australia, with considerably more employer power and
considerably less employee protections.
It can only be because he wants a low wage cost country. Make no mistake, this obsession still rules him.
Under John Howard's arrangements the Australian industrial system will be changed In favour of employers,
the bargaining will swing In their favour, the onus will fall on Individual workers and as a recent poll
indicates, they know workers' Incomes will be cut.
The real John Howard won't be standing up in this election, but we've seen enough from the last quarter
century to know exactly what to expect.
He will leave education to the States. He will leave the wages and conditions of Australian workers not to
the IRC and the system of awards and the principle of no disadvantage but to the law of the jungle and the
survival of the fittest.
With the processes of his industrial relations system his rock-solid guarantee of workers take home pay Is a
sham and a ruse. 
11
With John Howard we have once again reached a fork In the road. His path leads Inexorably to a reduced
social wage, reduced educational opportunity, the end of the Accord, and the end of an industrial relations
system which levels up the playing field of our national life.
Since I last spoke to you, we have had three highly productive years. There have been major economic and
social reforms. We have maintained the environment of cooperation and tolerance which has taken us so
far in recent years. In 1996, just about the only thing which hasn't changed for the better is the Coalition.
Even the recent change in rhetoric is no change if you remember this time in 1993, they were attempting
to sell a new cuddly version of Fightback.
We are seeing it all again. And with your support, we will see the same result at the election.
ends 



( 7)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF OUR NATION
SYDNEY, 20 JANUARY 1996
* CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**
Even allowing for this years rel atively awful weather everywhere from here to
Bass Strait and beyond, there are things about Australia in the summer
holidays which never fail to remind us that to live in this country is to be very
fortunate. The long warnm days, the beaches, the barbecues, the family, the friends; the
sport, the arlts, the space it's generally enough to help wind down from the
year gone by and to wind up for the one ahead, even one which contains an
election. You stop reading the papers, give up on the evening news It is a
nag-free environment.
We take the good things pretty much for granted. But sometimes all of a
sudden its hits you, that we are profoundly lucky to have a country as good
as this a continent as big and wonderful, and a society as strong, free,
democratic, rich and unpretentious.
I think it's a time of the year when, in an entirely understated way of course,
we celebrate the country and the pleasure we take in being Australian.
There are even times when I think we should all stop and drink a toast to the
place, to the fact that we are here, and to our fellow Australians.
And just as quickly go back to whatever we were doing or not doing.
This may be an unconscious reflection of a Celtic heritage. The Celts love
toasts. But I don't think it's got much to do with the Irish. It takes a lot less time than
my family have been In Australia to develop a purely Australian form of
sentimentality. We might retain a certain self-conscious pride or interest in.
our ethnic origins, but after a generation or two it is not much more than a
hobby. Yet in an immigrant society the knowledge of where we came from is
knowledge worth having. 
Even after several generations of experience has made us incorrigibly
Australian, we old Anglo, Celtic Australians retain a certain affectionate
curiosity about our ancestral seats, and almost certainly reflect a little of the
culture from which we are derived not to say the physical characteristics.
A hundred years ago there were plenty of people in this country who knew
exactly what Henry Lawson meant when he said: " I am Australian. I know no
other land".
And I have met Australians who migrated as children in the 1940s and
who would say exactly the same thing. Even as they eat dolmades and
gefillte fish and tabouli and toad-in-the-hole and tagliatelle.
Eve * n as they practise their traditional religions, observe their traditional
rituals and celebrations and display, in all sorts of nearly imperceptible ways,
their traditional culture and habits of mind.
In other words, we are all to a greater or lesser extent, Immigrants. And we
are all equally Australians. That is the reason for celebrating.
There have been many reasons advanced -for the success of Australia's
Immigrant sodiety. I think most of them are valid and none of them are
sufficient reason to be complacent about it. All of them put together are no
reason to be complacent about it.
There seems to me no doubt that the great physical spaces of Australia al so
create psychological space and this helps the cause of peace in a diverse
society.
And that is also a reason to bear in mind the need to plan our development in
clever ways which use the space and its resources optimally.
Immigration always teaches us things about ourselves.
The old democratic fabric and institutions of this country, and the egalitarian
traditions, have also helped us accommodate the cultural difference. The
Idea of the " fair go" has been a real force in shaping Australia, including
multicultural Australia.
And that is also a reason to insist that all Australians, and especially our
children, know -the-value of the democracy. and the democratic traditions they
have Inherited.
If there Is a third substantial reason for the success of multiculturalism in
Australia, it may be that we have been multicultural since the beginning of
European settlement. The First Fleet was multicultural and every generation
since has lived with significant cultural, religious and political difference not
the least of them of course the difference between the Irish and the English.
And that Is another reason not to be complacent our generations are not the
first to live successfully with diversity, we inherited a lot of our knowledge. 
3
If these are three broad reasons for the success of modern multicultural
Australia the fact of our environment, the fact of our democracy, and the fact
of our experience in cultural diversity they tend to suggest that to keep
succeeding we need to keep working and take nothing for granted.
Above all, we should remember what all free immigrants to Australia had in
common and that was the search for a better life. Nothing so effectively
made the cultural differences seem unimportant as the common pursuit of
prosperity and freedom.
It follows that if we want this diverse modern Australia to remain harmonious,
productive and cohesive we have to maintain both the standards of our
democracy and the energy of our economy and our society. Whatever
sophisticated multicultural programs we devise, these are the most important
prerequisites of success.
I think the essential thing to understand about a society like ours an
Immigrant society is that immigration is a two-way street. It involves a
cultural exchange.
When I was'gowing up;, I worked for a while in Pyrmont and I would often go
down and watch the ships from P&amp; O and the Orient Line come in and dock,
loaded with immigrants; families crowded to the rails looking at the city with
who knows what sort of feelings.
And who knows what sorts of feelings were felt by those of us who watched.
But 1 am sure that not all the fear and apprehension were on the other side of
the ship's rail. 1 am sure there was some kind of exchange of feelings. I think
whatever hope they felt was matched by our admiration for their courage in
crossing the world and, perhaps even more admirable, to have come among
US. In retrospect you can see how It was a leap of faith on both sides. That's the
great strength of Australia's post-war Immigration policy. It took courage on
both sides and I believe the experience has given Australia that much more
courage. It gave us many things and I don't think this audience needs me to tell them
what they are,.. But I do think-that-this.-is-a point worth making: when you
open yourself up to the world, when you are brave enough to look cultural
difference in the eye, you learn a great deal. And half of what you learn is
about yourself. And you are made stronger by that and more mature.
That is what I mean by immigration being essentially an exchange. For
everything we have given to the people from 160 countries who have come
here, we have been repaid. For a new start in life, they repaid Australia in
their energy, ideas and ambitions, in their skills and in their culture. But, just
as Importantly, In the greater maturity, self-knowledge and the courage they
have given us. 
In the global environment we now find ourselves in, and amid the intense
competition, these qualities have a value for us which is beyond measure.
We can define multiculturallsm In any number of ways. Some people like the
concept but hate the word so much they would like to define it out of
existence. Yet, as I have said before, so long as it is not mistaken for an
ideology or a bureaucracy or a set of rules in political correctness, the word is
a perfectly accurate description of what we are, what we must be and what
we want to be.
I think we should live with the word and enjoy the reality. Above all, we
should recognise that this multicultural ism massively enlarges our democracy
and our democratic traditions, It adds to our freedom as well as to the
richness of our lives.
That Is why we should enshrine the principle of tolerance among our most
basic democratic principles.
And that is why the suggestion made in the statement we are launching
today, that we begin to think of our country in terms of a Multicultural
Compact seeifns to me ' such a good one, Essentially it gives expression to
thb idea of Immigration as an exchange.
The Multicultural Compact states that we share this land with the first
Australians, whose cultures are oldest of all; and that, as a result of
Immigration, we also share a wealth of diverse histories and traditions.
The Compact asks of all Australians, irrespective of background and
generation, that they Invest their main allegiance in Australia; that they
accept the basic structures of Australian society the rule of law, tolerance,
equality of opportunity, parliamentary democracy, freedom of speech and
religion, English as the national language and equality of the sexes and
races; and that they extend to others the same freedoms they claim for
themselves. And the Australian community is asked in exchange: to ensure equality of
access, opportunity and participation, unimpeded by barriers of race,
language or country of birth; to ensure that our institutions reflect and
respond to the diversity of the population; to ensure that the potential
-contribution of-all Australians is recognised, and to provide opportunities for
all Australians to learn both English and another language.
I will be writing to Premiers and Chief Ministers seeking endorsement by all
Australian governments of the principles contained within the Multicultural
Compact. A healthy multicultural society has no need for rules and sanctions. But there
is value In describing the logic by which the country works, and in defining
the minimum standards required in a civil society. 
4. And this is the time to begin that process of definition.
Because in the last decade of the twentieth century, for the first time in our
history, we have a real chance to decide our own destiny to pull together all
the strands of Australian identity.
We have dismantled all the barriers which quarantined us from the rest of the
world and we are becoming ever more deeply engaged in our own region.
These are exciting times and we need Australians to engage in them. I
believe this statement will help that process. We have derived immeasurable
benefits from immigration and from the multicultural programs of the last two
decades. These days we tend to think in terms of the economic and cultural
benefits, and there is no question that they are immense.
However, I am inclined to think that the greatest benefits are literally without
measure; and that they go not only to governments, nations and communities
but to every one of us. They make all Australians, whatever their
backgrounds, a little bit richer and a little bit stronger.
In part, Our Nation is a response to the report of the National Multicultural
Advisory Co~ ncil, an&amp;~ I would like to thank the Council for its work in
reviewing the architecture of multicultural Australia.
I want especially to thank Mick Young for his great work as Chair of the
Council. Mick comes from the same ethnic group as myself.
But and I'm sure you will excuse my using the word in this context we are
both thoroughly assimilated.
In his own way Mick Young is proof of the greatness of this democracy: in
not every country is it possible for a shearer to reach the highest rungs of
office; but then not every country produces shearers like Mick.
Mick is stepping down for health reasons; and I hope he will forgive me for
reminding him that everyone in this room wishes him well.
* I must also welcome the new Chair of the National Multicultural Advisory
* CounciyMr Neville Roach,. who is with us today..
I am now delighted to launch Our Nation.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH NOTES BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRIME MINISTER'S WELCOME LUNCH FOR MEMBERS OF
THE CANBERRA COMMISSION, MONDAY 22 JANUARY 1996
ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY
* May I begin by formally thanking each of you for accepting my invitation
to join this Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons
0 I am very conscious of how busy you are, and far you have come to
participate in this meeting
I am very grateful to you
0 However, I am sure from your presence here that you all agree there can
be few comimitments more worth making than this
I would not have set up this Commiission or asked you to take part if I
did not believe your combined efforts will1 be able to make a
significant contribution to one of the most pressing issues facing the
international community
that is, how the world can remove the threat of nuclear weapons
weapons of mass destruction so powerful that their use could
destroy our civilization
The Australian Government begins from what seems to us to be the
unarguable proposition that the world would be a better, safer, saner
place without such weapons
that is, if they did not exist
* But we have them and only three possibilities follow from that:
first, that they will be used 
second, that they will not be used but will be managed forever by
wise, prudent and well-meaning governments and military forces
or, third, that somehow we can agree to eliminate them
* The first possibility offers catastrophe to the human race
T he second requires us to make assumptions about the future which run
completely counter to logic and experience
-because if there is one thing of which we can be utterly confident, it
is that the present relatively benign global situation in which only five
countries have declared nuclear weapons, and are unlikely to use
them offensively, will not obtain forever
far more probable over time is the emergence of a more
fractured, dangerous, world in which the restraints which have
governed the strategic outlook since these weapons were
invented no longer apply, and the possession of such weapons
proliferates more generally to other states and possibly even
beyond state control
* That leaves only the third possibility
that somehow we begin, with care and caution and a clear-eyed
sense of all the difficulties it involves, to move to eliminate such
weapons completely
* That is a massively difficult task and the Australian Government is not
naive about it
we have no illusions about the technical difficulties of solving the
central problems of verification
and we acknowledge the political problems involved: uncertainty
about the future and the accretion of fifty years of nuclear doctrine
nor do we imagine that a world without nuclear weapons will be a
world without conflict
so serious issues of security also need to be addressed along
with the technical and diplomatic issues 
3
So it is in pursuit of that third possibility,-what seemrs to us to be the
only real option for the world that we have invited you to join this
Commission Because if the aim of a world without nuclear weapons is ever to be
realised the issue has to be placed more firmly and centrally on the
international agenda
if that does not happen, we will inevitably see the familiar
allowed to drift unchallenged into the future
so that objective to ensure that this issue is widely debated,
and in depth Is one of the aims of this Commission
But if that debate is to move ahead, the onus is on those favouring
abolition to provide practical and serious ideas about how it can be done
-and, most importantly, how it can be done in a way which actually
enhances global security
That Is the other reason for establishing the Commission
It is why we have invited all of you from differentt backgrounds and
different approaches to participate in it
you bring to this task, collectively and individually, an unmatched
experience in statesmanship, in nuclear and scientific issues, in
diplomacy and in strategic analysis
we are convinced that if any group can address these issues in a
fresh, persuasive and unconventional way, it exists here in this room
We are not looking for easy statements of principle in your report, or for
words which are agreed for the sake of getting agreement
* what we hope for is that you will come to grips with the hardest, and
most intractable issues, and show how these must be addressed
Many of you have spent much of your professional lives engaged with
these Issues and I don't intend to offer you advice now about them
But I do want to say something about " why now?" and " why here in
Australia? 
0 In Singapore last week, I gave a speech in which I said that it seemed to
me that we were living through the greatest period of change in the
world since the emergence of the nation state
The end of the Cold War has freed up the global system in an
unprecedented and unexpected way
0 What comes next is very uncertain but it will not be uncertain for long
0 Within a very short time, the world will adjust and settle into new
grooves, from which it will be very difficult to dislodge it
0 But for the time being we have an unparalleled opportunity and an
unprecedented responsibility to look afresh at what have seemed to be
intractable problems
9 And, of these, possibly the most intractable has been the threat of
nuclear weapons
0 When the Cold War ended, most people in the world breathed a sigh of
relief and assumed that the nightmare of the nuclear threat had
disappeared along with the Berlin Wall
-the strength of the international reaction to the French Government's
decision to lift its moratorium on nuclear testing stemmed in large
measure from this unexpected and unwelcome reminder of a danger
which many people assumed had passed
We in Australia believed it was important for all countries to focus
attention not just on the symptom continued nuclear testing by France
and China but on this larger cause
Why should Australia be involved in an exercise like this?
we are not a nuclear power
we are geographically distant from the major areas of nuclear tension
and we are an old and committed ally of the United Sates and have
benefitted from the protection of extended deterrence
The answer is that we are convinced that in the new international
environment our security and the security of our friends, as well as the
people of the world at large, will be better served if we can eliminate 
nuclear weapons, as we have moved to eliminate other weapons of mass
destruction
9 Australia does not have any proprietorial or exclusive interest in nuclear
disarmament or any preconceived outcome in mind from the deliberations of this
group * because if progress is to be made and I believe it can be it will be
by the combined and relentless efforts of many governments and
groups and individuals
-not just expressing by our hopes and fears, but by coming to grips
rigorously with all the difficult issues involved
1 am convinced the time is right and, of course, the people are right
for the Canberra Commission to make a major intellectual and political
contribution to this work
6 Gareth Evans, personally, and the Australian Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, including Ambassador Richard Butler, the convenor of
this Commission, have a long record of achievement on global and
regional arms control issues, Including their contribution to the
conclusion of the Chemnical Weapons Convention and the work on the
CTBT They will be ready, through your Secretariat, to give you whatever
assistance you require
a Let me end by again expressing my personal thanks to all of you for your
participation in the Commission and let me welcome you formally to
Australia
ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
" OUR LAND" STATEMENT
ALBURY, 24 JANUARY 1996
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
First, let me thank Professor Blake, the Vice-Chancellor of Charles Sturt
University, and Professor Cullen, the Director of the Cooperative Research
Centre for Freshwater Ecology, for their invitation to open this research
facility for the Murray Darling Freshwater Research Centre.
There is great work being done in Australian research, and I sincerely hope
that this event will help to advertise that fact.
Research of the kind being done here is essential because it seeks solutions
to the problems of living on this continent which we simply must solve. It
adds to our body of knowledge, and thus contributes vitally to Australia's
future. The work here is unique, but there are parallels across the country. We are
doing a great deal in the field of environmental research, we are doing a
great deal to restore and protect the environment, and each year we do more.
Since 1988/ 89 the Commonwealth has spent nearly $ 350 million on
vegetation-related projects alone. Nearly 700,000 hectares have benefited.
Nearly 200,000 Australians have been involved.
Or, to quote another example, since 1989 the Commonwealth together with
State Governments have spent over $ 300 million to address the damage to
our greatest river system, the Murray-Darling Basin and this investment has
leveraged an even greater contribution from the community and private
sector. I am continually impressed by the quality of the people involved in the handson
environmental effort in Australia. 
It is easy enough to be passionate about the environment, and we need
people to be passionate. But to succeed we need to be wise and passionate.
We need to be practical. And, because we won't repair the damage of two
centuries and we won't create a sustainable Australia overnight, we need to
be dedicated.
No one should imagine this is a task for the short term, any more than they
imagine that governments and dollars alone are the solutions. Success
requires a sustained national effort a communal, generalised effort.
If after all the expenditure of money and energy and expertise in recent years,
we feel daunted by the task that still lies ahead, there are only two remedies.
The first is broaden the effort: involve more people and communities, more
companies, more landowners make it a more coordinated nationwide drive,
make it inseparable from the nation's progress, build the energy of private
interest into the public environmental good. That's the first remedy.
The second is more of a spiritual cure. Go to Daintree, go to the Franklin
River or Kakadu, or Shoalwater Bay or Jervis Bay. Go to the places which
have been saved. Go to the environment itself. Go to the places up the
Murray from~ here which Greening Australia and the local communities are
making a corridor of green; or walk along the Hawkesbury or the Yarra which
unemployed people with local communities are renovating under REEP
schemes financed through Working Nation; or go to any of the thousands of
Australian farms where Landcare has made a visible difference.
As works in progress go, this is more rewarding than most: the evidence of
each step we take is so gratifying. This huge continent throws up a huge
challenge, and at times it will look like we are not making progress but we
are. And as a nation it would be disastrous if we were to lose our nerve.
Today we take some more steps big steps. And most importantly, we pull
all the elements of the national effort, into step.
This is a very big policy initiative. All up, it involves expenditure in the region
of almost half a billion dollars.
It is also very good policy: it goes to the heart of the problem, it builds on
proven programs, and in the longer term it will produce far more savings and
far more national wealth than we intend to spend.
In a real sense it will be the test: when these programs are fully implemented,
we will have a very clear idea of whether the concept of sustainable Australia
can be made a reality.
If it can, the rewards will be immense: for our prosperity, for our quality of life,
for our relationship with this land, for our farmers, for our children. 
It is a statement in two interrelated parts: the first concerns the task of
creating a sustainable rural Australia; the second is directed at meeting our
responsibility to conserve our natural environment. It is a statement about
the relationship between our natural riches and the economic wealth that we
create from it. It constitutes by far the most dramatic single response any
Australian government has ever made to the challenge of protecting the land.
Australia is an environmentally rich nation.
We have diverse biological capital: numerous species that are not found
anywhere else; ecosystems in coral reefs, rainforests, wetlands and deserts
which are things of wonder for the whole world.
We also have huge and diverse areas of farmland which provide high quality
produce over long seasons. Over the years, this has helped us build
considerable national wealth through the export of our commodities.
But Australia is also environmentally fragile.
Recent assessments have shown us just how fragile and how difficult is the
task of repair-
In Singapore recently, I drew attention to the environmental challenges facing
a rapidly growing Asia. Many of these challenges are shared by Australia.
Soil erosion, salinity, water pollution and loss of biodiversity are all too well
known to us.
The challenge of protecting our land is inextricably linked to our economic
well being. The two go hand in hand. That is sustainable development. The
links are obvious, but always worth re-stating.
Our farms must be profitable if we are to maintain the capacity to invest in the
conservation of our environmental assets. To be profitable, we must add
maximum value to our produce and link producers and processors closely
with consumer demands.
Maximum value can only be added over the long haul if our produce is clean,
as our consumers will demand, and if our resource base remains productive.
Our resource base can only remain productive if ecological processes and
biological diversity are maintained. And that demands a strategic network of
nature reserves joined with conservation measures on and off farms.
And so the circle is closed. With this Statement we enlarge the circle
hugely.
Today, we make another very significant down payment on securing the
future of our land a major investment in our capacity to profit economically
from the land and protect the diverse life the land itself supports. 
Some 60 per cent of the land is managed by our farming families. Last year a
great many of these families depended on us to survive the drought. The
much more common reality is, of course, that Australia depends on them.
At present our agricultural industries are finely balanced. They face
substantial opportunities for growth and prosperity. But they also face
significant environmental challenges if they are to remain productive.
Farming families are already seeing an increasing proportion of their produce
being processed in Australia, or being packed and exported quickly and
reliably to premium price foreign markets. That is the way they will improve
profitability and so be well placed to manage our natural resources in a
sustainable manner.
In turn, sustainable farming is essential if our products are to find favour with
the burgeoning consumer classes across Asia. By the year 2000, spending
on food in Asia will have increased by around $ US160 billion per annum from
the 1990 level.
Asian consumers will increasingly demand quality, and increasingly be
subject to fAshion and.' market presentation.
For Australian suppliers, continued product innovation, market development
and reliable distribution will be essential to increased market share.
The success of the rural sector in adjusting to change is demonstrated by the
record of exports of high value added food products. In 1991-92, the year
before the commencement of the Government's Agri-Food Strategy, these
exports totalled $ 2.5 billion. We set an ambitious target of $ 7 billion of
exports by the year 2000. Last year our high value exports had risen by
per cent to over $ 3.7 billion, and we are clearly on track to meet and exceed
our Year 2000 target.
The Government will build on the success to date by pulling together the
threads of natural resource management, on-farm performance, product
development, market identification, transport, distribution, and consumer
servicing. Industry leaders have suggested to me that the next phase of development
should cement Australia as a major food exporter to Asia. I have agreed that
the Government will join with and support strong private sector leadership in
this endeavour.
As part of this, we will energise the Agri-Food Council to develop and drive
an Asia Food 2000 Strategy. The Council will report to me and I will chair at
least one meeting a year. 4 
Further details of these reforms will be announced on Friday. For now I can
say that the Council's general aims will be to improve linkages across the full
production, processing, marketing and transport chain with the objective of
promoting high value food exports.
Yet the greatest imperative in the long run is sustainability.
By the early 1 990s around 6 per cent or $ 1.5 billion of annual agricultural
production was being lost to natural resource degradation. This is the legacy
we are tackling in partnership with rural Australia at the level of individual
farms, local communities and broader regions. It is only through such a
comprehensive strategy that we can succeed.
The Government cannot solve these major environmental problems in
isolation. What is more, to attempt to do so, is to squander by far the largest
source of energy and inspiration at our disposal. I mean communities, the
people of Australia.
Community involvement is a theme of this Statement the Government can
set the policy goals and framework and provide the bulk of the funds, but the
maximum return depends on how well we engage the community.
The massive investment we are making today will help us arrest and begin to
reverse the equally massive land and water degradation our land has
suffered over the last 200 years.
It will not mean the end of the problem. Only that we are not daunted by it.
Unfortunately, much of the burden of turning this situation around has fallen
to the current generation of farming families. In November 1994, I
established the Land Management Task Force to investigate ways to improve
land management in rural Australia. It reported that property management
planning is an effective and essential tool in improving the financial and
natural resource management performance of Australian farms.
The National Property Management Planning Campaign we initiated in 1992
has laid the foundations for a major expansion of more strategic farm
planning practices.
Property management planning helps farming families manage farms in an
integrated manner, as both businesses and environmental assets. Through it
they identify their goals, assess the productive capacity of their farms, create
business plans for their properties, and allow for normal contingencies such
as commodity cycles or drought.
In response to the Task Force's recommendations, the Government will
extend the National Property Management Planning Campaign for four years
from 1996-97 at a cost of $ 35 million. 
In addition, the implementation of property planning on farms will be
supported through the Rural Adjustment Scheme, which will be strengthened
with the introduction of a new sustainable farming component costing $ 12
million dollars over 4 years.
Planning at the individual property level by farming families will be most
effective if it is supported at the community level in a broader geographical
context. And that is where Landcare comes in.
Landcare is a particularly successful, innovative and, I think, uniquely
Australian approach to sustainable resource management. The concept was
relatively new when the Government announced in 1989 that $ 320 million
would be allocated to Landcare over the next decade.
We said we hoped to have 1000 Landcare groups across the country by the
year 2000. Today we have 2500 groups. Thirty per cent of broadacre farm
families are involved. Awareness of Landcare in rural Australia grew from
per cent in 1991 to 85 per cent in 1994, and in urban Australia from 10 per
cent to more than 60 per cent. What Landcare did the genius of it was to
tap the resilience of Australian farmers, their passion for the land and their
determination to stay on it, and turn these qualities to the goal of
environmenfal sustain-ability.
Landcare has been one of Australia's most spectacular national successes.
With the new spending in this Statement, total expenditure on Landcare since
1989 will exceed $ 1 .1 billion more than three times our original commitment.
Today's announcement not only substantially increases the Government's
support for Landcare, it also directs more of those resources to community
Landcare groups. The rapid embrace of Landcare has seen the funds often
spread too thinly and many worthwhile projects inadequately supported.
Importantly, the Government will provide $ 128 million to assist with the
development and implementation of catchment plans by local communities.
Changes will be made to the Regional Environmental Employment Program
to improve linkages with Landcare activities and address national
environmental priorities. We will appoint 10 environmental employment
coordinators to increase the take-up of REEP.
The REEP initiatives are just part of the Government's efforts to increase the
positive environmental impacts of labour market programs. The Government
has allocated more than $ 1 billion, through Working Nation programs,
towards the development of green jobs. In 1994-95 there were approximately
25,000 placements in Landcare, environment, conservation and cultural
heritage projects at a cost of $ 252m. In the following three years these will
increase by 90,000 placements at a cost of $ 936m. 6
J. 7r 7. I 7 77rm 
While many issues need a regional focus, some of the environmental
challenges must be addressed across several States.
Most notably, the Murray Darling Basin is Australia's largest and most
important agricultural area. It contains 26 per cent of all Australian
agricultural land, almost 75 per cent of irrigated agricultural land and
accounts for over 40 per cent of Australian agricultural production by value.
The value of agricultural exports from the Basin is around $ 6 billion per
annum. In 1988 the Government, together with the relevant state governments,
established the Murray-Darling Basin Commission, and the combination of
significant funding, science and community effort has led to substantial
progress in many areas. Witness the growth of the wine industry in
Sunraysia or the dairy industry in the Goulburn Valley.
However, it is all too clear that the Murray-Darling is still in trouble. It is
sufficient to note that we have lost 500,000 hectares of land to salinity.
Unless decisive action is taken now, around 1,500,000 hectares, much of it
prime agricultural land, will be under threat by around 2040.
The scale of the probl~ m clearly requires a national response, and the
Government is prepared to meet that responsibility.
The Government, in partnership with the relevant States through the Murray
Darling Basin Council, has commenced a comprehensive natural resource
management and rehabilitation program of the Murray Darling Basin. To
reinvigorate this we will provide an additional $ 98 million over the next four
years as part of the Murray-Darling Basin Sustainability Initiative. We will
expect matched funding from the States.
Comprehensive priority action will be taken on reducing waterway pollution
arising from towns and cities, increasing salinity control, addressing land
degradation and erosion, reducing the effect of agricultural run-off on
waterways and protecting native animal habitat and remnant vegetation.
For example, we estimate that through this and other initiatives we can
reduce the amount of nutrients entering the river systems by a massive
per cent. Over 1,600 kms of the most sensitive riparian zones on the major
rivers will be rehabilitated. Dry land salinity will be tackled on a catchment
basis including through extensive farm forestry.
Let me now turn to the broader issues of nature conservation. In our largest
program for this ever for the protection of biodiversity both on or off reserves,
the Government will provide a $ 175 million program to expand the National
Reserve System and to ensure that conservation is a priority outside that
Reserve System. 7. 
To this end, the Government will provide $ 70 million to maintain and extend
the range of Landcare programs which have nature conservation as their
primary objective. These programs, such as Save the Bush, National
Corridors of Green and Waterwatch, have galvanised community action to
protect our environment. Some 1200 grants have been made to community
groups under Save the Bush. And more than 30 000 people have
participated in Waterwatch.
Funding for Save the Bush will be doubled and targeted to four key areas;
namely, support for community activities, training Landcare facilitators,
research into techniques of regeneration and conservation of grasslands.
Funding for Waterwatch will be increased by 50 per cent and the program will
be extended through to the year 2000. A priority will be community
monitoring in the catchments of Australia's Ramsar Wetlands.
The River Murray Corridor of Green program has deployed 90,000 hours of
community labour to protect or re-establish over 4000 hectares of vegetation.
We will provide $ 8.1 million to establish a National Corridors of Green
program for similar projects in all States and Territories. The program will
assist communities to enlarge and connect remaining patches of bushland
and link thege with ne w plantings establishing a biodiverse " web of life".
The driving force will be communities, and the advantages will flow to them as
well as to the environment. They will flow particularly to young people.
These programs have a multiplying effect; they raise understanding and
awareness of environmental issues as they go, and that in itself is a
substantial guarantee that future generations will not make the mistakes
made by previous generations including ours.
We have only recently become fully aware of the rate at which we are losing
our native vegetation. That rate is ecologically unsustainable and has been a
primary cause of many of our most difficult problems, including salinity, soil
erosion and the lost of species.
Fortunately, State and Territory governments are now addressing this
important issue. To provide additional national momentum and a regional
focus, I will convene a National Native Vegetation Conservation and
Management Forum.
This will bring together all governments, the farming, scientific and
conservation communities and other relevant parties in a series of national
and regional meetings and consultative processes around the country.
The objective will be to seek a consensus on effective native vegetation
management strategies. 8 
We will also increase our efforts to combat feral pests and weeds with the
provision of an additional $ 13 million to create a comprehensive framework
for the management of invasive species.
This audience more than most will recognise the importance of our wetlands
and waterways as the lifeblood of the system and as indicators of its health.
We will allocate $ 15.3 million to establish a new National River Health
program to create a scientific basis for understanding the flow requirements
of our river systems. This work will feed into the reform agenda being
pursued by the Council of Australian Governments.
In March Australia will host the largest international environment conference
ever held in this country. Representatives from around 100 countries will
gather in Brisbane for the Ramsar Conference on Wetlands of International
Importance.
Wetlands are one of our most important ecosystems. To improve their
management and conservation, we will expand the National Wetlands
Program with extra funding of $ 6 million.
The Governfrent accepts that management of land, including parks and
reserves, is primarily a State responsibility. But in the case of World Heritage
areas, there is obviously a role for the Commonwealth.
million will be provided to improve management of priority areas,
including Fraser Island, the Willandra Lakes, the Central East Coast
Rainforest Reserves, Lord Howe Island and Shark Bay.
While our World Heritage areas are the jewels in our crown, protecting the
most rare and vulnerable species and examples of our major ecosystems,
demands a comprehensive network of representative nature reserves.
Through the National Reserves Program we started in 1992, the Government
is working with the States and Territories, Aboriginals and Torres Strait
Islanders, and the wider community to create this network.
There have been some major acquisitions including areas like the Starke and
Silver Plains properties in North Queensland and the Anglesea heathlands in
Victoria. But the main focus of the first phase has been on planning and
identification of ecological priorities.
The Government will now provide $ 80 million to fund the second phase of
establishing the National Reserves System. With matching contributions
from the States, this should provide the momentum to develop by the turn of
the century a system of parks and reserves second to none in the world. 
The objective is to protect prime examples of our major ecosystems and the
most important representative areas of biological diversity and wilderness.
Protection of these areas will create havens for a range of endangered
species. The Government recognises that we will need a range of measures to fully
protect our biological diversity.
In order to identify these strategies, I will propose that the Council of
Australian Governments institute a major review process associated with the
National Reserves System with the aim of removing unnecessary
impediments to best practice in biological diversity conservation.
It should also develop innovative means to complete the National Reserves
System and increase the conservation effort off reserves. The review could
cover the regulatory framework, economic instruments and voluntary
measures.
We will also establish, as part of the National Reserves Program, a
million revolving Australian Nature Conservation Trust Fund for innovative
and cooperative initiatives which may involve States, private sector and
community 6ontributions. For example, this will provide opportunities to place
conservation covenants on land which the Fund may purchase and on-sell.
If it is true, and it surely is, that conservation of the environment represents a
challenge for all Australians, this fund represents an opportunity for all
Australians to respond. It is an opportunity for communities and individuals.
It is an opportunity for private companies both big and small to play their
part. It is not unreasonable to entertain the hope that the Government's
million will be the seed of something much bigger.
Of course some 15 per cent of Australia is currently owned by Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Government will consult with the land
owners, as part of the National Reserves System Program, to develop an
Indigenous Protected Areas Initiative. This will aim to establish reserve-level
nature conservation management in areas of high conservation value, while
maintaining indigenous ownership and control.
The National Reserve Program will protect the habitats of many endangered
species and ecological communities but attention needs to be given to
individual species and particular communities.
More than eighty per cent of Australian endangered and vulnerable species
do not yet have a completed recovery plan in place. To respond to this need
the Government will provide an additional $ 13.4 million to tackle the threats
facing the most critically endangered species, both inside and outside the
reserve system.
So there it is.
1, 1 1. f. or T. 7 T I 11, I I I V 17. yw 1 I I MM lql. tqt 
A sweep of integrated measures, with new funding totalling $ 463 million, from
the pure nature conservation of a world class National Reserves System,
through Landcare and property management planning, to export market
access for premium food products. Integrated, because the policy problems
we are facing can only be properly understood by making these connections.
This is the substance which underpins the concept of ecologically sustainable
development. Historically we have not been kind to our environment. Nor have we
observed the connection between the environment and production. Over the
last decade, however, we have begun to see how thoroughly they are
interwoven and, once we see them, we begin to see how urgent it is to
repair the broken threads.
Our economic health and environmental well-being cannot be separated.
Treated apart, we are bound to fall short of success in both causes. Treated
together, we have a chance of succeeding a chance to repair the damage
done in the last two centuries and give to the Australians of the next century
their birthright, a flourishing, natural Australian environment.
At the same time, it will do them no harm to have flourishing rural industries
and a rural culture and communities. Among other things, that will mean
Australia is realising its unique potential.
And it will mean that we have done the right thing by the future.
We can be the generation which turned the tide. We have to be and I am
certain that we want to be.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
** EMBARGOED UNTIL 6.45PM, 25 JANUARY 1996*
*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
PRESENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIA DAY AWARDS
OLD PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 25 JANUARY 1996
Thank you for coming to this 1996 presentation of the Australia Day Awards
and thank you to the Australia Day Council for staging them. And thank you
for inviting nfM along to present the Awards.
Australia Day provides us with a chance to reflect on the country we live in:
on the year past and the one which lies ahead.
Because it falls just a few weeks after New Year it is, in a sense, a second
chance. A chance, maybe, to make a few adjustments if not grand new
resolutions. It is a day when all around the country Australians offer up their assessments
of where the nation stands and what direction it should go.
But on the whole, there is relatively little pomp and ceremony, and a great
deal of general enjoyment.
There have been various efforts down the years to give it more formal shape
and meaning, but it has evolved as essentially an expression of our freedom,
and a quite unselfconscious celebration of our way of life.
At all sorts of sporting fixtures; in lounge rooms, gardens and backyards; in
the bush, on beaches; in pubs and clubs and cafes; in city streets and
country towns in a thousand different ways, we commune with each other
and the continent.
And no amount of official direction or attempts to invest the day with more
formalities can resist the popular sentiment and nor should they. 
Perhaps across the country we should all stop at a prearranged moment,
pause for a second or two, and give thanks to our fellow Australians of all
generations. Because we do all depend upon each other.
And, if we are to make the best of the great gifts and opportunities we have,
we always will depend on each other.
Few years in our recent history have demonstrated this as clearly as the last
one. In many profound ways, 1995 was a great year for Australia. In economic
terms, no country in the developed world did better. We made great strides
among the countries of the region where our future largely lies. On this
Australia Day there can be no argument that Australia has advanced our
economy is a little stronger, our future a little more assured, our horizons a
little wider. As a nation and as a society, we have made real progress.
And there can hardly be a better reason to celebrate than that.
Yet, I think the events of last year from which we have most to learn and
most to celebrate occurred in a different sphere of our national life.
H
It was not in economics or any other area of national policy, or arts, or
science, or sport, or any of the other things in which Australians continue to
excel. It was in the area of what might be called the spirit the national spirit.
Last year we celebrated a whole generation of Australians the Australians
who loved this country and their freedom and cared enough about Australia's
future to give everything, even their lives, in its defence.
In celebrating them, we learned a lot about ourselves. Our children learned a
lot about their parents and grandparents, and thus a lot more about what
Australian means. They learned, and we were reminded, that we are all part
of the same story.
We all learned a bit more about Australia. And most gratifying of all we
learned that the spirit which inspired that generation is alive in our own.
The enthusiasm with which Australia Remembers was taken up all over
Australia was a reassuring statement that all the great changes of the past
fifty years have not dampened our affections.
And, of course, in remembering the war we were also reminded that nothing
about our freedom and the way of life we enjoy can be taken for ever granted.
It was hard won and it will always have to be defended. 
Similar lessons were there to be learned from the nation's response, to the
worst drought in living memory.
In rural Australia we saw scenes of environmental devastation and human
hardship which most people in the cities certainly most young people
never imagined possible in their own country.
And, again, the response was overwhelming and immensely reassuring to
anyone who might have doubted that the old spirit lives on. From one end of
the country to the other, Australians pitched in to help farming families and
farming communities to survive.
It became a great national cause. And, as a result, when the rains finally
came to most of the farms, most of the farmers had survived.
In the process a lot of Australians learned something about the resilience of
rural Australians. They leaned how much they had in common with them.
Perhaps most importantly, we were all reminded again that our good
fortune can never be taken for granted.
That's why' ( think 1995 was such a very good year for Australia. It was proof
of the spirit of the place: if you like, proof that the values of Arthur Boyd's
generation, including his love of the landscape, still inspire us in this post
modern, globalising, information age.
It couldn't be more timely.
If the lesson was that there are times when only our own collective effort will
see us through, then the lesson is a good one for now because this is one
of those times.
I believe we have begun a whole new chapter in our history.
It used to remind me of that earlier one, before the long overdue arrival of the
Second Fleet when, cut off from Europe, unable to adapt to the environment
and feed themselves, at odds with the Aboriginal people and unwilling to
learn from them, horribly conscious that they were alone and adrift, the
survivors of the First Fleet waited helplessly at Port Jackson for supplies.
And while we are not in any way abandoned and starving, we are in every
essential respect dependent on our own efforts and ingenuity.
And, if we needed any reassurance, last year should have provided it we
have learned the lessons of experience and we know what it takes.
The challenge is to enter the next century economically strong and dynamic,
at home with both the rapidly changing realities of technology and the modem
world, and thoroughly engaged with that part of it in which we live. 
And because, obviously, it will make us more able to succeed in this, the
challenge is also to enter the next century strong as a community; confident
that the cultural and social differences between us, like the physical
distances, are no impediment to our common purpose.
At the same time, and for much the same reasons, we need to come to just
terms, once and for all. with the original inhabitants of this continent, the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People.
And also come to terms with the natural environment on which our future
prosperity and our way of life significantly depends.
In both cases, we need to repair the damage of 200 years. We need to find a
way to live in harmony with the continent and the people who have lived on it
for more than 40,000 years.
These are challenging and exciting times. No previous generation of
Australians ever had such an opportunity. No other country in the world has
such an opportunity now.
So long as ( e retain faith in ourselves, practise tolerance and reward
initiative, we should be in no doubt about succeeding.
That is why Australia Day is so important it is an expression of the essential
things about our national life.
And it is why Australians of the Year are such important people by their
achievements they give us a clue to what we all can be.
And it is now my great pleasure to announce that the Australian of the Year
for 1996 is Dr John Yu. 



.1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE YOUNG AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS,
DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY, 25 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I think it is a wonderful thing that once a year we take time out to celebrate
our young Australians and what more appropriate day than for Australia Day
as we celebrate it by naming an Australian of the Year and a Young
Australian of. the Year. And it is always a good occasion too because I am
always a sug Ier for a bit of entertainment.
I thought those Tap Brothers were just terrific. I remember seeing the
Tap Dogs, but hairy legs and working boots are not quite the same as those
knee tights and spats. And I saw in some of the routines, being an old
Fred Astaire fan, some of the work of his great choreographer, Hermes Pann
and there is a name for you. Of course his mother and father were Mr and
Mrs Pann and they just loved Hermes. But he was the best choreographer in
the business and obviously some of it has rubbed off and, of course, the
spats you know, the white tops on the black shoes give you all the
movement.
And, of course, in the twenties, spats were all the go with the well-to-do.
I mean one of my predecessors, Stanley Melbourne Bruce, always had them
on. But what I worry about is if the Tap Brothers get very famous, half the
Coalition will put them back on again. I mean if they look anything like
becoming a fad, they will slip them on so quickly I mean half of that front
bench. But I will tell you this, they might have them on but one thing they
won't do is tap or dance I can tell you that. There is certainly no rhythm in it.
And, of course, John Williamson. Isn't he a star at getting that ethos and
sense of Australia out there. And James Morrison I mean the one authentic
form of American music, of course, is jazz and I don't know that we have ever
had a better exponent of it here than James Morrison.
So apart from the essential importance of our function today. It was good to
come just to be entertained. If you know that old video 
' That's Entertainment", I have rearranged all the magnetic particles on that
over the years because it does you good, it warms you up.
Well, I think, that one of the things worth saying about young people is that
I don't think any experience I have had as a Minister, or as a Member of
Parliament, or as Prime Minister with young Australians hasn't been
positive.
Always you get from them the hope, the expectations, the up-lifting spirits
they have, the belief, the hope and the faith they have scepticism but not
cynicism, interested, keen, and it is our duty to, I think, understand what a
great joy it is to have them around us, what a great strength they provide our
country and to invest in them.
In the last couple of days I have been thinking about that and I did this
morning in thinking about this question of, it's called, inter-generational trust,
or the inter-generational inheritance. And this morning I met the Canberra
Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons. Without a doubt,
I think, the most distinguished group of people in the world saying of how the
world would be a better and safer place if those 50,000 nuclear warheads
laying around, arsenals, were taken away. And, I tell you what, it almost
brings a tear to the eye to hear the Strategic Air Commander of the
United Statds just three years ago say there is no place for nuclear weapons
today, that they have no military use, that essentially they are a dead weight
on the world and they are making the world an unsafer place.
Or to hear similar views expressed by the former Prime Minister of France, or
the Nobel Prize Winner Joseph Rotblat or any of the other distinguished
people there. And if we Australians can be just that much influential in being
the first government to take this issue up and start moving against the view
that in the post-Cold War world we need a stock of nuclear weapons to keep
it safe, then we will have done something for our children that, I think, we can
be proud of.
And we won't be leaving them with the inheritance we have lived with, all of
us, through our young years, the tyranny of knowing that the world could be
annihilated at any moment by accident, or by design. And so that is one thing
that in this last 24 hours I have been thinking about in terms of
inter-generational trust.
The other is the environment and yesterday the government announced a
very large package of measures to deal with some of the real environmental
problems of this country land degradation, dry land salinity, destruction of
bio-diversity, developing a National Reserves System. And you might recall
before Christmas where the government announced a big policy of putting
6 million hectares of Australian forests away for posterity into deferred forest
areas. And looking at the commitment we are getting now from Landcare, where we
hoped in 1989 when we started it we would have 1,000 Landcare groups. 
We have now got 2,500 Landcare groups and we are going on. The big
commitment of that is coming from young Australians. They are the ones who
are interested in the environment. They know that we don't have to spoil the
place to have a good life. And yet we know that if we don't manage it well, by
the time our generation is no longer managing this country's fortunes we
will have left them a degraded place, a place that they can't be proud of.
So in just these two things, in the environment where we have got this great
inheritance of this old continent of ours and where we have a chance to hold
some of its pristine quality and repair the damage of 200 years since
European settlement. These are things that, I think, we must think about in
terms of the inter-generational inheritance, or cleaning the world up of
nuclear weapons, making life safer and better.
There are things that we can do, all of us, I think both with and for our young
people and our question of who we are and our identity; the fact that we are
now an open, modem economy trading into the world; the fact that we have
made the linkages with Asia. I mean I know, as you know from just a week
ago, the people who manage Malaysia, and Singapore, or Indonesia.
But I didn't know them when I was young and young Australians will know
them and they will know their counterparts in these countries. They will have
that interest and excitement and opportunity that we didn't have.
And I notice this debate in the press about now, you know, the pundits sitting
back saying well you haven't jumped the TER hurdle. It is sitting up there in
so many universities having not filled up their places, this is shocking. Well
we want to see the places filled up. In fact the government just about
doubted, in fact we have added 70 per cent of places, to universities taking
them through from 300,000 to 560,000 places. So there are more places and
that is why it is taking more time, perhaps, to fill them.
But the fact of the matter is, eight youn g people in ten now complete a
secondary education. Ten years ago, it was three in ten and now they have a
secondary education we want to invest in them the confidence of knowing
that we are interested in them, that we will take their education further, that
we offer them the promise of an interesting and secure life in a country that is
nice to live in, in an international society that is sane.
Now, I think, these are some of the things that we have to think about.
And on this occasion we have these awards to acknowledge the contribution
of some young Australians, so that when we honour them we honour all
young Australians and to say that we love them, that we are interested in
them, that we will put our arm around them and that we celebrate their
victories and their successes and their joys.
That is what today is about and a nation that cares about its young people, is
a nation with a soul, it is a nation that has got its values properly fixed and
that is what we are doing here today. 
So it is my very pleasant duty to announce the Young Australian of the Year
in 1996. And I suppose what makes it, for me, a double pleasure is to dwell
on the point I made earlier about entertainment and to celebrate the
successes of our young people who can perform the way those Tap Brothers
performed earlier, or the other artists today.
And the winner, at 20 years of age, is already one of Australia's busiest
concert pianists. She has won numerous awards and is currently studying for
her Masters Degree at the Manhattan School of Music and about to make her
debut with the New York Symphony Orchestra. It is, of course,
Rebecca Chambers and Poppy King will escort her to the stage.
ends -j'; R 



I PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HEALTH POLICY LAUNCH, MELBOURNE, 6 FEBRUARY 1996
At this election as in every election the Government seeks a new mandate
from the people of Australia. We seek to re-establish the trust of the people
of Australia to govern for another three year term.
We are very proud of what we have done in the past three years. It has been
a Government, I think, of great enterprise and purpose. And we have
delivered those things we said we would deliver.
But we know that, once again, we must convince the Australian people that
the policies we have implemented, and the policies we propose, are the best
policies for Australia. And that they will be delivered by the people who are
best able to deliver them.
A crucial element of the new mandate we seek is a mandate to maintain and
extend Australia's universal health care system a health care system for all
Australians. We ask Australians to invest their trust in us to protect and
extend Medicare.
And. as the pioneers of Medicare, we believe that Australians can extend
their trust to us with confidence. We will defend Medicare. We will extend
and improve it.
Between now and March 2 the Australian people must make a decision about
the kind of health system they want.
Because health care is fundamental to the well-being of every Australian and
every Australian family, because a fair and effective health care system is
fundamental to our aspirations as a civilised society it will be a momentous
decision.
45~ 8.4 
Health care is an immensely complex issue in modem society and
immensely expensive. In Australia it consumes more than 8 per cent of
Gross Domestic Product. But the system we have developed is efficient. In
the United States health care accounts for more than 14 per cent of GDP.
and yet it leaves millions of peoole with no health insurance, or inadequate
health insurance and. as a consequence, without decent health care.
The Australian system is a good one and Labor will protect it.
Countries have choices in health care. In Australia the choices have been
argued for the last 20 years.
The major political parties have come to the debate with two entirely different
perspectives. More than twenty years ago, a Labor government made its
andateposition clear when it introduced a system of universal health insurance
. ndate kno'., vn as Medibank. The Coalition. in turn. showed its preference for a
. eopleprivate system by ripping Meoibank down. When they left office in 1983,
more than two million Austraiians had no health insurance.
3s been The same divisions have characterised the debate ever since. Labor has
rebuilt a universal health care system. Medicare is not perfect no system
ever will be. But there are few better systems in the world. And we can make
3 thatours better.
-ie best The crucial thing is that all Australians are covered. That has been the
ici areessential choice should all Australians be covered in a universal system, or
should there be a two tiered system? A system with gilt edged services for
iin andthose who can afford it and much poorer and less reliable services for those
i no ad on lower incomes.
, id Until now the Coalition has never disguised its preference for the two tiered
system and its contempt for Medicare. At successive elections they have
and vowed to pull Medicare apart and no one more consistently or virulently
: tnd than John Howard.
In fact they were the very words Mr Howard used in 1987 " I will pull it right
) n about apart", he said. He would do things " that amount to its dle facto dismantling".
He made no attempt to hide the fact of his ambitions for it. 1I would love to go
back" to the pre-Medicare days, he said.
* mi s ian andThat mistawkea, s iht iiss haims baimtiobnit ioinn 1n9o8w7.. It was his ambition in 1993. And, make no
ientous This time he says he will keep Medicare. But we all know he won't. Jeff
Kennett \-. ill turn his casiio into an Anclican mission before John Howard
supports Medicare. 
Over the last decade. Australians have said again and again that they want a
universal system. and not an American style system. They have said it at five
nationai elections. In the most recent Doils of cuolic ocinion over 85 oer cen:
of them say they want Meoicare retaineo.
And it is only for this reason that the Coalition are saying they will keep_
Medicare. There it was in the newspaper advertisement placed by the Liberal candidate
for Fremantle this week: Medicare is " a medical and moral scandal", he said.
Anid there it was in the Financial Review yesterday:
Coalition sources [ the report says] privately concede that Medicare is
financially unsustainable in the medium term and that it is being
embraced by the Coalition mainly because it is electorally popular.
Not because they believe in it. Not because they will keep it. But because
they think it will help them win the election if they pretend to support it.
That is why we say the decision Australians make about health in this
election will be a momentous one. This is the same fight to the death for
Medicare as it has been at every election since 1984.
Once again the election will decide the kind of health care system we will
have over the next generation, and in so doing it will decide in large part the
kind of society we leave our children. It will substantially determine the kind
of country Australia will be.
John Howard is saying that we are running a scare campaign on Medicare.
Apparently we should take him at his word when he says he won't harm it.
Well let me say even if we half believed him, or a quarter believed him we
would be issuing the most dire warnings. But in fact we don't believe him at
all. We pioneered Medicare. We nurtured and built it into one of the best health
systems in the world. It was our baby and now it is Australia's health system.
So no one should be surprised if we are passionate about defending it. N.
Erect the two-tiered system Mr Howard wants; put the weight of the well-off
into the pnivate health system, make the private system stronger than the * i
public, and the public health system will start to crumble.
Australia will then have an entirely different kind of health system a SNVV
flourishing first rate pnivate industry for those who can afford it, and a second
rate public system for those who ican't.
45586 
.4
Lose universality, and essentially we lose Medicare.
' hey want a
aid it at five Lose Medicare, and we lose one of the great building blocks of fairness and
per cent cohesion in Australian society.
And it will not be a temporary loss. It will not be a little experiment which we
keep can abandon if we don't like the way it's going. Pull away the universality of
our health care system and you pull Medicare down.
I candidate Fail to support it, say you support it while leaving the states to rip into the
ihe said. health system, and you pull Medicare down. And when it's down, we will
have lost one of our great social achievements and our children will inherit a
very different Australia.
edicare is It's a free choice. That's what an election is. But there must be no doubt
eing about what the choice is between. At this election the Coalition are not
opular. presenting policies, they are presenting tactics.
because Their environment proposal was not a policy it was a tactic. A tactic to sell
rt it. Telstra by bribing the environmental vote.
: his Their industrial relations proposal was not a policy, it was a tactic a tactic to
aath for drive wages and conditions down and undermine job security by embracing
enough of the Government policy to neutralise the debate.
we will Their health proposal is also a tactic a tactic to create the health system
le part the they want by pretending to keep the health system they hate.
e thekindBut even if we believed them, even if we believed that they had undergone a
change of heart and were not merely heeding the polls for the purpose of
/ ledicare. winning the election. even if we ignored the mountain of evidence from the
harm it. past, their health proposal still constitutes a critical attack on the foundations
of Medicare.
. v him at The fact is they neither understand it nor like it. Medicare is hostile to the
very basis of their thinking. And it is hostile to their friends in the private
health care system.
et heystm Mr Howard says he will leave Medicare alone. But leaving it alone is not
ilth sstem. supporting Medicare. Leaving it to Jeff Kennett is not supporting Medicare.
ng it. Nor is introducing tax rebates for private health insurance by itself supporting
a well-off Medicare. Their tax rebates are designed to encourage people out of the
ian the Medicare system. They are designed as much to be an industry policy as a
health policy a policy for a private health care industry.
. a Supporting Medicare demands that you believe in Medicare. Supporting
J a second IMedicare demahds that we see it as a rock on which our future will be built. 4,587 
Ano supporting Medicare means building on that rock. Ohr
P-at is n doinc in naamt'c.' ' Ae are building on the rock, just ne
to c~ ai.
Meoicare gives all Australians access to free first rate treatment in a public visit to
hospital and affordable medical care from general practitioners. chiidre
But Medicare generally does not help with the costs of dental and orthodontic The La
treatment, or other services such as physiotherapy, speech therapy or public,
chiropractic treatment. These health services can be very expensive for familie,.
families, particularly the cost of dental care for children. But the only way Rebate
families can get help with these costs is to take out private health insurance. childre familie
Today I am announcing a new way for families to get assistance with these The Li
costs. ak
The new Family Health Rebate will be a cash payment from Medicare Offices Theirr
to help meet the costs of dental and orthodontic treatment. physiotherapy, aoi
speech therapy and other health services for children. mantor
Families who receive Family Payments will be eligible for the rebate that is for thei
about 80 per cent of all Australian families. Fra
The maximum rebate in a year will be $ 350 for a family with one child and would
$ 500 for a family with two or more children. hospitF
Families will be able to claim 50 per cent of the cost of dental and other The acheaith
services for children up to the maximum rebates. choice take u
The Medicare system is a balanced system providing for people who take outAsIz
private insurance. Because private heaith insurance is a major cost to As. I s
famrilies, a flat rebate of $ 350 will be available towards the cost of health i. Yi
insurance premiums. T his S350 will te countec towards a family's maximumUne
rebate. billion
An important element of the new rebate is that, if a family does not claim their hospit;
maximum rebate in one year. they will be able to carry over unused rebatesOvrt
for up to seven years. This will help families plan ahead and cope with large Ovce f
bills, for orthodontic treatment for example. flrm4
The strength of the Family Health Rebate is the choice it gives families in
meeting the health needs of their children. Howev
servic(
Many families around 40 per cent already take out health insurance and
these families will be able to claim $ 350 towards this cost. The pr
their e
Many other families would like to take out health insurance to better manage Comm
health costs, but--find the premiums too high. A rebate of $ 350 will be a past tt
substantial help.
88 
Other families will be happy to remain in the public system. These families
just need help with the costs not covered by Medicare. They will now be able
to claim a rebate of 50 per cent of the cost of these services whether it is a
Ic visit to the dentist or a physiotherapist or other health services so that their
children can get the help they need when they need it.
) ntic The Labor approach to health care is built on Medicare. We start with the
public health system and ask how can we make it better. We start with
families' needs and ask how can we best meet them. The Family Health
Rebate extends public insurance to cover dental and health services for
ice. children not presently picked up by Medicare. but at the same time allows
families the choice to insure privately if they prefer.
ie The Liberal approach to health care starts with the private health system and
asks how they can give it more business, how they can boost its profits.
: ices Their policy of tax rebates for private health insurance does nothing for the
majority of families who do not have private health insurance and who do not
want to take it up. These families will get no help with the extra health costs
t is for their children.
For families who choose to have private health insurance, the Liberals' policy
would push up premiums by blowing out costs as specialists and private
hospitals simply increase their fees to take advantage of the rebates.
The advantage of Labor's Family Health Rebate is that, by giving families a
choice, if health insurance premiums go up, people will vote will their feet and
take up the alternative of the family health rebate.
9 out As I said. it is not enough to say you support Medicare. You need to defend
it. You need to extend it. And you need to protect it.
ium Under the Medicare agreements, the Commonwealth provides about
billion a year to the States and Territories for free patient care in public
their hospitals.
. re Over the past few years, under the agreements, the Commonwealth has
3rge increased its funding by 26 per cent, which has taken our share of funding
from 47 per cent to 55 per cent.
However, this has not resulted in the reduced waiting times and improved
services we intended and the Australian people have every right to expect.
rid The principal reason for this shortfall hos been t'-e Staes' 0 pe-: tcut in
their expenditure on public hospitals-l10 per cent in real terms. VVrnile the
age Commonwealth has put in an extra $ 800 million to public hospitals over the
past three years,-Ahe States have taken out $ 700 million from public health. I 0,1 
The problem is that the Medicare agreements are basically " gentlemen's It is PC
agreements". by which I mean they are not tied to performance or achieving make
better results for their oatients. We neec a new caninershio cetweer. the With
States and the Commonwealt., on iinairg for puolic nospitals. We need zo
relate funding to performance, to better results in health care. We want to To str(
see what we are paying for. haer
The most important result we want to see is Australians having to wait no " L1awbaotcrhlonger
for surgery than their doctors recommend.
A Labor Government will offer the States and Territories an additional $ 150 TeA
million over the next two years to reduce substantially the number of patients ties. c
waiting longer than the time deemed clinically appropriate. trivati
But to be eligible for the new funding, the States will need to achieve a protec
reduction in the number of patients waiting too long for surgery. We will only I beg
pay on performance, on results. States will only qualify for their full share of tegait
the $ 150 million if they ensure patients are treated within times recommendedthvi
by doctors. Toa
This new approach to funding will form the basis of new Medicare the wa
Agreements to be negotiated with the States. The new Agreements will look Electic
at the overall performance of public hospitals, with performance on waiting
lists being one very important area. A h
But attacking waiting lists without looking more generally at performance abolitik
could be counter-productive. For example, hospitals could reduce waiting $ 1.3 b
lists quite easily by forcing patients out of hospitals too soon in order to save per ce
money. Just tv.
The new funding arrangements will include other targets for quality health
care, such as how long patients wait for emergency treatment: the number of
unplanned readmissions to hospital: and the links between hospital and other
services such as community care and general practitioners.
The new approach to funding will particularly benefit older people who are In othe
the main users of hospital services. were n
Understandably, many in the community are cynical about government And M,
promises to tackle waiting lists and to improve health services. Many are entecti
confused about the role of the Commonwealth and the States. has hai
But it is important to emphasise that we can make our public hospitals better. He ask
But this can only be achieved if the Federal Government plays its role and is yia
willing to fight to protect Medicare. The fa(
Medicz
11590 
It is possible to reduce waiting lists. The number of patients on waiting lists
wing make up only about 3 per cent of the total load of the public hospital system.
3vingWith a new approach to paying on results. a target to ensure all patients are
to treated in the time recommended by doctors is achievable.
To strengthen confidence in the public hospitals. the community needs to
have reliable, independent information about public hospital performance.
Labor will establish an independent Hospital Services Authority to be a
" watchdog" of the public hospital system for the public interest.
150 The Authority will monitor hospitals' performance and, in particular, report on
150t the achievement of targets for better care, including the reduction in waiting
tentstimes. It will also report on the effect on patients of any proposed
privatisation of the public hospital services. The public interest must be
protected in any contracting out and privatisation.
only I began by saying that in this election we ask Australians to entrust us with
* e of
indled the vital task of protecting Medicare and our universal health care system.
Today we ask to be given the opportunity to extend it and make it stronger in
the ways I have outlined.
look Elections are about choices. On health the choice could not be clearer.
ng At the last election our opponents went to the people with a policy for the
abolition of bulk billing for more than 13 million Australians, a cut of at least
-lig $ 1.3 billion in Commonwealth funding for public hospitals and a more than
save per cent cut in the Medicare rebate.
Just two months ago Mr Howard said this:
, h I don't accept for a moment that we went to the last election as Paul
er of Keating alleges promising to abolish Medicare: that is wrong, we
other didn't. We promised to make changes but not to abolish it, he said.
re In other words, we were going to remove Medicare's heart and soul but we
were not going to abolish it. We did not intend to kill it only to make it dead.
And Mr Howard asks to be believed about Medicare. He asks Australians to
e entrust their health care system to him. He asks us to believe he will deal
effectively with State Governments. He asks us to believe that on health he
has had a change of heart and not just a change of tactic.
sitter. He asks us to believe that his proposal for the people's health is not simply a
d~ is cyr. tcal deceit.
The fact is they cannot with a skerrnck of credibility ask to be trusted with
I Medicare and the health of the Australian people. ' 1F 9) 1 
9
With the release of this policy, Labor asks Australians to continue to put their
trust with the people and the party who dreamed of Medicare. who made it a
reaity, who are still expanding and imoroving it and who believe it is
funcam= ntal to our gooc society. Ne1
lMinister for
TI 1/
The F
Minis, Coalit " Tod.
statin said. " In sh
line oi
advoc. " Whilt
' borrc
MrBr the EI(
Gover " First
Gover copiec " Next
millic to con
" And s
travel annour
" But h
advoca " In the
to his
April I
up ope
1592 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ALEXANDER HEIGHTS COMMUNITY CENTRE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
8 FEBRUARY 1996
I am very pleased to be here to support Carolyn in her effort to win Cowan for
the ALP and to come to Perth in support of all our candidates.
It will be hard work. but I think we can hold all our seats and even pick up one
or two including Cowan.
We have exceptional candidates in the West and we've had them for some
time. Old hands like Kim Beazley have always had to work very hard. It has
become a way of life.
I was in Canning yesterday, where George Gear is going to have to work as
hard as Kim has had to, and I left confident that George will come through too.
This election will be hard. But we're used to that. None of them has ever
been easy.
But we must win this one. We have achieved so much in the last three years.
We have got to a point where Australia is so much stronger and has so much
to look forward to we can't give it to John Howard. Or Tim Fischer, or
Alexander Downer. Or Peter Costello. Or Peter Reith and Bronwyn Bishop.
We can't leave the future to people who live in the past. We can't hand
Australia's future over to their conservative creed.
And, however much they are hiding it and pretending that they're new-born
social democrats and progressive thinkers, it is a backward and backwardlooking
creed.
Look at it its antecedents every reactionary fashion of the last fifteen years
Thatcherism, Reaganism, the New Right, the HR Nicholls society, Joh for
Canberra. the Greed is Good brigade. John Hewson. Fightback, John and
Andrew, Andrew and John and Alexander and John again, and some hybrid
now of John Howard, Newt Gingrich and the Fabian socialists.
4662 To t
year
And him. s
The and Coa last The still hatE able The and relat And disg Of C
legi! peo use The UbF
des labc
Joh Last
said hist labc
And sai war Sol
juck to 4 
To help distinguish this Mr Howard from the one I have known for the past
years, in my own mind I call him Jack Howard.
And I think it is only reasonable that Mr Howard do something to distinguish
himself in the same way for the people of Australia.
The point is that for all the changes of leadership, and the changes of rhietoric,
and the changes of tactics and the changes of ideological fashion the
Coalitions intentions today are essentially the same as they have been for the
last decade.
They still want to privatise the health system. They still hate Medicare. They
still can't concede the value of a social safety net and a social wage. They still
hate the Accrd. They still have a problem with tMe idea, that people should be
able to combine to protect their common interests in the work place.
The real nature of the Coalition, the real unreformed nature of their thinking
and their intentions is nowhere revealed more clearly than in their industrial
relations proposals.
And, of course, nowhere have they made a more thoroughgoing effort to
disguise thir real intentions.
Of course there are some very obvious signs of what they have in mind. The
legislation brought down by Jeff Keninett in Victoria is one example and for
people who might think that we should not judge them by their record, it is a
useful one.
Their rcrd shows and John Howard's record particularly shows that the
Liberal and National parties want nothing in the world so much as the
destruction of the Accord. the breaking of the unions and the creation of a
labour market in which the balance of power shifts heftily to the employers.
John Howard has beern the most consistent advocate of these policies for the
last 20 years. He has opposed all but two wage rises in that period. He has
sdagain and again that tabour market reform of the kind he has in mind is
his great mission in life. He was a passionate advocate of the draconian
labour market proposals contained in lFightback.
And so thoroughly is it understood within the Liberal Party that Jeff Kennett
said recently when John Howard gets eklced those 400,000 Victorian
workers who escaped from his legislation will have nowhere to hide. In other
words, the Kennett legislation will become Commonwealth legislation.
So we have their record to judge them by and Jeff Kennetfs legislation to
judge themi by. And we also have the West Australian government by which
to judge them. 466,3 
What the WA Government has been doing in public health, education, in their Un
approach to nurses' oay and industnrial relations generally is wholly lin
consiste.: with Joh:. Howard's .;. inkng over the past two dEcades. fal en
Don't be fooled by the cardboard cut-out John Howard. Th
Last time they fought a savage ideological battle. This time it's a battle of inc
tactics. But the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had is still the
the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had. wo
But his policy on industrial relations exposes the truth. And you don't even Le
have to draw comparisons between Mr Howard and Mr Kennett and Mr Court in,
to prove it. You don't even have to draw the logical inference from his past. If;
Remember how Jeff Kennett said that there would be nQ " loss of wages and sh
conditions" end then when he was elected abolished all state awards and took rrm
away holiday loadings? Th
Remember when Richard Court said that he was no Jeff Kennett and that
workers had nothing to fear and then when he was elected removed all Ne
income guarantees from the West Australian system and cut youth wages to eff
S3.77 an hour? W,
And remember any one of hundreds of statements made by John Howard over m;
the past dozen years. Jo
There is no doubting their intentions. 0
If John Howard is elected the Commonwealth industrial relations legislation will
become the same as Kennett's and Court's. an
But it will also be distinctly and expressly John Howard's. He hasn't waited Ethis
long to look like he's imitating someone else. Tr La
John Howard's industrial relations package in 1996 will deliver the same
results as the package contained in Fightback. The only difference is that the Th
Fghtback package spelt it out. jot fro
In the new 8 January 1996 package you have to look at the fine print and in
when you do you see that the " rock solid guarantee" that " employees cannot
be worse off" is cynical nonsense. MI
of
Look behind the veil of comforting rhetoric shrouding his most recent policy
announcement, and you can see the distinct shape of the old ideological M
obsessions lower wages, less security, weaker unions: in short a labour rru
market much more closely resembling the US labour market, and much less Ev
our own labour traditions. ME
The proof of the pudding is in the proposal itself. ye
4664 
Under the Coalition's system the Industrial Relations Commission will be sidelined
and made impotent. There will be no public testing or assessment of the
fairness of contracts. Workers will have to bargain, as individuals, with the
employer, in secret
The Australian Workplace Agreement, which is what the Coalition is calling
I, individual contracts, will be filed and that just means put in a cabinet with
the new so-called Employment Advocate. It will not be looked at unless the
Lets think about the circumstances in which a worker would ask for an
inspection of their contract.
If asked to sign a Workplace Agreement would a job applicant say, " let me
show it to the union, or to a lawyer first", when they know that some other
more compliant applicant will then get the job?
The answer is of course not. Job applicants will have no effective choice.
New workers will be forced onto agreements that will not be scrutinised by an
effective or even expert body.
With the high levels of job mobility which characterise our modemn labour
maket. the system must quickly and inevitably reflect the law of the jungle.
Job mobility is an issue with huge implications for the Howard legislation.
Over 1.7 mnillion Australian workers face a new employer each year about
300,. 000 tertiary education graduates: up to 150. 000 year 11 and 12 leavers:
and 600.000 workers who change jobs every year.
Every year 220,000 Western Australian workers take a new job. 33,000 are in
Trades, 45,000 are Sales or Personal Service workers, and 55.000 are
Labourers. The system will change radically, and quickly, because somebody wanting a
job will sign up even if they are unhappy with the contract. And no one apart
from the worker and the employer will know what has transpired because, as
in Victoria and Western Australia, the contacts will be secret
Many of these workers will be young around 750,000 people under the age
of 25 take a new job every year.
Many of them~ will be immobile and without much choice around 225,000
marred women return to the workforce to new jobs after iooking after children.
Every year.
Many of them will have a poor understanding of Australian practices about
150,000 people born in non-English speaking countries take a new job every
year. 4665 
T,.
Many of themn w.: l te taking their f si ever jot-about 2730 000 Australians W
expenence, this every year.
In proportionate terms, the figures are similarly striking. The number of new
job takers over a year is about 40 per cent of all employees in Sales and
Personal Assistant occupations, and the same for Labourers. Twenty five per
cent of all all wage and salary earners take a new job every year. n
Ask the most batsic question: how can an inexperienced jobseeker, possibly It
with litte confidence, surel without a good understanding of the award 4
system, and without doubt little recourse to the Australian Industrial Relations OL
Commission, unions, or the government's award inspectors how can they
expect to strike a fair and balanced agreement with an employer about the pay If
and conditions of a secret individual contract? -cc
Just taking the fact that over 40 per cent of workers have been in their current TI
job for less thani 3 years, it must follow that over the first term of a Hoard PC
government at least 3.2 million workers will be on individual contracts. SIC
Secret indivdual c ontracts.
Contracts that the applicant won't challenge, because if they do they won't get SI'
the job. ba
Contracts that the existing employee won't challenge. biecause if they do there Ir
will be big and adverse personal and professional consequences. M
Contracts that will change the nature of Australian workplaces and pay, and W
with this the social fabric.
Existing employees are also not going to challenge their employer if they think a,.
the contract is unfair. This would amount to publicly questioning the W
employer's honesty and credibility. ac
The employer can make this costly in all sorts of ways -by not offering Jo
overtime hours. by niot allowing holidays when they are wanted, by not giving 58.
promotions, and even by the sack under the Coalition's impotent new unfair
dismissals laws. T
jus
How can an individual worker resist? Th
Why would an individual worker bring a complaint to the Employment $ 2
Advocate when it has no judicial power, and no way of enforcing a decison, be
othe than to take it to court where it could stay for many monfths and where AL
the outcome is uncertain? ca pn
4 666 
The eenI issues concerning the Coalition's new agenda in comrbination
with the mobility in the Australian labour market are a profound part of this
debate. They are explained in more detail in the Statement issued from my
Office today.
But for all the detail in that Statement and all the details of the Coalition's
many statements, the industrial relations system has more fundamental
meanings. It goes to the core of society. If the conditions in which we negotiate our
working lives are unbalanced, our society is unbalanced. If they are unfair,
our sciety is unfair unfairness will be built in.
if intimidation of the weak is built into our workplaces it is built into the
Tcohme mCuonaitlyit. on's industrial relations proposals are atac tic to disguise their real
policy. And their real policy would make a monumental change not just to
something abstract called the industrial relations system it will make a
monumental change to the balances in Australian society.
It will, effectively by stealth, take away the one means. by which workers have
always been able to level up the social equation the right to join together and
bargain collectively.
In other words the Coalition's agenda is not just about low wages it is about
moving the balance towards employers and away from workers.
We can see it in the fine print of the infamous January 8th sech
We can see it in their planned legislation on strike activity. They want to take
away from workers any capacity for industrial action. They want the world of
work to be defined by employers on the one hand, and individual workers
acting alone on the other.
John Howard said this just two days ago " individual contracts are lerrific!', he
said. The Coalition applauded the actions of CRA in the recent dispute at Weipa,
just because they were individual contracts.
They did not mind that workers doing the same jobs as others were paid up to
$ 20,000 a year more suiply because they weren't ass ated with collective
bargains. The government believed strongly that this was wrong, and the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission brought down exacly that ruling.
There is dlearly a place for individual contracts. But we say there must be the
capacity to negotiate conftras without discimination against collective 4667 
We say that an industrial relations system that denies workers freedom of
assciation and . ollective action is unnalanced. urtair. and ultimately Fo
Sworkabje. grt
And yet that is the gist of the legislation. It is hidden but it is unmistakably Yo.
there. del 001
Consider this: Th;
The Coalition said that strikes would be illegal for the duration of a Workplace are
Agreement. wit
Now imagine some of the circumstances that might justify workers taking It i;
industrial action when the contract is in place. W1
Imagine a workplace in which asbestos becomes a threat to the health of me
workers and the employer is not prepared to take corrective action.
Imagine a workplace in which safety procedures are poor and the employer is oft
not prepared to take corrective action. wa
Imagine a boss persistently engaging in harrassment. WIr in
Even under these extreme circumstances. according to the Coalition, a strike war
would be illegal. And illegal means just that time in prison for those taking ind.
industrial action. Yo
When Peter Reith was asked about this aspect of the Coalition's policy in yok
1993, he admitted that a gaol sentence for the striking worker could follow. Th,
There is more. in i
of
Because the Coalition's policy makes it illegal to strike while an agreement is
in place, for many employers the strategic thing would be to stagger individual It i:
contracts so that a disgruntled co-worker could never have other employee val
support for action. to t
What the Coalition has in mind is legislation for employers, pure and simple. Ant
Legislation that will make it close to impossible for workers to bargain or chi
negotiate or protest collectively. Ark
So what does the Opposition hope to achieve by these proposals? Iib
Higher labour productivy? But labour productivity in Australia has been more ow
than twice that of New Zealand in the four years since they introduced an
individual contract system. WE orm
Less strikes? But wev had less strikes in the last year than in any year since
1940. Under the Acrol te number of working days lost per 1.000 workers An
has been cut by 67 per cent since the Coalition was last in power.
4668 
For economic growth? But we've got growth. For inflation? But we've got
growth with low inflation.
You can run through half a dozen hypothetical reasons why they are so
determined on this course. And you can't find a plausible answer until you
come to the question of lower wages and insecure jobs.
That is the Coalition model and it always has been the Coalition model. They
are utterly obsessed with the notion that Australian business cannot prosper
without a scramble in the labour market for low paid jobs.
It is part of the Coalition vision as much a part now as it always was.
What the Coalition means by labour market reform is wage cutting. They
mean ripping away job security from hundreds of thousands of Australians.
What they mean by labour market reform is a fundamental shift in the balance
of the most fundamental of social relationships the relationship between
workers and employers.
What their proposals will also mean although they refuse to consider the
implications is a direct assault on thousands of workers' families. Reduce
wages, worsen conditions. cut penalty rates. reduce security and
4iependence and you hurt families.
You hurt their income, your hurt the opportunities available to their children,
you hurt communities.
Theywilcall what wesay ascare campanof course -but noone oudbe
in any doubt that this debate on industrial relations goes to the very essence
of the diffierence between Labor and the Coalition.
It is about the soit of society we want Australia to be. It's about how much we
value each other. It's about how deep the feeling runs that we are all entitled
to fair treatment in Australia.
And in ths campaign it is also about the truth: the Coalition hias not had a
change of heart, it has had a change of tactic.
And Australian workers and thewiryiles stand to be the losers.
It is fundamental to Labors cause that we resist this and that we re-affirm our
own vision and our own record.
We have a very good story to tell of the last four years, and an even better
one to tell about the future of this country.
And in the next three weks across the country we are going to tef. l it. 4669 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ALP CAMPAIGN LAUNCH
MELBOURNE, 14 FEBRUARY 1996
Three years ago I asked the people of Australia to entrust to Labor the most
important responsibility a government can have I asked Australians for a
mandate to create jobs, and help the unemployed.
To create jobs, I asked Australians to give Labor the task of creating
sustainable economic growth on which jobs depend.
To create jobs, I sought a mandate to make Australia stronger; to find our place
in Asia and the Pacific; to encourage the industries of the future; to massively
expand education and training: to increase our national savings.
I sought a mandate to protect our environment.
I asked Australians to entrust to Labor the guardianship of the social safety net.
I asked for a mandate to make the arrangements governing our workplaces
both more flexible and fair: a mandate to encourage more enterprise bargaining
while maintaining awards and the right of Australian workers to bargain
collectively. I asked that arrangements with the trade union movement be such as to ensure
low inflation and thus sustainable economic and employment growth; I asked
for more of the Accord.
I asked that Labor be entrusted to act upon the decision of the High Court of
Australia which recognised that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
had occupied this continent for thousands of years before Europeans came.
I asked that Australian women put their faith in us to make it easier to combine
work and families.
I asked Australians to trust us to maintain the principles of tolerance and
diversity on which the cohesion of modem Australia depends and on which it
is flourishing.
4824 
I asked to be entrusted with the task of resisting that radical conservative
assault on our social values and our national aspirations which then went
under the name of Fightback, and presently goes under the various disguises
of John Howard.
Today I ask for a renewal of that mandate in every detail, including the last.
I ask for it on two grounds: for what we have done in the past three years, and
for what we must do in the next three.
The Australian people gave us that mandate in 1993 at a time when they might
easily have chosen to reject us. Australia was just emerging from recession.
There were a million people unemployed. Australians might easily have
chosen to punish the Labor Government and abandon Labor~ s social
democratic model for the conservative alternative.
lost Our responsibility was therefore all the greater when they chose not to. For the
) r a past three years we have governed in that knowledge.
ting And we have worked, I think, at least as hard as any government in our history
to repay that trust.
ace We aimed at 500,000 new jobs and we have delivered 714,000 500,000 of
M~ Y them in small business. We aimed at sustained and sustainable economic
growth and we are now benefiting from the longest period of sustained growth
in Australia's history. And with low inflation and rapidly growing exports into the
fastest growing region in the world, we can at last say with confidence Ohat the
growth is sustainable.
iet. We said we would find a place for Australia in Asia and the Pacific, and we
ces have surprised even ourselves by the progress we have made. The APEC
ing agenda now agreed will add another half million new jobs for Australians.
lain We said we would expand education and training to prepare young Australians
for the modern workforce and a world in which knowledge is a nation's most
ure important commodity and through Working Nation we are injecting $ 1.5 billion
ked into it.
With 2 million new jobs since 1983, employment growth under Labor has been
t Of virtually unrivalled in the world. The Department of Education and Training
) ple estimates that if we lift our skills and grow our information and service
industries if we keep to our present policies we can create another 2 million
jobs in the next 10 years.
ine Working Natiun deveaops skills which enaole people to compete for the new
jobs. Only Working Nation has the strategy and resources to do this. And only
3nd Labor is committed to Working Nation.
: h it ,1825 
3
Working Nation does something else, of course it looks after unemployed
Australians. \ Ve :" ave introduced a Jot Com-act wihich, when fLuiy implemented. will mean
that any Australian who has been unemployed for 18 months or more will be
offered a job. We are personally case managing 377,000 Australians to help
them find their way into jobs, or training for jobs.
We have reduced the number of young unemployed by nearly 20 per cent. We
have reduced the total number of unemployed by 230,000.
94,000 young Australians are still looking for work, and the unemployed still
number more than 750,000, so there is no cause for self-congratulation.
But there is cause to be confident that we can reach our target of 5 per cent
unemployment by the turn of the century and the other target we have set
ourselves, of another 600,000 new jobs over the life of the current Accord.
And there is every reason to defend the policies and programs which are taking
us towards these objectives.
We have substantially increased our national savings, as we said we would.
The figure presently stands at $ 230 billion; under the new superannuation
measures it is anticipated to grow to one trillion by the year 2000 and
two trillion by 2020. f
It is worth considering Australias foreign debt in this context. Total fbreign
debt, of which 5 per cent is Commonwealth Government debt, stands at
$ 180 billion. The vast majority is private debt, and much of that is invested in
major national projects which will be of considerable long term value to
Australia.
At the same time as foreign debt has accumulated, so has our capacity to pay.
And now secured against the debt, and providing an alternative pool of capital
from which to barrow, are national savings already much bigger and growing
infinitely faster.
Our superannuation changes will increase national savings and the savings oft
all Australians; such that an Australian couple now in their mid 30s with
average earnings will receive, on their retirement, an income 75 per cent higher
than the age pension. c
We asked that we be entrusted with the care of the Australian environment, v
and we have taken that responsibility very seriously.
In 1996 our natural environment has a better future than it has had at any timeE
in the past 200 years. Perhaps most importantly, we are all beginning to see
that environmental values are not only consistent with economic success, but a
precondition of it.
4826 
oyed Shoalwater Bay and Jervis Bay have joined the Franklin River and Kakadu and
the rainforests; of the wet tropics, and are now protected forever.
-nean ill be The Cape York Agreement has the potential to deliver the second largest
help World Heritage area in the world with the support of the communities in the
region.
We Landcare, which Labor started in 1989, has been given support to match the
great enthusiasm with which Australian farming communities have adopted it.
i still Major community participation programs like Save the Bush and Coastcare are
flourishing.
cent We have put aside six million hectares of forest for potential inclusion in a
3 set world class system of forest reserves.
Last month we delivered an environment statement which contained the
iking biggest commitment in our history for the protection of our land, its productive
capacity and its biodiversity. That environment statement takes the programs
we have conceived and nurtured over the past five to ten years to a new level.
ould. ation And the statement is fully funded. It is not contingent upon the sale of Telstra.
and We have delivered on the environment in the past and we will deliver in the
future and we wAil deliver policy, not political blackmail.
reign is at We said we would maintain and expand the social safety net and we have not
ed in least through Medicare, Australia's universal health care system.
ie to And with our new family health rebate, which will extend and strengthen
Medicare, Australian families will have more choice and greater security and
pay. assistance than ever before.
, pital
. wing We have made life for working women easier by establishing thousands more
child care places and paying a child care rebate through Medicare offices. We
introduced an $ 840 maternity allowance, and for parents who want to stay
gs of home with their children, a parenting allowance.
with
gher We asked for a mandate to preserve the principle that decent wages and
conditions based on the right of working men and women to bargain collectively
and openly in the workplace are the basic requirements of a fair society, and
nent, we have preserved that principle.
We have preserved the jurisdiction ol che Industrial Reiarior-s Cor" mission to
time act as the umpire to ensure fair agreements between firms and their workers.
see
but a 4827 
We are transforming our workplaces. We are making them more flexible.
creative and productive in the last four years. labour productivity has been
more than twice that of New Zealand. which, has been touted by our ooponents
as a shining exzrnpie of the benefits o~ the syste cf; d' contrac* ts.
Labor will not shift the essential balance in the relationship between employers
and employees: we will make the relationship more flexible, we will make it
more productive, we will offer more choice, but we will not sacrifice a hundred
years of progress and leave Australian working men and women at the mercy
of a market free-for-all. F
We will not adopt the fantastic hypocrisy of modem conservatism whichr
preaches the values of families and communities, while conducting a direct
assault on them through reduced wages and conditions and job security.
We respect every legitimate right of employers, including the right to dismiss
employees, but not a right to unfairly dismiss them. We don't think we help r
young Australians by making it easier to sack them or their parents.
Three years ago Australians relied upon the Labor Government to maintain c
unswerving commitment to cultural and racial tolerance and to continue to
invest in the multicultural fabric of the nation. And we have done this. 1
We have invested in the cultural diversity of this country and we have
legislated to protect the victims of prejudice. We have not turned a blind eye to
racism and we will not compromise the principle of non-discriminatibn in C
immigration by erecting new barriers which discriminate against family reunion r
for our Non-English Speaking Background communities.
We introduced and passed legislation that ensured the right to sexual privacy
for all Australians. C
The mandate we sought to give legal expression to the Mabo judgement we
have fulfilled, and it gives me great pride to be able to say so. The long battle
to win the day has dramatically raised the level of understanding between black 1
and white Australians. We were brought together and we learned a lot. We
proved we could find solutions. r
There is still a long way to go before we can say that we have done what must
be done. But the will to do it is there. The next term of a Labor government wAil h
see an unprecedented effort to solve the distressing problems of Aboriginal fE
health and morale which are the continuing legacies of dispossession and
neglect. I. v I; f
Three years ago we promised to invest the arts with a new stature and k
direction, and with Creative Nation we made good our promise. g
4828 
 ible, Three years ago we promised Australians that we would develop a model for
been an Australian republic, and that is what we have done. We appointed an expert
ients group and we set in motion a broad community debate.
In June last year we presented the Government's preferred model to the
) yers Australian parliament and people.
ike it
idred The Government never suggested that its model was the only one. We want to
iercy see the widest possible discussion and consultation. We have issued nonpartisan
educational materials to schools, libraries and community groups
across the country. We welcome and support the Australia Consults program
vhich recently launched by the National Australia Day Council.
firect We believe that Australia's head of state should be one of us. We believe that
an Australian head of state should welcome in the new century, should open
miss the Olympic Games in the year 2000, should represent us abroad in this
help nation's second century.
If re-elected we will ask the Australian people what they think about the
, itain question: do you want an Australian to be Australia's head of state?
e to The Government will conduct a plebiscite a non-binding popular vote within
twelve months of the first sitting of the new parliament.
have ye to If the plebiscite is carried, the Government will then propose that a Joint Select
) n in Committee, representative of both Houses of the Parliament, be appointed to
inion make recommendations for a constitutional amendment to be put to the people
at a referendum.
vacy The joint committee would be established in such a way that neither the
Government nor the Opposition would possess a majority. It would conduct
extensive consultations with the states and the community and would consider
twe submissions.
attle
) lack~ To succeed, the constitutional amendment necessary to create the republic
We would need to be carried at the referendum by a majority of electors and in a
majority of states.
must The question of the republic has been one of several controversial issues we
t Will have confronted in recent times. But we believe that not to confront them is a a
ginal failure of our duty to lead the nation conscientiously.
and We are very much aware that the great progress we have made in the last
three years the unprecedented econimic groWn',. th; lovv inflatic-tfh? Ic,' st
and level of strikes since 1940, the huge growth in joos, ie growth ir 3x; p'. rts and
productivity has not translated automatically into material benefits, or a
greater sense of security among many Australians. 4829 
But that is not an argument for throwing out the policies which have given us
strikingly good results. It is an argument for listening harder and doing better.
It is : nErefore not arcurnent ' C . n cc e
They have opposed us at every step.
Never has there been a more negative Opposition; or, since John Hewson's
departure, an Opposition less willing to honestly state what it believes in.
Never, I believe, has there been an Opposition so weak on policy and direction.
And as we have led, our opponents have been busy changing leaders.
John Hewson has gone he went abusing us for Working Nation and the
Native Title Act and even more loudly cursing his colleagues for their
dishonesty and faint-heartedness. Alexander Downer came and just as quickly
went in a thick fog of confusion and embarrassment.
They now offer, as an alternative Prime Minister, their own third choice as
leader of the Liberal Party.
They have changed their leaders but not themselves.
They present him as a new man; they ask us to believe that all his previous
political life had been one gigantic mistake.
They ask us to believe that he will now support all those things he has devoted
his life to opposing.
They ask us to believe that he supports Medicare,-that his passionate life-long
opposition to universal health insurance was just a passing phase; that when,
over two decades, he was opposing every wage rise bar two and declaring that
award protections were the greatest blight on the country, he was just
rehearsing for the moment when he could say they were essential.
They ask us to believe that while for two decades he never raised a finger in
the interests of our environment, he was at heart an environmentalist.
Apparently we are to interpret his deeply reactionary record as just youthful
exuberance. It is too much to ask anyone to believe.
They ask us to believe that he has a vision for Australia. But, after 20 years in
politics, can any Australian say what it is?
4830 
Ius The fact is. while Labor has a vision for Australia in the 21st century, John
Howard's vision extends no further than 2 March 1996. While Labor has been
repositioning Australia for the future, John Howard has been repositioning
himself to escape his past.
For 13 years we have resisted radical free market ideology in all its guises
including the guises of John Howard.
on's in. Now he is back, and with him a shadow ministry which presents a truly
: ion. disconcerting prospect.
Mr Fischer as Trade Minister a man who has publicly canvassed the idea that
Australia could institute a trade war with Japan, our largest trading partner, by
the not selling our primary products into their markets; a man who has said that the
heir Israeli secret service stole Malcolm Frasers trousers in Memphis.
-: ky Alexander Downer as Minister for Foreign Affairs the man who says we are
", obsessed" with Asia the region where we do 75 per cent of our trade; the
as man who says he would re-focus Australia on Europe and on what he calls our
" Western allies" in North America;-and who said two days before the historic
security agreement with Indonesia was signed that the " relationship was in
tatters".
ots We have a Shadow Treasurer who has yet to make a single constructive
contribution to the economic debate in this country. Can anyone remember
Mr Costello saying something positive or interesting about the futu re of
) led Australia?
And the Minister for selling Telstra in a Coalition government will be Bronwyn
ong Bishop.
len, , hat And they talk about arrogance.
just Australia's greatest enterprise and the one with the greatest potential, the one
on which every Australian in some sense depends Telstra is to be given to
r in Mrs Bishop to sell.
-hfulLet me repeat that Telstra is to be given to Mrs Bishop to sell.
And if she fails in this task, as she is bound to, Australians will not get their
environment policy from the Coalition.
Let's be very clear about this. One party will sell Telstra if they win this
s in election, the other Darty wi'l no! The Cof' tion wi!! sell it. The L~ t'r Party wil
not. Yet, for all the alarming inadequacies of his most senior colleagues, none of
them presents greater cause for alarm than the man who would be Prime
Minister. ' 18.31.
I 
Mr Howard has always opposed those things which Australians are committed
to thinas like Medicare. the environment and the social safety net. He now
piasacs : that he has seen now A-, st,:-rac-like them. and has the! elOre char;: ed
his mind.
Even if we accepted this explanation, we would still have to query his
On foreign policy he has almost without exception chosen the wrong side on
every issue. He supported Ronald Reagan's Star Wars program but opposed
the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone. He thought Gorbachev's perestroika
program was a plot to disarm the West. He agreed with the opponents of
Nelson Mandela and vociferously opposed economic sanctions against South
Africa. When he mistakenly anticipated some political advantage, he
questioned the non-discriminatory principles of our immigration program. Last
year he gave every indication that he is still fighting the Vietnam War by
refusing to see Vietnam's most important political leader during his visit to
Australia. He is truly the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had.
The truth is Mr Howard has never been able to drag his feet from the sands of
the past. He once said about Medicare that he knew we could never go back
entirely to the privatised health system of the 50s and 60s but, he said, " I
would love to go back".
As with Medicare. so with so much else.
That is why we say leadership is a major issue in this election because we
cannot go back. We cannot drift. We cannot take the risk.
If we are bold and have confidence in ourselves, we can grasp the opportunity
that now presents itself. No country in the world just now has such an
opportunity. What is happening now in East Asia is without precedent in world history.
Consider the wealth generated by the Industrial Revolution, and then consider
the relative size of the populations which produced it
East Asia has 2.5 billion people. The consistently high rates of economic
growth coupled with higher education is producing new and rising levels of
wealth and opportunity that knows no parallel in history.
And Australia is right in the middle of it.
Through most of our history, we have been remote from the big markets of the
world. But not any more.
41832 
nitted If we recognise the opportunity and truly seek to integrate ourseives with it our
noweconomic future is assured. And with that integration will come the trade and
. nged wealth to further develop Australia and put us firmly in charge of our future.
The last ten years have seen us prepare for this opportunity, the last three
y his years have seen us beginning to come to grips with it.
But we will only succeed in the region around us if we truly want to be there. If
Je on we regard it as our natural place to be, with the people around us as real and
) osed genuine neighbours.
troika its of Our children will receive the inheritance we ourselves have been given, but
; outh they will employ it not as an enclave marooned on an abundant island but as a
he nation with a destiny flowing from the most generous benefaction of history; a
Last continent of our own, a border with no one, a deep democracy, an egalitarian
3r by ethic.
; it to The challenge is to harness our confidence;, to make ourselves stronger at
home and more enterprising abroad.
We have been preparing well, with higher levels of education and training, a
ds of premium on creativity and innovation, the development of a productivity culture,
back a commitment to competitiveness.
iid " I In a decade our exports are well on the way to doubling, our service industries
are growing dramatically and there is now a constellation of Australian
companies all over the world.
* e we Australians and their children will increasingly live lives caught up in the
phenomenon of our intemationalisation and find jobs in the industry of our
region. And their income growth will be guaranteed.
unity ian We can enter the new century a unique country with a unique future. We can
enter it prosperous and dynamic: a diverse and tolerant society, trading actively
in Asia and the rest of the world; secure in our identity, the more so because
we know that we have met the challenge of our times.
sider It is the greatest challenge we have ever faced as a nation. By the year 2000
we should be able to say that this predominantly British and European country
has learned to live securely, in peace and mutual prosperity among our Asian
omic and Pacific neighbours.
Is of We will not be cut off from our British and Eiuropean c~. es 2-:-do c
from those economies. On the contrary, the More engaged re
economically and politically with the region around us, the more value and
relevance we bring to those old relationships.
, f the 48.33 
Far from putting our identity at risk, our relationships with the region will it
energise it. c E
We wili have Thnis unio-ue , ced.. We&amp; w e made sense
of our future.
But it will only happen if we make it.
If we hesitate; if we look back and say: well, there is the past on the one hand,
and on the other hand there is the future, and the choice is not exclusive; let us .1L
ponder, let us form a committee, let us have a convention, let us listen to whata
our rump has to say, let us drift if we do that, we will lose the chance, a0
Because our neighbours are not drifting; our competitors are not drifting, the
modem world is not drifting the tide of change in the modern world is greater E
and more rapid now than at any time in our history. To drift would be 1
disastrous. The truth is we either grasp the opportunity now, or fail. The pace and V
momentum must not be lost; for if the fire goes out, not only is it unlikely to be
re-lit, but the opportunity will be lost and we will repent in leisure. T if,
The Asian economies are a huge field but the gateways are narrow and wAilb
rapidly close. tc
ar
The same might be said of another great opportunity which we simply'ms
grasp. T
Our ability to meet the challenge of the information revolution will significantly C.
determine how many jobs we can create in the near future, and what sort of
jobs they will be. A
How we meet it will also have a large say in the kind of country we become i
over the next half decade: whether, for instance, we continue to grow as a ft
clever and creative country; whether we innovate for ourselves or borrow from C
others; whether we generate our own films, television, information services of
and scientific and educational materials; whether our kids watch Playschool or
a Hollywood equivalent. P
It all depends on decisions we have made being followed through. And on the ar
right decisions being made in the near future. I V
If we move quickly we can create a major new Australian industry worth many At
billions of dollars which will create many thousands of jobs. fo
4834 H 
will It can be Australian hospitals, not Californian ones, which deliver on-line
diagnostic services to Vietnam; Monash University, not the London School of
Economics, which delivers on-line education services to Malaysia; Australian
ise banks, Australian insurance companies, Australian businesses and agencies
vastly expanding their operations through on-line services abroad. There really
is no limit.
So long as we move quickly.
uds Let me ask one more question flowing from the information revolution. Does
' hat anyone believe that the current Coalition is equipped to deal with it? If the
answer is ' I'm not sure' that is as good a reason as any other not to vote for
them.
the
iter Because if Mr Howard and his colleagues dither if they drop the baton we
be have carried for the past four years the race will be over. And Australia will
be the loser.
ind We will lose a potentially massive industry and much else with it.
be The ability of our schools to take advantage of this revolution is particularly
important. A Labor Government will not support a school system divided
will between the information rich and the information poor. Our first priority must be
to provide computers on the basis of need, especially the needs of those who
are economically disadvantaged or in remote and rural areas.
ust The digitisation program, along with commitments made by Telstra and Optus,
will deliver network access to over 97 per cent of schools by the turn of the
ritly century.
t Of And today I am happy to announce that Labor will provide a new $ 300 million
information technology strategy for schools: $ 240 million over four years for
me hardware for computer learning centres for Australia's schools, and. $ 60 million
a for professional development for teachers. The $ 240 million will buy 150,000
omn computers and might I say, because of last year's Innovation Statement, many
; es of them will be made in Australia.
I or This is essential spending if we are to succeed in the information revolution
the and our children are to have a first rate chance in a first rate country.
J What we do over the next few years will have profound implications for schools,
businesses, homes and hospitals. It will have profound implications for
3ny Australia in the 21st century. It cannot be left to chance. I truly believe it
cannot be left to the Liberal and National parties.
I have chosen not to announce a swag of new policies in this speech today.
Unlike the Coalition, we have had our policies before the Australian people
for their examination for some time now. i the Innovation Statement, the
Housing Statement, the Environment Statement, the National Forest Policy 4835 
Statement, the health policy, the Accord, APEC. the Security Agreement with
Indonesia the republic.
In this soeech. what I have been concerned with are the challenges we face as
a naticri ana the way Labor is going about meeting them. I think that is what
Austraiians need to be sure about just now the direction we are going, how we
are coping with the change all around us, how their families, communities and
their country are going to fare in all this.
I believe they are going to fare very well.
Much of what I have said has concerned our future, our kids, the Australians of
next century.
But change also affects older Australians. It was in part to protect them against
change that the Government has fulfilled Labor's historic promise to ensure that
the aged pension is pegged at 25 per cent of average weekly earnings.
Last year, and right through the commemorations marking the 50th anniversary
of the Second World War, Australians have paid tribute to the heroic
generation who defended our liberty and freedom everywhere.
A generation which contributed so much to this country deserve all the benefits
that we can provide.
At the same time, we must meet the needs of those members of today's'older
generation who too often find themselves out of the workforce but still-willing
and able to make vital contributions to this country.
Today we are releasing some initiatives a Labor Government will take to help
them to make these contributions. These may be taken as the beginning of
what will be a major government undertaking to come to terms with the new
realities of modern society as they apply to older people and to develop
programs which will tap their skills and knowledge and, where they wish,
engage them in the social and economic mainstream.
Ladies and gentlemen
At the end of three years we face the people of Australia confident that we have
earned their trust once more. I think we can say these things.
That we strenuously pursued the goals we set and that sometimes we
exceeded our own expectations. That we have been willing to lead, at home
and abroad, and that we have led with success. That we have looked after the
national interest and that we have looked after our fellow Australians when they
needed looking after. We have been conscientious. We have been active. We
have honoured the trust that was placed in us.
11836 
wvith It is for the Australian people to judge us. If they judge us on our record I
believe they will decide that we have earned their trust again. And not just for
what we have done. but for what we are determined to do for what we believe
3ce as in, for the future of Australia.
3 what
ow we Our opponents, who have refused to present the people with their policies until
3s and well into the campaign itself, are talking about honesty, and trust.
But there can be no honesty without the honest presentation of policies. And it
is not honest to offer one policy as a bribe to win support for another. And it is
difficult to trust a man who denies his past, who says he supports a health care
ans of system he has always opposed, promises an industrial relations system of the
kind he has always abhorred, or declares himself something he has never
been.
gainst
* e that Our opponents say that it is time for Labor to go, as if there was a natural order
to elections, and not the need to prove credentials, prove ideas, demonstrate
capacity, show the people of Australia where you intend to take the country.
3rsary ieroic These years are too important to risk.
Let me tell you this: Labor's vision never burned so brightly, we were never
mefits more determined, never was the sense of mission stronger.
We Australians have a remarkable future within our grasp, a future which other
oldercountries can only dream of. We have this great goal and Labor has a great
wvilling passion to reach it.
ihelp
ng of
new
velop wish, have
3 we
iome r the
they We 4837 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPD
ARTS POLICY LAUNCH, PLAYHOUSE VICTORIAN ARTS CENTRE,
MELBOURNE, 17 FEBRUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed. One has always got to think laterally. There arb cures!!
You know, through that dreadful experience of the 1993 election -mpaign
when the Huns and Visigoths were out there before us nothing so brightened
me up or cheered me up as the support you gave me and us in 1993 and
I think you have done it again. I can't tell you how moved I was by your
reception of Annita and me and the things that Wendy ( Harmer) and
Jacki ( Weaver) and Hugo ( Weaving) have said about the Labor Party and
also about me and my colleagues. Fred Astaire once said if I had a tear
drop, I could just cry'. But, I could have done one better than Fred, I could
have cried without one.
At any rate we are all here, I think, celebrating the same thing. This is not so
much a celebration of 13 years of Labor and what it has done for the arts, but
as much a celebration of what the arts mean to everyone of us. To all of you,
who are part of the arts in this country or who support them, to me, to my
colleagues, to all of us who know just how important it is.
I think, that it was one of the things that Wendy said that, I think, I was very
happy to hear and that is that now in this country people appreciate the arts
as though they are entirely central to our life. Entirely central to our national
life, not just some thing off on a tangent on the side, but a manifestation of
the way we are. And that they are not just something the government gives
grants to or has bodies for or supports companies of, but that they are, of
their essence, central to the way we are. Because, I think, all of us feel that it
is only in a free society, it is only in a truly democratic one that has got good
values in that space and intellectual freedom does the richness bubble to the
top and we get the distilled essence of ourselves and the celebration of what
we are and what we have become.
Those words that Jefferson once used and wrote in that great American
document about human happiness life, liberty and human happiness
human happiness is the core and central objective of government. There can
be no manifestation of human happiness if our mood is crestfallen, if we are
downcast, if we are subjugated, if we are intimidated, if our creativity and our
expression is not allowed to move, we will never see the manifestation in
what we call the arts.
So, when we see a country that has vitality and vibrance in the arts we know
that we are truly making it as a society. That we have got that happiness
there and that we have got that creativity and that space that a deep
democracy does give everybody. I think that is what we are really
celebrating. We are celebrating all of that and we are celebrating the
manifestation of it in celebrating the arts. 
I
My opponents say of me " you only want to give things back to the arts, you
only want to pay back the arts." I say too right I do, and I will never repay
them. I will never repay them. When I say ' I I mean it in the plural. We will
never repay them because you can't recompense, in monetary terms,
something which is central to the spirit of the nation and it is about a
celebration of the spirit and the understanding of the spiritualism of the arts is
the reason we will never repay them. We will try and we may do some things
better than others, but we will never repay them because of their essence
that richness and spirituality is something that comes from people, from
institutions, it comes from their up spiritedness, their good naturedness, it
doesn't come because of a government cheque. I am an indefatigable
warrior for the arts and I always will be. And we will resist our opponents
when they attack us.
But I think the proof of the importance of the arts is there with our Aboriginal
people who were here before all of us. For against the ravages of 40,000
years dance and music and history and religion and story telling kept them
together as a civilisation, as a community and even withstood the ravages of
the rest of us. That is where I think our lesson is and if we can do, as a
society, as they have done with that sense of belief in themselves, in
ourselves and pride in ourselves as they have then our arts in this country
will have succeeded.
I don't know of any country that has been so singularly blessed as we have.
To think that just four times our life time ago there was this large continent
inhabited by this old people who have now bequeathed us, shared this with
us, is one of the great perhaps accidents of history, one of the great
benefactions of history. We are now appreciating, I think, what a great
benefaction is as population growth and the pressures of modern life change
the way people live in the world we just the 18 million of us have inherited
this vast continent. We have got a chance to do something with it, we have
taken the great change in the post war years, the greatest risk but the
greatest reward of our time here and that was the post war migration policy
and as a consequence we now celebrate our diversity, our strength, we
rejoice in the vitality it has given us. It has made us new. This diverse
nation, this vibrant group on this continent with this old society, in this old
place, in this country we love has a chance to make us, as a nation state,
unique in the world.
Now for the first time in our history, we are living with other peoples around
us as we have never lived before. I often, when you look at the Liberals and
their subliminal messages about the good old days of the 1950s and 1960s,
the days of the monoculture, the days when all around us, when the sun
might have been shining on Australia and on Britain, maybe, and on the
United States and on Canada but there wasn't much sun shining on Burma or
on Indonesia or on Indochina, on Vietnam or on China itself. I mean these
were dark days with the Burmese in their utter subjugation. The Indonesians
and their desperate poverty. The Vietnamese fighting back the yoke of
colonialism and the Chinese trying to organise themselves into a nation with
some bounty. Now we look around us and we find their freedom emerging, 
their income growth rising, their pride in themselves, the celebration of their
cultures and their invitation to us to join them. For the first time in our life
time, the sun is really shining brightly on the whole world, not just on a couple
of places. That is what is on offer to us. To be part of that because what is
happening around us in east Asia is a phenomenon without precedence in
human history.
I said the other day at the Policy Launch, you just might recall that the
industrial revolution created so much wealth in Britain the British built abbeys
to themselves across the English countryside and it came from somewhere
between 10 and 20 million people. In the United States when the Fricks and
the Carnegies and the Rockefellers put their fortunes together and built the
great businesses of America and the railroads opened up the country and the
mines created the wealth and the mansions were built all along Fifth Avenue
and in Baltimore and in Pennsylvania, right through the United States, it was
done of a population of somewhere between 40 and 70 million. Just imagine
what is going to happen with 2.5 billion people, with economies growing at
8 and 10 per cent a year. The revolution, the production of wealth, the flux
that is going to come from that will have no precedence in human history.
The emergence of China into the world economy all 1.2 billion of them
knows no historic precedence and we are right in the middle of it. Right in
the centre and we have got a gilt edged invitation to come to the party, to be
part of the life of this.
But, imagine going there without a strategy. Imagine going there without a
sense of yourself. Imagine having the great inheritance of this continent and
this people and going there uncertainly. Going there almost as though you
shouldn't be there. That is why it is entirely central, it is fundamental to our
future both economically, socially, culturally that we know who we are and
that we celebrate who we are and we express ourselves and why it is
important that we define ourselves and why the arts do these things for us.
Why it is important to have an Australian as our head of state, because we
can't go as some derivative society with the head of state the monarch of
another country and present ourselves as a unique people.
Yet, the Liberal Party says that the republic is a distraction. They say that
I use it only to get away from the big issues. But when I say hang on we said
we would produce 500,000 jobs and we have produced 713, 000. We said
we would make the economy again, we have grown faster than any other
western world economy, we have done it with three per cent inflation. What
do you think I am distracting from?
The other day when I said we would put a plebiscite to the Australian people
to ask them the question: do they want an Australian as the Australian head
of state? John Howard, quick as a flash, came out and said it was cheap
populism. To ask each Australian what their opinion is he says is cheap, but
to have 300 people boxed up in a room appointed by him in some convention
is democratic. So, they attacked the notion that we should know who we are
and that we could only proceed if we are completely certain of our identity 
and our strength and that we celebrate ourselves and that we take something
to this great change in the world and that we are part of it.
The arts is not just something for our quiet enjoyment. It is not just something
that governments do because it is the right thing to do. It is entirely
meaningful about the sort of country we are, the kind of democracy we have,
why we should invest in our creativity because without it, we will wander
around as waifs in a world of opportunity when it is really ours to claim.
We are now back, again, talking about these things. We are talking about
the importance of these things. The importance of the arts, its importance to
the country and what the Government has done for them.
I know three years ago that people thought that the arts were gravely
threatened. We had Fightback, we had John Hewson. They thought in the
deprivation of the economy, with a recession and high unemployment we
were dead meat and so instead of being subtle, they were unsubtle. They
said how about this, a Goods and Services Tax, we will rip up Medicare, we
will cut $ 10 billion out of the social wage, we will knock around the ABC, we
will gut the arts, what do you reckon about that? People gave them the
answer at the end. A lot of artists, I think, thought the game is really up for
grabs here. We are going to have to tuck in and defend the things we
believe in. But, in some respects, there was a boyish naivety shall we say
about John Hewson. You know, rushing in there with a document seeking a
mandate, in many respects quite an honourable thing to do. Seeking support
for the model he believed in.
But, in some respects, this election is far more dangerous for the people who
have belief in this country, who have faith in it. Because now you have a
campaign organised by cynics. You know, the warped intellect of Staley, that
absolute canister of cynicism in Robb their Federal Secretary and a Federal
Leader in John Howard who just wants to be himself and they won't let him.
He said ' look, I want to do the things I I want to cut wages.' No, no you
can't, no, no, John you can't do that. ' But that Medicare, I want to rip it up'.
And they say ' no, not yet John, not yet, not yet.' He went out there and they
put him in the forest and he said ' I thought we got rid of all of these'. They
have made him into another person and he is unhappy about it. He is waiting
to break out. He is waiting to break out. But when he does, all of their
cynicism about Australia, their belief in other places really, the fact that they
don't have much faith in us they have always seen us as some sort of
derivative place that they can get a quid from, make a buck from, live the
comfortable life from, perched in some good suburb, or on some harbour
foreshore and taking the occasional trips back to the places that they really
have their commitments to.
This is the sort of thing they will try and do and yet we say, look, for years we
have been saying these things: universal health is good, trees are good,
wages are good, the Arbitration Commission is good, the arts are good and
they don't believe us. They don't believe us. 
And here he is like Indiana Jones in some exotic place, in places he has
never trod Medicare, industrial relations, forests, the environment
discovering it all for the first time and we are supposed to be grateful, say, we
have humanised them, we are grateful.
I am sure when I came on here today I thought this was the set from
' Future Directions', you remember that thing which was published. But that is
them, isn't it? I mean that is them. In a sense, they define the rest of us by
being around. We don't mind them being around, we only mind them being in
charge. I mean Peter Costello said this when we launched the first ever Cultural
Policy for the country in Creative Nation he said, ' It has got to be' I mean
he is such a berk isn't he ' It has got to be a contradiction in terms, hasn't it?
I mean a Government arts policy. It has got to be a bit of a joke, doesn't it, to
run around and say at a time when everybody says you should be reducing
your expenditure. Here is another $ 250 million, some of it for people who are
quite wealthy or getting these artist grants.'
You see it is so perceptive, isn't it? It is so perceptive. And then, of course,
Mr Downer our little curly headed mate he said when he was the Leader,
when he was a Shadow Arts Minister, ' That a Coalition Government would
have the power to veto Australia Council grants'. Well there we are, cop that
one. And the Council be reduced to an advisory body, advising people like
Alexander Downer and Peter Costello and Tim Fischer and John Howard.
And Howard, back in the 1980s, when he was actually leading the Liberal
Party on that occasion, he then announced plans to abolish the Department
of the Arts, Heritage and the Environment and with it the Australian Film
Commission. I mean they are such a sweet little group, aren't they?
But now he is a convert. He says he is going to agree. He has ticked
Creative Nation, $ 250 million, he will have that. He said he is going to kick in
more money $ 21 million of it actually from that funded by the Government's
Budget last year and these sorts of things.
Well we really know about them and I suppose reciting their form gives us a
bit of fun, but not much joy. But let's recite some of the things, I think, we
have done and tried to do with you and for you.
We have put the Arts into Cabinet and Michael Lee, our Minister, is with us
today. We have also joined it up with the Department of Communications.
So it is Arts and Communications because we know how central this matter is
communications, the growth of communications and how it can never be
untwined from the arts.
We have bolstered the Australia Council and we have extended its brief to
Hillary Macphee and Michael Lynch who are bravely turning it into the
responsive and innovative organisation it should be and, I think, they are
doing well. 
We have set up a whole new set of important cultural institutions the
National Academy of Music, the Foundation for Culture and Humanities here
in Melbourne, and there is a lot of money around in this country now a lot of
bread. You can see with that change we are going to make to the tax system
on trusts. I mean how mean-spirited they are, some of these characters.
If they just gave any of that sort of money to the Foundation for Culture and
Humanities, the arts would get a gigantic kick along.
The National Indigenous Performing Arts Academy in Brisbane, the Gallery of
Aboriginal Australia in Canberra, the National Museum of Australia, the
Production Fund in Melbourne for the mini-series and the telemovies, and we
have got some other things to say and I would just like to mention a few of
those. We are setting up an Independent Music Development Corporation to
encourage independent production of contemporary music and develop a
touring circuit for bands. Now we should do this.
We are investing another $ 12.8 million in new regional cultural facilities, or in
the refurbishment of existing buildings and we will establish a series of
fellowships for outstanding regional arts groups, or companies, and provide
funding to promote regional artists and bring them into the national audience.
We will extend copyright protection for artists working to life, plus 70 years.
So it is life, plus 70 years. We will set up an Australian Copyright Office and
implement arrangements for performers copyright and indigenous copyright.
And here in Melbourne beyond the changes we have made already with the
Production Fund and the National Academy of Music on the site of
Essendon Airport, we will establish a National Film and Multimedia Centre, a
world-class precinct comprising film, television and multimedia development
studios; contemporary music video production facilities; operating officers for
local and international writers and publisher, creators and producers; and
laboratories and support facilities.
Now this is a mighty site that has been reserved to us by just the
development of airports in this city. It is about 340 hectares and it is
kilometres from the city and it offers a great opportunity and I am very
pleased to announce today that Mr Jack Smorgon has agreed to Chair the
new Essendon Centre Development Authority which will oversee the
development. We are giving $ 4 million to establish a Youth Programming Unit in the ABC in
Melbourne. We will provide another $ 1.6 million through the Australia
Council to establish a National Theatre of Cultural Diversity in Melbourne.
And we are going to build a home for the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra in
Hobart. 
And as we have been one of the prime movers in establishing APEC, which is
now the primary piece of political architecture in the Asia-Pacific, we are
going to invite the 17 other members of APEC to participate in an inaugural
festival of the Asia-Pacific in Brisbane in 1997.
I think these things will tend to round out what we have been doing, what we
have been able to accomplish, and we will of course be, as implied they are
not only maintaining our financial commitments to the arts in general, but
improving them.
But I am very pleased about those initiatives and especially with the last one,
inviting the APEC countries to come here because that gets back to the point
we have got a gilt edged invitation and we will be, I think, carried along by
the excitement and the growth of this region. And the opportunities we will
have to enjoy their culture and they ours because we have got so much to
give and we want to show people what we have got to give and as we have
been pretty much the architects of this, we can be the architects of an
international cultural festival of this kind and, I think, this is going to be
important to us.
Could I just say that, you know, the dear old French we have been fighting
them for years over various things. But we do some good things with them
too. They have been letting off nuclear weapons in the Pacific for years and
we set up the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and they are now
going to sign it.
We have been arguing with them about agriculture in Europe, in the
Uruguay Round, for years and we basically had a victory over them there.
But they are capable of some very good things as we all know. In fact, some
of us rather like them. And a couple have come to my mind. One is, that
when Michel Rocard first became Prime Minister, it was really a funny day.
Don Russell and I Don is with me today, you can't miss him when he comes
into a crowd Don and I were in Paris and we had this appointment to see
Michel Rocard. He had been Prime Minister for six weeks, no Australian
Minister had met a French Premier for, I think, ten or twelve years to this
point.
And I said to Don, we have got an hour and a half and we may as well knock
over the shops around the Rue de Bac and those places. And I dragged Don
in and out of all these places and I said we have got a quarter of an hour to
get there, we had better go.
We got in the car and we are heading for the Hotel Matignon and down the
street, I can't recall its name now, the Rue de Lauren I think it is, there was a
traffic jam and the time was passing, and the appointed time had arrived and
I said, we are going to have to hot-foot-it. So out of the car we got, down the
street we got, and we walked in the gate of the Hotel Matignon and the guard
said, ' No, no, you can't pass. Who are you?' I said, well I am the Australian
Finance Minister and this is my Adviser and after some trouble we got past
them to a waiting Michel Rocard at the door and we sat down and we talked 
about the Matignon Accords in French Polynesia and then he said to me,
' You know, the President and I want to do something for the bicentenary of
the Revolution next year.' And he said, ' We thought about setting up an
environmental protection agency, an international one.' And I said, well that
is a noble idea, Michel, but you and I will be very old people before that ever
happens. And he said, ' Well you are a fraternal party, what about thinking of something
we can do together'. And I said, well I have got an idea for you, but I am in a
minority of two in my Cabinet and that is to turn Antarctica into a wilderness
park. And five days later they, the French, were to sign after ten years of
negotiation, the Minerals Convention in Antarctica, which would have seen all
the big powers ripping it apart, mining for oil, looking for minerals, and we
stopped them and we signed it as it turned out and we put Antarctica away for
years until we understand more about it. That is one good thing we did
with them.
The other good thing is at the end of this acrimonious Uruguay Round when
our friends, the Americans, put the weights on us from Hollywood, we joined
with the French in refusing the Americans their wish on audio visual. And
having, sort of, thrown off the colonial culture that pervaded so much of the
arts in Australia for so much of our history, having succeeded in that, we were
not to have then laid upon us the culture of the United States, or worse
simply caught up in the global homogenisation of culture. And that is a threat
to us, it is a real threat to us. But you won't meet the threat by shying away
from it, you will only join it by meeting it.
And really, I suppose, in many respects, this is what we are doing. We know
it is coming. But with all of these countries around us, in APEC, in the
Pacific, in Asia, they want their cultures too and we have got in APEC half the
world's population, over half the world's population and 60 per cent of the
world's GDP. And that means we can, basically, keep our cultural freedom if
we are good at it, if we are quick enough. And if we are committed enough to
the things we believe our culture, about the unique quality of it, about its
peculiarly Australian characteristics and how important that is to us as a
country. So many of these institutions that I am speaking of today and the ones we
have created and the ones we are using well already, and whether it is a
celebration of our pigs, or our dance, or whatever it might be, it is ours and
we are out there and we are going to keep it. It is important that we put,
indelibly, our own stamp on the arts and that they are ours and when people
see them they know they represent this unique nation, this country
Australia. Now I have talked for too long, but I want to finish on these points. Never has
there been a time when it has been more important to have belief in
ourselves, to have faith in who we are and what we have created here. And
to be contemplating now, looking back, or trying to embrace a group that do
not want to celebrate it, don't quite understand what it is, and for the 
opportunity of the greatest economic phenomenon in history, to say as they
are saying now they don't want to be in it. They really say, we are obsessed
with Asia. ' The Government is obsessive', says Downer about Asia.
They are saying, they want to make relationships stronger with our Western
allies, meaning they really want the drive down Whitehall again and they
want the limo on Pennsylvania Avenue. And we have all done that and that
has its particular joys for the moment. In fact, when Hawkey went around to
see Reagan in a big black limo, I told him it would have been easier to go in a
Yellow Cab and he said, ' That is the thing about you, you have got no
understanding of protocol.'
But, at any rate, this is where our conservative colleagues want to be and we
like these countries, we have cultural affinities with them, we will always keep
them. But our future is here, our future is in this part of the world, and our
heritage is this great old place, and we will only really succeed if we celebrate
it in a way which reflects upon the creativity and the democracy and the
intellectual freedom we have created here and take it and transport it into the
countries around us where it will be received with great joy.
This is really the role of the arts in this country, the defining role and this is
what we are really here celebrating today. Not just 13 years of support by the
Labor Party, but the fact that the Labor Party understands this and that you
understand it and that, together, we are all part of it. Thank you for today.
ends 


