Prime Minister
Image: AAP Image
Good morning and thank you.
I was in a school yesterday in Bogor and I was sitting with the students and telling them a story about an incredible man I was going to meet. I said he was like you, he sat in a classroom like this and came from a very humble background. He worked hard and worked jobs and put himself through university and studied forestry and set up a business. I said do you know who this is? They all looked at me wanting to know who this incredible person was. I said, well his picture has been in your classroom the entire time and I pointed at the President.
President Widodo is a sign of hope to every young boy and girl in this country in what he has been able to achieve and it was indeed a privilege to meet such a wonderful man as him yesterday.
President Widodo is heading to Lombok today to view the earthquake recovery efforts.
What has occurred on Lombok has been devastating more than 560 who have perished, countless homes and buildings destroyed.
We express our deep sympathies for the nation of Indonesia and the people of Lombok - Australia stands with Indonesia, as it has always done.
There is currently a team of Australian engineers and construction experts working on the ground with their Indonesian counterparts, assessing the structural damage and integrity of buildings, particularly local schools, many of which have been funded through the Australian development program.
I wanted to make a statement by coming to Indonesia on my first international visit as Prime Minister.
I also wanted to underline Australia’s commitment to regional engagement and pursuing economic opportunities through trade.
As Australia’s Prime Minister, I know that Indonesia’s success is our success. But it is bigger than that - it is important to our regional and global economy.
As the world’s third largest democracy. Fourth most populous nation. The home to the largest Muslim population in the world. The prosperity, harmony and success of Indonesia is a ‘must’ for our shared global future.
And I am delighted to be here focused on the opportunities and potential of our partnership.
Most of all, I come recognising our two countries as friends.
And we have no greater friends here than President Widodo and Vice President Kalla.It was a real pleasure to meet President Widodo yesterday.
We elevated our ties to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership and announced the conclusion of negotiations to the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, known as IA-CEPA.
A landmark agreement and Indonesia’s most ambitious to date.
Both are real achievements and I’ll return to them shortly.
Let me start though by talking about what I want to achieve for Australia in our international engagement. We are witnessing the most fundamental shift in global economics in 200 years.&nbsp; Our region, the Indo-Pacific, is now the fulcrum of the global economy.
At the same time, unprecedented technological changes are creating new opportunities and posing unique risks.
Set against these rapid social and economic changes, our region is experiencing sharpening strategic competition. In an era of rapid change and uncertainty, we must know who we are, what we offer and what we’re about. There can be no wasted effort.
My Government has three clear goals to ensure an even stronger Australia: keep our economy strong so we can guarantee the essential services Australians rely on, keep Australians safe and keep Australians together.
Prosperity, security, unity.
Australia’s Foreign Policy White Paper, which as the new Prime Minister I am pleased to affirm, works to achieve these goals.
The White Paper outlines an agenda for opportunity, security and strength, working with our partners to drive better outcomes for all of us.
That is my agenda, whether here on this my first international visit and for my engagement with other world leaders.
We pursue opportunities through trade and investment because this makes our economy stronger and helps deliver jobs for Australians.
And trade brings opportunities for our partners, as President Widodo affirmed yesterday when discussing the potential for trade and investment between Australia and Indonesia.
We pursue security with our neighbours to keep Australia and Australians safe and our region secure and open. And by working with partners, we keep their citizens safe and secure.
We are committed to close cooperation with Indonesia and others to tackle common threats such as terrorism. We are steadfast in strengthening our alliance with the United States.
We will deepen our engagement with our regional partners like Indonesia, India and Japan to keep the Indo-Pacific secure, prosperous, open and inclusive. &nbsp;
I am committed to deepening our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership with China, which has brought great benefit to both sides.
Australia will remain a leading security and economic partner of ASEAN.
We had a very successful ASEAN Australia Summit in Sydney in March.
I will build on that foundation because ASEAN sits at the centre of Australia’s vision for the Indo-Pacific. Together we must build our region’s resilience to all forms of coercion and commit to protecting the rights of all states.
My Government will boost further our engagement with our partners in the Pacific, with whom we agree a new security declaration next week.
The peoples of the Pacific hold a very special place in our regional family. There is a special affection and closeness between us that enables us to speak warmly but candidly with each other to address the many challenges and opportunities that we face together. The key is we will always face them together.
At the Pacific Island Forum Leaders meeting next week in Nauru we will continue Australia’s walk together with our Pacific friends. We will keep our commitments and do all we can to protect and preserve the sustainability, prosperity and security of the Pacific family of nations, as we always have.
While I will be a reluctant absence at next week’s meeting, I look forward to remedying this when we gather together at the time of the APEC meeting in Port Moresby.
We will also work with others around the globe to guard the institutions and rules that keep markets open, keep the world safe and help build a better future for the next generation. To be successful and influential internationally, Australia needs to be strong and united at home.
Our democracy, our economy, our multicultural society and our people give us the confidence and strength to make our way in the world.
We are pragmatic and committed to action.&nbsp;
We come to get things done.
We also come with respect to listen and to learn.
As a partner and a friend, we are committed to doing the heavy lifting when required, to deliver for our people in partnership with our friends and neighbours.
Under my leadership, the Australian Government will continue to work with Indonesia and our other partners to pursue common interests.
Indeed Australia has no more important partner in our region than Indonesia.&nbsp;
I want to work together to make our economies stronger, to make our people safer and to keep our people together. One thing both Australians and Indonesians know is that we can’t achieve prosperity without security — one underpins the other.
That has never been more true than it is today.
Which is why on this visit President Widodo and I have elevated the formal status of the relationship between our countries.
We’re already partners. But this new agreement— the Comprehensive Strategic Partnership — reflects the new ambition we share for our relationship and our region, and the increasing importance each of us places on working together.
This new partnership gives Australia and Indonesia the framework to build even closer ties — to boost prosperity for our people, strengthen the connections between our communities and increase security not just for us, but across the Indo-Pacific.
As Australia’s Prime Minister, I’m proud of our shared efforts to make the world, and our region, safer. This agreement will ensure we work together more closely than ever to keep the oceans that surround us open to trade and free from trans-national crime.
We will step up our cyber security cooperation, protecting our growing digital economies from the scourge of cybercrime.
Indonesia and Australia are together leading the fight against terrorism and transnational crime in our region. As co-chairs of the sub-regional meeting on Counter-Terrorism and the Bali Process on People Smuggling our partnership is having a genuine impact.&nbsp; We are achieving so much more together than what either of us could do alone.
But we must be ever vigilant. Terrorists continue to seek new ways to spread fear and violence. As the tragic bombings so recently in Surabaya show us, the threat of self-radicalisation is real and it is serious. We must continue to stand as one against this ideology of hate.
Indonesia, like Australia, understands that there is “unity in diversity” and that our societies are strengthened by embracing a wide range of faiths and cultures.
We must continue to learn from each other.
Connections between our faith communities and young people, through initiatives such as the New Colombo Plan and Muslim Exchange Program, have brought depth and resilience to our relationship and have our support.
We need to make much more of these people-to-people and community contacts, especially among our young people.
As Prime Minister I will strongly encourage young Australians to embrace the opportunities offered by our dynamic, diverse neighbour to the north.
Our strategic engagement underpins our economic prosperity and every year our economies are becoming more integrated.
But there’s still a huge amount of untapped potential.
I don’t think anyone in this room would disagree that for two economies the size of ours, two G20 nations, our trade and investment relationship has been underdone.
I am here to put more grunt into the economic relationship.
That is why IA-CEPA is so important.
IA-CEPA is not a transaction; it is a partnership.
It will open the door to a new era of opportunities for Australian and Indonesian business. Whether in agriculture and manufacturing, services or investment, this new agreement lays a foundation to realise the economic potential of our partnership.
It will create jobs and it will create wealth for both countries.
Ninety-nine per cent of Australia’s goods exports will be able to enter Indonesia duty free or with significantly improved preferential arrangements.
And all of Indonesia’s exports will enter Australia without tariffs or tax – which means more exports for Indonesia and cheaper inputs for Australian business.
Because we know from first-hand experience that free trade works — it has underpinned Australia’s economic success for more than half a century and fuelled Asia’s rapid growth.
It will enable companies like BlueScope, Telstra, Elders, Astra, Indofood and Tatalogam to create new opportunities — shared opportunities.
Just take Bluescope as an example.
Once this agreement is ratified, the raw materials Bluescope Indonesia needs from Australia to produce its high-quality steel will be more affordable and supply will be more reliable.
That means Bluescope’s manufacturing facilities in Indonesia, and other Indonesian steel manufacturers, will be better able to supply markets across the region – further boosting the attractiveness of Indonesia as an investment destination and creating more jobs and economic opportunities in both Indonesia and Australia. In agriculture, Australian cattle producers will benefit from greater certainty, while Indonesia will have greater food security and cheaper beef prices, as well as the space to continue to build its own cattle production. Prospects are better for investors like Jetstar, which is now expanding its presence with more flights, jobs and training in Indonesia.
Because the driving principle of these agreements, just like the Australian concept of a fair go, is that another country does not have to be worse off to make Australians better off. When we reduce barriers to trade, we create win-win outcomes.
Both Indonesians and Australians can be, and will be, better off.
That’s how the global trading system works.
We both gain from trade and investment.
The agreement is a win for both sides as we prosper together.
For example, Australian majority-owned vocational educational providers will be able to partner with Indonesian firms, giving young Indonesians the chance to gain internationally competitive skills, and Indonesia the opportunity to make the most of its young and dynamic workforce.
But this agreement isn’t only about the goods and services that we buy and sell.
Importantly, it will give Australian investors greater certainty in Indonesia and promote more two-way investment. The hardest part is over – we’ve finished the negotiation.
We’ve both still got some legal and technical details to finish and domestic processes to work through, but we want the agreement signed and up and running in the months ahead.
Before I conclude, may I personally thank Vice President Kalla for your decisive leadership in bringing this agreement to fruition.
I’d also like to thank the business community in both countries for your strong support, including the Indonesia-Australia Business Partnership Group, which played such an important role in the negotiations. The people at the coal face of both our economies know that with perseverance we can make it. As partners, we need to deliver for our people to make most of the opportunity and potential between us. Our partnership has a promising future built on a long history of cooperation, going back to the origin of Indonesia as an independent nation.
It’s a fact perhaps lost to time for many, that Australia was one of Indonesia’s strongest supporters in its bid for independence.
So strong, in fact, that President Sukarno chose Australia to represent Indonesia in the United Nations negotiations in the lead up to Independence.
It was an honour for Australia then, and remains so today, to have been present at the birth of modern Indonesia. And so to all of you here today and all of the people of Indonesia, on behalf of all Australians I say: Ayo! Kita maju bersama.
C’mon lets go forward together.
Thank you — thank you for your friendship in the past, thank you for welcoming me here today as Australia’s Prime Minister, and thank you being our trusted partner in the exciting journey ahead. Terimah Kasih.
As I conclude can I ask you to do one thing? Think about the kids in the local school where you live - in your kampong, in your part of Sydney or Perth. What we have done here in this agreement was for them. It will long outlast any of us in this room today and we can feel good about that.
Good job. Thank you very much.


Prime Minister
Image: AAP Image / Simon Dallinger
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much Sussan for the very warm welcome to Jenny and I, and to my senior colleagues here particularly my Deputy Leader here, Josh Frydenberg and I, the ‘ScoJo’ team, as we’ve been dubbed amongst other things. I don’t know if that one will stick Josh, but let’s see how we go. Can I also acknowledge the Indigenous people and the land on which we stand and where we meet today, and acknowledge elders past and present and pay my respects to them, our first Australians.
I like rituals. I’m a keen fan of rituals. I try and create rituals in my family, Jen and I, we have a number of rituals with our kids. We had them when I was growing up as a kid. They’re important because they help you connect and remind you about the things that matter most. They connect you to your past, and they help you connect your past to your future. Just as Indigenous peoples have been doing for centuries, thousands of years. I like rituals.
One ritual we have as a family, as a broader family, is every year, on my grandmother’s birthday, we called her Mardie, and we loved her dearly. She was the matriarch of the family who kept everybody together because we’re a pretty disparate family. Very disparate. All different views, all different walks of life, all different ages. But we all love each other, because Mardie always brought us together. After she passed away, we were a bit worried that, well, how are we all going to stay together. We live such different lives. And we had this idea. We said let’s get together on her birthday, all of us, and we do it down on the South Coast of NSW, where a lot of my family also live. We get together and we tell our kids who didn’t get to know Mardie, because she passed away before most of them were born. And we tell stories about her and all the funny things she used to do.
The ladies were out there making the embroidery, there was a rug, a crochet rug they were putting together. Mardie crocheted us all a rug as kids. We call it the Mardie rug. Now, we call this get together the ‘Mardie Gras’. I know there are other events that have that name and good luck to them too. But what it does is we get together and we remember what holds us together as a family. The things that she taught us, the things that we loved.
This is why I’ve come here today with the next generation of the leadership of the Liberal Party. This is an important ritual, for us to come here today where Robert Menzies came all those years ago. To come here and pledge to that legacy, to that heritage, as a ritual. To show the things that we believe in today are the things that he believed in then and the things we will always believe in as a Liberal Party. After the 1943 election, it was a horror election for what were known as the non-Labor parties. They were wiped out. You’d think after a big election loss like that, that everyone and I’m sure quite a lot of them were, they were in the grumps and the mopes. That ‘it’s all done’, ‘it’s all finished’, that ‘the Labor Party will run the country forever’, it ‘was all doomed’, all that sort of thing. But Robert Menzies at that time, 75 years ago, almost to this day, it was in August 1943, he wrote to the President of what was called the Australian Council of Retailers, a fellow called Mr Lamp. And he said this to him in his letter, he said, “There is a great opportunity if we are ready to seize it.” That’s what he said. Now Mr Lamp thought this was just ‘Ming’ going off again. He was an enthusiast.
Fifteen&nbsp;months later, here in Albury, not far as you’ve just heard, they were putting the final touches and bringing together the formation of the Liberal Party, which has been the most successful political party at a federal level of any party. Of any party. And including most recently – six out of the last eight elections.
They write us off every time, and every time we come back and we come back hard. Because of the things that we believe in. Now on that day, when he brought everybody together, there were 18 different political organisations and parties. Eighteen!
He got them together, and the only thing they had in common up until that point in time was what they were opposed to. They were known as the non-Labor parties. There was one great one, it was called the Australian Women’s National League. The Liberal Party was founded on both the capital and the volunteers of one of the most successful Australian women’s movements in our country’s history. They got together, and what held them together at that point loosely was what they were opposed to. But Robert Menzies brought them here to unite them about what they believed in. Because you can’t just be about what you’re opposed to. You’ve got to be about what you’re for. As a country, as a political party, as an individual, as a family. It’s about what you’re for, not just what you’re against.
So those 18 organisations came together and Robert Menzies brought them together, and he didn’t come with a to-do list of stuff, and I haven’t come to you today with a to-do list of stuff. All the journalists who were hoping I was going to make 17 policy announcements and all the forms are out there and you can pore over all the documents, and there’s Morrison’s manifesto… No, it’s not happening today. Sorry to disappoint you.
I’ve come to talk to you today about what’s in here, and what’s in each of their hearts and in every heart and in every mind of my team. When Menzies came here, he didn’t bring a to-do list or a manifesto. He brought a list of beliefs that they had agreed in Canberra a few months earlier.
Let’s talk about what some of those beliefs were that he brought together. Menzies’ vision, and all of those who joined him, it all began and started with the individual. It’s all about the individual, and the capacity and the value and sanctity, the inherent virtue of every single human being that has the privilege to call themselves an Australian whether by birth or by pledge.
He understood that for the individual to be successful in life, and to be able to realise what they wanted, to realise for themselves, they needed some very important things. If they were fortunate enough, they would have a family that loved them, and not all Australians have that. If they were fortunate enough they would have a family and the family would support them. That is the first building block of any successful country, community, society, is family. That’s what it is for me and Jen, that’s the family we’ve come from, and we have been blessed beyond measure when it comes to the love of family. And my heart breaks for those Australians who don’t know that. I hope that they will. In one way, shape or form.
Then there's the community. So the individual, the family, the community that you're part of – a wonderful community, Susan here has represented today. All walks of life. People from school, people volunteering for Emergency Services, people just getting together and crocheting. A community supporting itself. An individual can thrive in a community like that.
But it's more than that. Menzies talked about the other things that were needed. You know, he talked about a ‘comfortable home’ and an ‘affordable home’. As important today as it was then – one of Menzies' greatest achievements was the increase in home ownership, and affordable home ownership. I think it went from around 40 per cent to around 70 per cent. We've slipped back a bit from there. We need to do better on that score. He talked about health services being accessible to all. Adequate health services. What's more important in regional parts of the country and remote parts of the country than ensuring we have accessible, adequate – indeed, better than adequate – health services accessible to all Australians?
He talked about having a stable job and good pay. Those who think that the Liberal Party aren’t interested in pay – we are. Because we know a job changes a life, and a wage changes a life and a family. I know Kelly O'Dwyer, my Minister for Industrial Relations, which we say proudly, is very keen on ensuring that people get good wages in this country, and that they have jobs. Menzies talked about employers and employees being on the same page. He talked about protecting Australia from ‘aggression’ – was the phrase they used back then. Having still been in the Second World War at the time that meant something real. We must continue to do the same thing today.
And he talked about the importance of freedoms. Of faith. Of religion. Of speech. Of association. That's a great place to start a party, I reckon, and it's a great place to continue to run a party from.
So, in coming here today, a new generation of Liberal leaders are embracing all of those beliefs. They remain as relevant today as when he first said them. This is what Robert Menzies said, though, as they broke up that meeting in Albury, he said this – I'm sorry I have to write these down – Josh has a much better memory than me. I wasn't very good at remembering verses at Sunday school either, but Jenny was a cracker. She used to sing them, too. I don't think she's going to do that today... [LAUGHS] I'll be in trouble... Robert Menzies said this in Albury: "No party seizes the imagination of the people unless the people know the party stands for certain things. And we'll fight for those things until the bell rings." Well, we're here today to affirm ourselves to those beliefs that I've just outlined, and pledge ourselves to them until the bell rings. Until the bell rings. Just like Robert Menzies did, and his team, and they went on to do great things for Australia.
Let's fast-forward to now. As we go forward as a party, under a new generation of leadership. In just 24 hours’ time, tomorrow, we will mark five years since the Coalition Government – the Liberal and National parties – formed government. Tony Abbott led us back into government after those six years of the Rudd/Gillard/Rudd Labor administration. I pay my respects and my honour to Tony for what was a Herculean task, to take our party from opposition back into government. Over the last five years, both under Tony's leadership and under Malcolm Turnbull's leadership – who I also pay respect and honour to today for his three years of service, of service to his country – over those five years, we've been doing what we said we would do at that election. We said we'd stop the boats, and we did. We said we'd get rid of the carbon tax, and we did. We said we would repair the budget that had been put into recklessness and mismanagement by the Labor Party, and we have been. We said we would create a million jobs within five years, and we have. Including 95,500 jobs for young people in the last financial year – 2017-18 – more than half of them full-time jobs, the single largest growth in youth employment in 30 years. Nothing, as these guys know, gets me more fired up than seeing a young person get a job. Because I know from when I was Social Services Minister, if you get a young person into a job and not on welfare, by the time they're about 22 to 24, you save them from a life on welfare. That's generational change. And particularly in Indigenous and remote communities, the impact is even greater.
Creating jobs is the best job there is, isn't it, Kelly? It's the best job there is as a politician, to see Australians get into work. And that's what we've been about. We've opened up new markets, new trade. I was up with the President Widodo on the weekend, and we'll finalise that most recent agreement to add to the work that was done under Tony and Malcolm, whether it was on the China Free Trade Agreement, and Simon's here carrying on that work. Or the Japan free trade agreement. I spoke to Prime Minister Abe last night, and we're continuing that relationship. Whether it's the work we've done with Korea, the work we're doing in the Pacific, opening up new markets, backing small businesses and medium-sized businesses. The biggest changes to taxation arrangements for small and medium-sized businesses in decades. Backing small business to create jobs.
We've been meeting our emissions reduction targets in a canter. We smashed the Kyoto 1 and 2 and, I believe, we'll absolutely be able to deal with our present target out to 2030 with no impact on electricity prices at all. That's why we're focusing on getting electricity prices down – simply by the key measures that relate to how energy is priced, how energy is delivered, and how the regulations protect those – us as Australians from the companies who can sometimes take a bit of a loan of us.
So we are making progress. Infrastructure. Nation-building and congestion-busting. Our Defence Forces back up on its way to 2 per cent of expenditure, as a share of our economy. Rebuilding. Rebuilding. But you know what, that's an impressive list of achievements, and it's a list that we will continue on.
But that's the "what?" Australians are asking me and my team more questions about the "why?" Between now and the next election, you will hear a lot of promises. You know that. You've heard politicians make promises for decades. You'll make up your mind about whether you believe those promises or not. But I'd give you two suggestions about how you can weigh them up. Can they pay for them? If you don't have a strong economy, it's not worth the paper it's printed on. A strong economy enables everything else to happen. And the other thing is – do you trust them that they believe it? You assess that based on their own beliefs.
Because you know, when it gets tough – I remember when we were stopping the boats and there were some tough days in that process. Now, you're only going to do that if you really believed it. Because there were some hard choices, and heavy burdens that you had to carry. And it's the same in putting a budget back together, and the difficult choices. When it's just you and your Cabinet or your other colleagues sitting a in a room, there’s no cameras, there’s no one else, and you’ve got to make those calls – what is going to make sure you deliver is whether you really believed it in the first place.
So it's about the "why?" and I want to tell you about my "why?" Like Menzies, no to-do list today. This is my why. These are the things that I believe in. I believe in a fair go for those who have a go in this country. I think that's what fairness means in this country. It's not about everybody getting the same thing. If you put in, you get to take out, and you get to keep more of what you earn. That doesn't matter what your level of ability is.
The reason I was in Yunkar yesterday up in Brisbane with young, disabled Australians who are an inspiration, because they're having a go. They wanted to live on their own. They wanted to be in their own accommodation, living together, having the same choices as other young Australians. They're having a go and they're getting a go. If you're running a small business, you want to have a go? You should get a go. That’s why I think your taxes should be lower, if you’re running a small or medium-sized business, and that’s what I’ve delivered. A fair go for those who have a go.
Secondly, we've got to look after our mates. That's what I believe. Every Australian matters, and that's why we have a safety net in this country – to protect people – but it works as a trampoline, not as a snare. The best form of welfare is a job. And our safety net – our social safety net – enables people either to bounce back up and to get back up on their feet, or it provides them with that place of comfort and support that they need during challenging times in their lives. As Australians, we look after our mates. If you're wondering, perhaps in the future, "What's the Prime Minister going to do when he comes to thinking about the social safety net? About Medicare and things like that?" Remember, my value is: we look after our mates.
As Australians, our goal is to make a contribution, not to seek one. It doesn't matter what walk of life you're in. We always want to look in our community – and this room is full of people who always make that choice – wanting to make a contribution rather than take one. See where they can contribute rather than whether they can take out. That is what creates a noble society. That's what creates a growing and benevolent society. A caring society. Always looking to see where you can make the difference.
Here's a key one for me. I think this is where there's a key difference between us and the Labor Party today. Particularly today. I don't believe that for you to do better, that you have to do worse. I don't think you need to be taxed more for you to be taxed less. I don't think that, for someone to get ahead in life, you've got to pull others down. I believe that we should be trying to lift everybody up at once. That we get away from this politics of envy.
I know things are tough for Australians right across the country. Some are doing well. I've been in drought-stricken areas and I know how tough they're doing it, I'll talk about that in a few minutes' time. But we don't get anywhere by trying to say, "Well, it's all their fault, it’s their fault..." "We bring them down, I can go up." That's not fairness in Australia. That's just ugly envy. And I have no truck with that whatsoever. I want to see all Australians succeed, and none at the expense of another. That's an important value.
Now the touchstones that I have as a Prime Minister will be these, and I'll be laying these out in more direct presentations over the next few months. I want an even stronger Australia based on the values. We are a strong country. We are one of the most – if not the most – remarkable country on earth, and we are all privileged to be here. We celebrate it all the time.
But we can be even stronger if we adhere to these values. We'll be a stronger Australia on the basis of my plan, which is about keeping our economy strong so we can guarantee the essentials that Australians rely on - the services, the Medicare. On the weekend, we announced a new drug under the PBS. A drug for cystic fibrosis which will extend the life of Australians by 20 years. We were all thrilled when John (Millman) won the tennis, but I tell you what – the thing that makes me a passionate Australian is when I know that we can list a drug that does that. We can do that because we have a strong economy. We can do that because we're a generous society. Our kids are growing up in a country where that happens. That's something you can celebrate on Australia Day every time. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. The pension. The Disability Support Pension. The National Disability Insurance Scheme. All of these things are made possible because of the sweat and the work of Australians who create a strong economy that make all that possible.
That's why we keep Australia strong and we keep our economy strong. You can't take it for granted, can you, Josh? 3.4% growth through the year. He's only been Treasurer for two weeks and he's already smashed my growth records. [LAUGHS] I know Mathias would have a lot to do with that. That's the consistency. Unemployment coming down. Youth unemployment down to 11.1% – the best in five years. That's – they’re great numbers, but it's what it enables us to do which is important.
In regional Australia, keeping the economy strong. Let's talk about the drought for a sec. I've been out in those drought-affected areas and I have been listening, and we have Major General Stephen Day out there doing the same thing, coordinating our response. I've been talking to the Premiers. And of course we've got Barnaby Joyce out there as a special envoy as well, working with the other ministers, listening hard. It's a big task. There are all levels – different levels of support, whether it's the feed, whether it's the farm household assistance, and making sure a form that takes seven hours to fill out – which is not good enough, it should take a tenth of that – that that can get the support where it's needed, that the water turns up where it needs to. It's a big mobilising effort, and we're on the task.
But the one thing we need to remember is keeping those towns alive. It's great to see it raining here in Albury today. I pray for that rain everywhere else around the country. And I do pray for that rain. I'd encourage other – others who believe in the power of prayer to pray for that rain and to pray for our farmers. Please do that. To everyone else who doesn't like to do that, you just say, "Good on you, guys,” and “You, you go well." And think good thoughts for them. Or whatever you do. But putting the money into the towns – $1 million for every shire that's out there – to keep the money flowing in the towns, keeping those towns alive. We can't make it rain, but we can keep those economies going until it does. Because what really thrilled me when I went to Quilpie was this – I didn't find despair, I found hope. They've been going through the drought for six years. I found young families with kids, little dogs running around, kids going to school... I found hope. They showed me a photo of the pasture which had grass up to here 2 and a half years ago. They said, "We know this – we know this place can work. We've just got to get ourselves to that point, and we thank Australians for backing us in." But let's not think of those who are going through there, only having, dealing with despair, and I know many are, and that's why we've got the mental health counsellors out there. But let's get give them hope as well, and let's encourage them in how they think about hope.
The second one is we're going to keep Australians safe. Our government can always – a Liberal National Government, a Coalition Government – can always be counted on when it comes to national security. I've already talked about the achievements of our Government and how we're continuing to work in areas of cybersecurity to keep our kids safe from predators and the work that's done by the team, and I commend Peter Dutton for the work that he's been doing, particularly. You all know about stopping boats and things like that, which I know a bit about too. But one of the things that Peter has done and been passionate about is making sure our kids are safe from predators, and kicking those out of this – kicking those people out of this country who would be predators against them. They’re the people we've got to keep an eye on. So, keeping Australians safe is important. But there's one great principle that John Howard, I think, put it best in Sydney many years ago: "Our sovereignty in keeping Australians safe is critical,” and that means – we decide. We decide, as he said, who comes to the country. But we decide the things of national security that determine our future. That's very much a key direction from my government.
And thirdly, we want to keep Australians together. I don't want to set Australians against each other. I want to bring them together. I'm bringing my party together around the values and the beliefs that I've outlined to you today. Beliefs I hold. You know, values are things politicians talk about. Beliefs are things that, you know, you and I talk about. You talk about what you believe to your kids. You talk about what you believe as a community. And keeping Australians together to ensure that we respect our senior Australians so they have dignity in those years, that we respect our young Australians by listening to them about their hopes for the future and their concerns for the future.
Where it's environment issues in particular, my ears are very alert. The War On Waste – yes, I have seen it, on ABC – the War On Waste. I get it. That's what's focusing and concerning them, so that means it matters to me too. That's how you bring Australians together. You take all of their concerns seriously, and you work with all of them, and you listen to them. That's why, coming back to those fundamental freedoms of the individual, of their faith, of their association, of their right to free speech and all of these things are so critical. Because you know, I'll finish where I started – I'll finish where Menzies started. It all starts with the individual. I love Australia. Who loves Australia? Everyone. We all love Australia. Of course we do. But do we love all Australians? That's a different question, isn't it? Do we love all Australians? We've got to. That's what brings a country together. You love all Australians if you love Australia. Whether they've become an Australian by birth 10 generations ago, when my ancestors came – not by choice, but in chains, rocked up in 1788 – they did alright. Or if you came last week. If you've chosen to be here in this country, that's even more special, in some ways, isn't it? Mathias knows that.
Let's love all Australians. Let's love this wonderful country. That's what I believe. That's what you can expect from me. That's what you can demand from me. That's what you can hold me to account for and all of my team. So we're just going to get on with it. Thank you very much for your attention.
&nbsp;


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:03): I rise, on indulgence, to acknowledge the recent passing of United States Senator John McCain. It is not the usual thing in this House to express condolences for overseas politicians who are not the heads of governments or heads of state, but I think all in this House would agree that Senator John McCain is a worthy exception. We honour him in this House today because of his service to the United States and his service to this country as well, through his friendship.
From Prime Ministers Hawke to Turnbull, John McCain was a steadfast friend who understood that our alliance is a reflection of two similar peoples. As he put it, we are both societies of immigrants and pioneers:
… who put our faith in the rule of law, and who believe that our destinies are inseparable from the character of the broader world order.

His understanding of our Australian character was something passed on to him by his own family's service. His grandfather, the first John Sidney McCain, first came to Australia aboard the Great White Fleet in 1908 and later commanded US air forces in Australia's defence during World War II. His father was a submarine captain based in Perth during the Pacific War, and later, as Admiral McCain, he became Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Command, during the Vietnam War. In time, Senator McCain's own sons, Jack and Jimmy, would serve alongside Australia's soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan.
At the Naval Academy, Senator McCain, the son and grandson of two admirals, came 894th out of a class of 899, but that's not where his distinction would be recorded. That would occur in Vietnam. The sailor became an aviator and, on his 23rd mission, his plane was shot down over Hanoi. As we all know, John McCain was injured in the crash and captured by the enemy. Vietnamese medical treatment of POWs was rudimentary at best. As the son of an admiral, he was offered repatriation and he declined because the honour code demanded that any repatriation be first given to POWs who had been in captivity the longest—character. During the ensuing 5½ years, John McCain would withstand torture, years of solitary confinement and was tested to the point where eventually he would say, 'Every man has his breaking point.' What kept him going during these darkest times, in his own words, was: 'Faith in God, faith in fellow prisoners and faith in country.'
Somehow in a hell hole, John McCain became stronger. He learned to rise above the times. He took that strength and perspective into politics. He was elected to the US Senate six times and was, in 2008, the Republican nominee for President of the United States. I had the great privilege, as members of this place did recently, to meet him in person, and it was a great honour for all of us. And though he always talked straight, even at the end he did so also. He left an admonition I think to politicians all over the world—in his own country but also here in this country. He said:
We argue and compete and sometimes even vilify each other in our raucous public debates. But we have always had so much more in common with each other than in disagreement. If only we remember that and give each other the benefit of the presumption that we all love our country we will get through these challenging times.

There is grace in his words and a lesson for all of us. On behalf of this House and our nation, I extend our deepest condolences to Senator McCain's wife, Cindy, his family and the American people he served so magnificently. May he rest in peace. God bless.


Prime Minister
Photo:&nbsp;AAP Image/David Crosling
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much Paul and congratulations to you on your incredible work as editor at the Australian and I wish you all the very best for your new role at Sky. Can I welcome the great and the good of the economics and publishing community here and can I, well I can say this about the former Treasurer Peter Costello, as he is part as one of the great media chairs in the country these days. But can I particularly acknowledge Peter Costello in the room, the greatest treasurer Australia has ever had, ever had, there is no doubt about that. Angus Taylor is here, one of my colleagues as well. And I want to thank all of you who have come here for what is a landmark event. I’m always very pleased to participate and have been doing so for many years. So I want to thank the Australian and the Melbourne Institute for the invitation to be here today and I want to congratulate the organisers once again on this Conference.
Now the central theme of this Conference has always been about the balance between economic growth and social equity in Australia. And the Conference is a chance to take stock of what I would like to call the modern Australian Compact – a compact that supports enterprise, that supports growth, that supports fairness and social cohesion across our nation. It’s the compact in Australia, a very Australian compact, that makes us, I think different, from so much of the rest of the developed world.
What lies at the heart of this compact? Well you’ve heard me say it, I suspect, a few times, not only over the last seven weeks, but longer than that as Treasurer. A fair go for those who have a go, looking after your mates and leaving no one behind. It is a two-way compact, as it should be. &nbsp;Rights and responsibilities.&nbsp; Give as well as take. A focus on making a contribution rather than taking one. This is the promise that we all make as Australians and that we seek to keep as Australians.
Yet to fulfil this promise, we must never lose sight of this most basic truth. Without a culture of enterprise and growing our economy – without a strong economy that supports jobs, fairness and communities – social equity is a mirage. It is prosperity that pays for our social safety net, not sentiment. It thus falls to each and every generation of business, of citizens, of politicians, of indeed broadcasters and journalists and those involved in public commentary, each generation to stoke the fires of enterprise and growth in Australia if we are to remain both a prosperous economy and a fair society.
That is why today I am announcing a further step forward in the Government’s, our Government’s Enterprise and Growth Plan for Australia, that I first spoke of three years ago in my first Budget. A plan to give greater incentive to small and medium-sized businesses to invest and employ Australians by dramatically accelerating the tax cuts that we have already legislated for small and medium sized businesses. We are going to help our job-producing small and family businesses grow even faster, with major tax cuts for Australia’s millions of small business people.
Australia’s economy is growing, our Budget position is getting stronger and stronger. Because of our economic management, and because of that we can provide further and major tax relief to the more than 3 million small and family businesses around this country who employ more than 7 million Australians, which is more than half the workforce in Australia today. More than half the people who work for a living in this country today work for a business that has a turnover of less than $50 million, and if you go beyond Melbourne and Sydney, south east Queensland or Perth, you go out in the regions. It’s pretty much everybody, it’s pretty much everybody who is working in those businesses that will be the beneficiaries of our plan.
So if you are running a hairdressing salon, or a cleaning business, or a plumbing business, like Warren down in the Shire, who does our plumbing. I remember when Jenny, when we went on ACA, Jenny said she wishes I was a plumber. And I saw Warren down at Cronulla Mall and he said; “Mate, ScoMo, Jenny likes plumbers.” A very Shire thing. G’day Warren.
Or a news agency, or a coffee shop, a dry cleaners, any of these things. This is good news for you and anyone you’ve been able to create a job for in your business. If you are a mum or dad running a home-based business, this is fuel in your tank for your business that you’ve been waiting for and wanting. Your small businesses, if you run a business that has a turnover of less than $50 million, you will be moving to a tax rate of 25 per cent within the next three years.
That’s right, we are going to bring forward the scheduled reduction in tax rates to 25 per cent for small and family businesses up to $50 million in turnover forward by five years to 2021-22, with the first rate cut to 26 per cent to be done in 2020-21. And we will start this process next week. We will be bringing in the legislation next week to make those accelerated tax cuts for small and family businesses law in this country.
So there will be a clear choice, as Paul said, at the next election. Lower taxes for small and family businesses under our Government, or Labor’s promise for higher taxes for small and family businesses. Because they have already said they will reverse the legislation that would have small businesses - the smallest businesses in the country - a reduction of their tax rate to 25 per cent, they have already said they will change that law if they are elected. And now I can only assume that they would seek to change these laws that we are now seeking to legislate to ensure that within the next term of Parliament, by the end of that term of Parliament, these businesses under our laws will be at 25 per cent. Under Labor, they will be at 27.5 per cent.
Now our tax changes are paid for by not proceeding with the tax cuts for large businesses. As you know, we sought to put those through the Parliament and they were rejected ultimately by the Senate, and I don’t think anyone can accuse us of not having exhausted every opportunity to pursue those. Parliament has had their say, and we have decided to move forward to ensure that the benefits of that plan are now completely focused on small and medium sized businesses around the country. It is also not done as a result at any risk or any threat to the&nbsp;return to balance year which is projected for 2019-20, and we will be able to continue to meet that objective on the estimates as they’re currently presented.
Our Government is unashamedly on the side of the women and men who run small and medium sized businesses in this country. &nbsp;And we’re on the side of the millions of people they employ. These Australians tend not to obsess about politics. You won’t find people out there wearing t-shirts calling for lower taxes for small and medium sized businesses, in orange t-shirts or green t-shirts. They won’t be walking around with placards and they won’t be belting down the doors of politicians. They won’t be hassling editors, they won’t be writing op-eds. You know why? They’re pretty busy. Their days are already pretty full – balancing the books, paying taxes, investing in their future, playing by the rules, caring for their families, giving back to their communities and their country. That’s why it’s for our Government to stand up for them and to listen to them and to understand what the challenges are they face. This isn’t a response to advocacy. This is the action of belief and conviction of a Government that believes that small and family businesses and medium sized businesses are the hope of the side, and so we’re backing them in. We’ve been saying that as a Government consistently from the day we were elected. We are backing them in because they are the foundation of this Australian Compact for prosperity and fairness that we believe in.
Let me talk a bit more about the foundations of our national compact. I want defend it today from its opponents who are increasingly filling the benches of those who represent the Labor Party in the federal Parliament. Now this compact, this modern Australian Compact arose from a shared recognition by many people from across the political spectrum some 40 or so years ago. After years of economic underperformance, a generation of Australian leaders from different walks of life came to appreciate that we could only aspire to be a good and compassionate society with a stronger, more competitive Australian economy. Now some came to this view from a liberal perspective, and Peter Costello has been the greatest champion of that view on our side of politics. Our Government at that time under the Howard Government, moving forward to achieve things in this area like few other before it. Some came to that view from different points of political perspective. And they converged on the need for modernising reforms to liberalise our economy, open it to the world and make it more productive. Under the Keating reforms, that occurred and there was a consensus. Because when the Labor Party under Bob Hawke and Paul Keating were reforming our economy, you know who was voting for those reforms alongside them? John Howard and Peter Costello. Backing in those reforms. I can’t say the favour was always returned Peter, when you were moving some of the reforms when you came to Government as well. But you could at least say that there had been some consensus that enabled the economy to modernise and to go through rather significant reform. It led to an era of reform, and they agreed that advancing equity and fairness was best achieved off the back of a growing economy where businesses thrive, where Australians are in work, and our national income rises. Where those who have a go are rewarded. Where opportunities are created for individual initiative and enterprise.
Yes, people differed – sometimes fiercely – over policies. &nbsp;But the mindset was not that different; the direction of travel largely agreed. From Bob Hawke to John Howard, Bill Kelty to Hugh Morgan, if you cared about prosperity and fairness in Australia, you cared and were committed to growing our economy. And how did you nurture that growth? You nurtured it by fostering a vibrant, productive, free enterprise system. The private sector employs eight in ten Australians. To be strong and sustainable, our social compact demands a vibrant, productive, free enterprise system. From this mindset arose the foresight and determination to pursue bold economic reforms, the fruits of which help to sustain the Australian Compact to this day.
Now our Government has served that legacy and acted in accordance with that legacy over the last five years. We have continued the strong, long running economic growth now in its 27th year, a world record. More than a million jobs created in five years as we promised, and before time. The lowest percentage of working age Australians on welfare in 25 years and more. The protection and maintenance of our AAA credit rating under some if its greatest threats, particularly on the other side of the mining investment boom that ripped $80 billion out of the Australian economy. Record investments in health, education and infrastructure, the essential services Australians rely on supported by a strong economy. A progressive tax system where the top 10 per cent of taxpayers are paying almost half of personal income tax and the bottom 50 per cent of taxpayers pay around 12 per cent. The bottom 10 per cent of households by income achieving the highest income growth of any group since the Global Financial Crisis. A tax-transfer system that reduces income inequality in Australia by more than 40 per cent according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics. A social security system that targets benefits to the poor more than in any other high-income country according to Peter Whiteford from the ANU. A decline in what the HILDA research calls ‘relative poverty’ from 13 per cent in 2007 to 9.4 per in 2016. And we are doing this far better than many of our other friends in other developed nations.
The lesson of the Australian Compact is that you don’t reduce poverty by bringing people down, you do it by lifting others up. The recent Productivity Commission report tells us that unlike our friends in the United States, real incomes in Australia have risen strongly across all income deciles over the last 30 years. In Australia, disposable income per capita has increased by an average of 1.6 per cent a year since the 1980s. That compares with 1.0 per cent in the United Kingdom and just 0.7 per cent in the United States. Now should we aspire to do better? &nbsp;Of course we should – and we are, and we will continue to. But the evidence says our Australian Compact is delivering for Australians of all incomes.
Now those who claim the Australian Compact is broken are not just wrong on the evidence. They like to trash talk deliberately, irresponsibly, and cynically, casting a pall over the future aspirations we have as a nation. They do so because they want conflict. They want to divide Australia. They want to turn every single issue into us and them, winners and losers, for their own political advantage, to push their own ideology, and to push their own barrow. They have forgotten that our compact and our social fabric is a shared one. They tear down one part of it, and they weaken us all. For short-term political purposes they seek to take us down the path of other countries where citizen is set against citizen, and where the bonds of our shared endeavour would begin to corrode.
What’s become clear is that today’s Labor Party under Bill Shorten no longer sees economic policy like the Labor Party used to. They are no longer fellow travelers, I believe, on this modern Australian Compact that began roughly 40 years ago. They no longer see this as a project they are willing to stand by. In fact, they are willing to tear it down. They have discarded the mindset of Bob Hawke, and they have embraced Bill Shorten’s politics of envy, and you know hypocrisy is not far behind. In this vein, he and Labor now says millions of workers are ‘ensnared’ by workplace laws that were written by Labor, and him in particular. The trade agreements that were endorsed by Labor as the enemy of workers. The problem with Labor’s modern view of fairness is that it begins and ends and deals only with issues of redistribution. Carving up that under Labor and those mindsets and those policies will only ever be a diminishing pie - less for everybody is the product of that thinking.
For the Coalition - and the Australian people in my experience - fairness has a broader meaning and a more ambitious aspiration. It encompasses redistribution and help for those in need, and of course that’s true. But fairness also embraces reward for effort and responsibility to have a go and be given a go. It encompasses those who need a helping hand as well as those who work hard, get up early, take risk and employ or support others.
The goal of Labor’s anti-business, union bred, union fed and union led anti-enterprise crusade is clear. It is to stoke resentment within our market economy and towards it, with those having a go in business and with our free enterprise system itself. You know you can't lead a country that you want to divide, where you want to drive a wedge between employers and employees. Where you want to drive a wedge between parents who want to send their kids to one school and parents who want to send them to another. You can’t lead a country if you want to divide it. And that’s why under our Government, we want to keep Australians together, and we want economic plans that keep Australians together. None of this bodes well under Labor’s plan for middle Australia, for low income workers and those who rely on our social compact to get by. Because when you put growth at risk - this is the real kicker - the most vulnerable to what our opponents put forward as the alternative approach are the low and middle-income earners who have a higher chance of losing their jobs when growth slows. They are the victims, yet Labor claims they are their purpose. It is a bitter irony, and a costly one for those Australians.
The Coalition Government is determined to champion and strengthen this compact. We believe that only by maintaining a strong and growing economy with thriving businesses can we aspire to be a fair society. We believe for someone to do better in Australia, someone else does not have to do worse. You don’t have to tax some people more to tax some people less. We don’t believe that. We want to lift everybody up. We believe the best form of welfare is a job. We believe our safety net should work like a trampoline not a snare, bouncing people back up. We believe in Australians keeping more of what they earn, so families can get ahead and can plan for the future with confidence.
That’s why in this year’s Budget, we announced one of the biggest personal income tax plan reforms we have seen in generations, completely removing a tier of the tax system. And yes, we did it over seven years, you’ve got to do it responsibly, you can’t do it all at once. But people should know where their Government is going, they should know what the plan is. Our plan is you get to keep more of what you earn. When you put more in, you have the opportunity to keep more of that, and under our plan 94 per cent of workers will pay no more than 32.5 cents in the dollar on the extra income they earn. We believe in that.
The Government legislated tax cuts which we have put through, which Labor will cut in half, provide I think the guarantee that Australians are looking for from their Government that it’s worth putting the effort in. And we’re seeing the response. We’re seeing businesses respond, we’re seeing the jobs created. We’ve seen over 100,000 jobs in the last fiscal year created for young people in Australia. That is the strongest year of youth employment growth in Australia’s economic history, and I know as a former Social Services Minister, if you get a young person into a job by the time they’re about 24, their chances of living the rest of their lives on welfare radically diminishes. But if you fail, the chances of them being on welfare for the rest of their life goes through the roof. Getting young people in jobs is a game changer for our nation, and our Government is delivering that. Of all the things we’ve done over the last five years, I can’t nominate one greater than that. And you know who made that happen? Small and family businesses. The look in the eye of a small business owner who employs that young person that they know in their community, whether it is down in Burney or up in Townsville or wherever it is. The sense of pride that a small and family business owner has when they employ a young person and then several years later they’re at their 21st or maybe at their wedding or then they’re at their christening or Bat Mitzvah or whatever it happens to be. That’s what family business is all about, and they are revved up and wanting to put young people in jobs.
So we’ll continue to back them with our tax cuts, which I’ve already referred to. We’ve already lifted the definition of a small business from $2 billion to $10 billion, which gives them access to a whole raft of small business concessions to make not only their paperwork lighter but their interaction and their cash flow much more flexible. We’ve made changes to the consumer and competition law to put them on a level playing field, we’ve introduced the Australian Financial Complaints Authority. We’re tackling anti-phoenixing behaviour for small and family business to help them get ahead. We’ve extended the instant asset write-off which is enabling them to invest more. And when you’re cutting their taxes, and they can invest more in their business, and they can write these things off immediately as well, you’re allowing them to get ahead.
When it comes to the future of the economy, there really are two alternative visions. Our proven policies that have delivered jobs, investment and opportunity, or Labor’s radically different path. It never used to be that radically different, but there is a big difference now. Under our Government, we have kept real expenditure growth in check at 1.9 per cent, less than 2 per cent. That’s the lowest level of expenditure in half a century. Our responsible budget management has resulted in the smallest deficit in ten years and it is moving towards a balanced Budget in 2019-20. Indeed, the release of the Monthly Financial Statements just for July and August today point to a further strengthening of our Budget position. While this is a very early read, as Peter knows who would have seen these figures come through, the underlying cash deficit is $6.6 billion better than where it was estimated to be at by now in the Budget and our expenditure is lower than expected – and receipts are $4.2 billion higher resulting from a better performing economy – with more company and personal tax receipts.
The foundations of our fiscal strategy and success are keeping expenditure under control and keeping taxes under control, because that is what drives the economic growth that’s what’s supporting our revenue growth. Labor’s plan is to walk away from controlling expenditure and jack up taxes. Labor’s five point plan, as I said on the weekend - more tax, more tax, more tax, more tax and more tax. That’s Labor’s five point plan, and that plan will throw a wet blanket on the Australian economy. It’ll slowing growth and the growth that produces the revenue that pays for the services and essential services Australians rely on.
Now they say when they announce all their expenditure that it’s being funded by savings. Savings, they say. But they’re not savings. They’re tax increases. Tax increases are not savings. Well I suppose they are in one sense, because if you’re going to fund your Budget by higher taxes, what you’re telling Australian families to do and Australian businesses to do is they’ve got to make the savings in their budgets to pay the higher taxes. So Labor won’t control their own expenditure. So they say to every small and family business, they say to every retiree counting on the imputation credits, they say to every small business that will be paying higher levels of tax, they say, “You make the cuts in your budgets, you make the changes to your expenditure, because we couldn’t be bothered and we can’t control expenditure. So we’re just going to tax you more, and we’re going to outsource the savings target to your budget, to your family, to your business, to your retirement.”
Under Labor the Macquarie dictionary will have a new definition. Savings: taking someone else’s money and using it for yourself. That’s would be their definition. Even nine months out we know there is more than $200 billion in higher taxes. Taxes on housing, taxes on savings, taxes on earnings, taxes on business, taxes on investment. All slowing our economy down. So when you hear the shiny promises - $10 billion for this, $5 billion for this, $100 million for this. Every single one of those announcements are dependent on a higher tax, and you’ll pay for it. You'll pay for it twice, actually. You’ll pay for it in higher taxes, and you’ll pay for it in the slower growth that produces the slower economy that your job and your business depends on.
The best way we can continue to build a stronger economy is to support that Australian Compact that I have talked about. And I must say that this Conference has actually championed over a long period of time, and I’ve got to say Paul that the Australian has championed over a very long period of time. To support an Australian Compact that honours the hard work and efforts of its people. I was talking to the Irish Prime Minister the other morning, we caught up. And his party is known as the party who supports people who get up early. I felt a real affinity with that as a party, as a political movement in this country. And you know it’s not just the people who get up early to go to work, but it’s also the carer who gets up early to look after a parent, or a sibling, or to do the many other important jobs that are done around our society. Because that’s what this compact is about. It’s the connection between these two, and that’s what we passionately believe in.
It encourages and rewards those who work hard. It gives a hand up to those who need help. And we believe that prosperity and fairness are not mutually exclusive, they’re not an invitation for division or warfare and phony class warfare for that matter. Rather, prosperity is the foundation of fairness and the stronger Australia that our Government is looking to lead and to drive into the future.
We believe, I believe, our Government believes in the economics of opportunity. Bill Shorten believes in the politics of envy.
Thank you.
&nbsp;


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:01): On indulgence, I rise today to remember an Australian tragedy and to remember those who were lost. On this day 48 years ago, Australians watched in horror as the West Gate Bridge collapsed during construction. It's not a particular anniversary this year, just like it's the 16th anniversary this year since the terrible Bali bombings that were commemorated just a few days ago. But, whether it's the 48th or the 16th or the 35th or the 55th, each time this date and this period is marked it's a chilling reminder and a terrible time of sadness for all of those who are touched personally by these tragic incidents.
On that day, Australians watched in horror as the West Gate Bridge collapsed during construction. Most of us who sit in this chamber would have been small children. Some would not have been born. But Australians around the country on that day watched in horror and 35 men needlessly lost their lives. Just before midday, on what should have been just another ordinary working day, 2,000 tonnes of steel and concrete crashed to the ground and the waters below. Thirty-five working men, many of them migrants who had come to Australia seeking a better life, were killed and lost. Kids lost their dads, wives lost their husbands, parents lost their sons and family members lost their brothers, and many, many more were seriously injured. Miraculously, 18 men escaped the carnage and, on that day, these survivors would be the first responders, doing what they could do to save their mates. It was a day that should never be forgotten, and it's not been forgotten today. I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition writing to me about this anniversary and suggesting us doing this here today together.
Mostly, when these things happen we call them accidents—a chance of fate—but that wasn't the case on this day. The collapse of the West Gate Bridge was not an accident; nor was it a chance of fate. As the royal commission found, the collapse was as a result of man-made errors—error upon error, mistakes compounded by efforts to rectify them, and all occurring within a confrontational culture marked by distrust, division and demarcation. Thankfully, much has changed since the 1970s and, of course, our workplaces are much safer today than they were almost half a century ago. Tougher laws have been introduced and workers have been given more of a say, as they should, about safety on the job. Safety is now something everyone is responsible for right across the organisation. We achieve so much more in our workplaces and, indeed, in a country where we work together and we look out for each other, whatever our role is within an organisation. As the report of the Royal Commission into the Failure of West Gate Bridge said:
It is widely accepted that the essential requirements for good labour relations are mutual trust, confidence and respect as between management, trade unions and men. Once this relationship is established, all concerned will work as a team and first-class production can be achieved. Without it, little if any progress can be made.

As a lesson for today, the mistakes that are made are not supposed to bind us forever; they're supposed to guide us into our future. On this 48th anniversary, we remember the lessons of those times and we remember the 35 men who needlessly perished and their families, who have lived with this every day from then till now and will into the future. Today, tens of thousands of vehicles will pass across the West Gate Bridge. Its flags will be lowered in an act of remembrance. Families, friends and former workmates will gather at the site of the collapse, as they do every year, to remember the loved ones they have lost. It's only appropriate for us here today to pause here in the nation's parliament to remember the lessons of that day so that they might shine a path forward for all of us. May the 35 souls lost at the West Gate Bridge rest in peace and may God bless their families.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:00): I rise, on indulgence, to acknowledge the passing of Ian Kiernan AO. We learnt of his death earlier today. His untimely death is a reminder that being a great Australian is within the grasp of every citizen of this country; you just have to be willing to have a go. Ian's approach was always to empower others. When he founded a movement first to clean up Australia and then to clean up the world, he sought not to attract followers but to produce leaders. Whether it was cleaning up beaches, parks and waterways, or planting trees, or conserving water, Ian's ultimate mobilisation of 30 million people in around a hundred countries was never about him. It was about empowering others to take action. As I said this morning, he observed the beauty of the land and the planet on which he lived and he tapped us all on the shoulder and he said: 'We've got to take care of this. It's our responsibility—each and every single one of us.' He did it by igniting that spark of personal responsibility in those supporters and volunteers who rose to the cause or, indeed, led that cause. 'You know best,' he would say.
Ian Bruce Carrick Kiernan was born near Sydney Harbour, which he loved, in 1940 to British migrants George and Leslie. As a builder, renovator and investor, he accrued a prodigious property portfolio, only to see it go belly up in the recession of '74. After that, he said he would do what any self-respecting young builder who sailed boats would do. 'I got on my yacht,' he said, 'and visited 36 of the most beautiful islands that I could find—Tahiti, Hawaii.' And he did it all in one year. But with the postcard imagery that had attracted him came an ugly awakening. It was while he was moored in Hawaii that an overnight downpour pushed a mountain of rubbish down from the local ravines, dumping it in the harbour. Ian surveyed the unsightly mass and instantly felt a twinge of new opportunity, of the difference he could make. However, it would be some years later, after he set an Australian solo world sailing record of 156 days in the 1986-87 BOC Challenge, that those feelings resurfaced into his life's mission. He later recalled seas that should have been magic and myth that were littered with rubbish:
First a rubber thong, then a toothpaste tube, a comb, a plastic bag … The rubbish popped up on both sides of the bow.

So Clean Up Australia Day began, as Clean Up Sydney Harbour Day, on Sunday, 8 January 1989.
The plan initially had been to contain the effort to Mosman's beaches, but Ian was the sort of guy with one eye always on the horizon, like a good sailor. One day he just said—and no offence to the member for Warringah, or indeed to the Speaker of the House for the language—'Bugger Mosman! Let's do the whole harbour.' And he did, with the help of an astonishing turnout of 40,000 Sydneysiders. It went national the next year. It also went gangbusters, bringing together 300,000 Australians to lend a hand.
On behalf of the government and this chamber, I extend our deepest condolences to Ian's family—to his wife, Judy; to his daughters, Sally and Pip; and to his son, Jack. Thank you, Ian Kiernan AO, for your service to our country and to our planet. May he rest in peace.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Lukas Coch
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you very much Fred for your introduction and what a marvellous evening looking out here. All these great minds, all dressed up to the nines, you look fantastic. It’s great to have you here, I’m pleased to see you getting a night out.
[Laughter]
Closeted away all day doing experiments, on the computers working through all the amazing things that you do, going into your own minds and coming out the other side, this is what fascinates me about science. You know, the person who most fascinated me about science was Captain Cook. Now, you might go: “Why Captain Cook?” Well, yes he was an amazing navigator and his voyages and discoveries are legendary, but when you read Cook’s journals and you read about him, you discover that he was actually a scientist. And that’s what he should be remembered for more than anything else; an inquiring mind, a mind that wanted to understand, a mind that wanted to pass on that knowledge, a mind that wanted to explore the boundaries. I don’t know if you know this, but James T Kirk from Star Trek was actually -
[Laughter]
I’m not kidding, Gene Roddenberry confirmed this - was modelled on James Cook. To go where no one had been before, that’s what you do. As scientist you go where we haven’t been before, you dare to imagine the things that others haven’t.
I have no doubt that as you do that, you think it might be there, you suspect it might be. You turn it into a theory, then you follow the rulebook, but it all begins with something you believe. Something you think is possible. And if you look at all the great minds over time, those in Australia, those down through the generations around the world, that is that I think has always really encapsured, the great magic of science, if you like. It starts with belief, it starts with passion.
The people in this room are pressing forward in ways that are making our country stronger. Making our society stronger. You’re keeping people healthier, stronger, safer. You’re making an extraordinary difference to the daily lives not only of Australians but people all around the world.
Now, it’s true I actually have a science degree –
[Applause]
It’s true. But I hate to disappoint you; it’s in Applied Science, Social Sciences and Economic Geography. But that said –
[Applause]
BSc Hons is what I used to put on the card many, many years ago and I’ve always felt like I should have changed it to something else because I never really thought of it in the same way as those of you here. But look, I was passionate and I was interested and I did believe and I did want to learn and did want to know. You know, today in Australia, our people are our best asset, that’s been true for a long time.&nbsp; We’re accepting, we adapt, we’re not very hierarchical in this country and we are inquisitive. And if we want to keep up the huge pace and scale of change in technology and industry that we’re seeing and in our society, we need people who know how to lead us there. There’s people in the room tonight as you’ve gathered together, who exemplify that.
We are in a new fourth revolution, industrial revolution. A revolution that reflects breakthroughs in every field of endeavour. In your daily work in genetics, in artificial intelligence and robotics, nanotechnology, 3 –D printing – this is all the sexy stuff -
[Laughter]
Biotechnology. But in so many other areas which is not so much, that doesn’t often get the headlines but is equally important and people are equally passionate about. We used to think of our assets as being just those in the ground and it was many years ago at the start of the gold rush that it was pretty straightforward to get to surface gold. All you needed was a pick and a shovel, a panning dish and then you could sift with a cradle. It was hard work but it was relatively simple. But with those sorts of tools, you couldn’t get to the good stuff buried deeper down, the stuff that was covered by the basalt in the old creek beds or the gold-bearing quartz in the cracks and the crevasses. That was much harder to get at and very lucrative too. To get that, you had to go below the surface and you had to go below the surface of your own imagination as well, because you needed technology and you needed skills. In Ballarat, they realised this, that they were lacking in the know-how. So they decided to do something about it, as Australians always have. So they set up the Ballarat School of Mines in 1870 and upon opening the school, its first President declared the “era of the cradle and the tin dish was over”, and it was “time for the calculating and inventive brain and cultivated intelligence to play their part.” That’s what he said. Those words ring as true today as they were said then. The new school trained people in science, maths, engineering, geology, mineralogy, chemistry and metallurgy. Many years later, one of the principals of that Ballarat School of Mines was someone called Charles Fenner. Now if that name seems familiar to you, it’s because he was the father of the late Frank Fenner, in whose name we honour the annual prize for Life Scientist of the Year, that we’re presenting later this evening. I want to acknowledge Frank’s daughter Marilyn Fenner who is in the audience tonight, no doubt you’ve heard the stories Marilyn. Today’s gold rush though is a technological one as well. Just like then, it’s massive and just as we did back then we need to sharpen our knowledge if we’re going to take advantage and not miss this huge moment in our history. We’ll need knowledge of science and our knowledge of maths, because maths is the language of science, it is. We’ve got a maths teacher out there.
[Laughter]
I was asked a question recently, who was one of the most formative people in my time at school and in my upbringing. Now if you look at me you’d probably think it was his rugby coach or someone like that. It wasn’t actually, it was my maths teacher, a guy called Mark Reed. He was also our year master and he instilled a passion in his students for how what he was teaching connected to broader life. He was also a mad punter, which I think explained his keen interest in maths. Nonetheless he took what he was passionate about – horse-racing and maths – and it made him an amazing teacher. We did a lot of work on probability theory.
[Laughter]
We actually did. Now, I’ve lost my place. Our STEM education though, on a more serious note, in science, technology engineering and maths, we did used to lead the world in this area. It’s been about 12 years now that we’ve been slipping back into the middle of the pack. It’s something we need to continue to do things about. But not just governments, all of us. I want to ask you something; do you think intermediate level maths should be a prerequisite for studying engineering at uni? You’d think so. I would think so. But do you know in this country, more than 40 per cent of unis will let you into engineering degrees without it? Only 14 per cent of universities require at least intermediate level maths for entry into a Bachelor of Science and only 13 per cent for entry into a Bachelor of Commerce.
I think that sort of says: “No, don’t worry, you’ll be right, just Google it.” Well that’s - I don’t Google the Budget, I can tell you that. Now, some may disagree.
[Laughter]
But I’ll disagree with you, mine adds up. There has been some positive change, notably from the University of Sydney, where they’re working to raise that bar again and good on you to the University of Sydney. It’s just a start, there’s a way to go and as Vice Chancellors come to see me, asking me their usual questions – I don’t have to give you a guess about what it is, though it does relate to budgets, - I’m going to ask them what are your prerequisites for science and engineering courses when it comes to maths? Is it any wonder that there’s been a sharp decline in the number of Year 12 students choosing advanced maths subjects, when that’s the message they’re getting? Why would you bother putting yourself though all that mental challenge of difficult subjects, getting Bs and Cs instead of As, when all the signs point to it not being necessary? Universities and schools need to send that message about maths and science, to young people. It’s particularly important for female students, who according to the statistics are currently much less likely to participate in the more advanced maths and science subjects. As a father of two daughters, I can only encourage them to take a different view. I encourage my daughters and everyone else’s daughters to consider these areas for them. So, we do need to change that. We do need to reassert the importance of science and maths because that is essential if we’re to have the pipeline of students that we require.
You know, I was up in Boeing earlier this year and Boeing – I don’t know if you’ve ever been there and seen the sort of production line that goes into putting the Dreamliners and all of these things together. It’s an absolutely amazing thing to behold. Boeing’s presence in the United States is known, but the second largest presence that Boeing has outside of the United States is actually here in Australia. It’s down in Fishermans Bend. I asked them then, as the Treasurer, keen to see how we can continue to ensure a strong place and a future for manufacturing in Australia. I said: “Tell me, why? I don’t want to talk you out of it, I want to talk you into it, but why? What was the basis of your decision?” And they said: “Because the people who are there are smart.” They don’t have the luxury in a huge production line like that, with a supply chain that goes around the world, to be working with people who don’t know what they’re doing. The future of manufacturing in Australia today isn’t about companies coming to chase cheap labour around South East Asia and the Pacific, that’s not its future, they’ve worked that out too. The ability to get it right every single time is what matters today. That’s where the value is added and that’s where I’m excited about the future of manufacturing in Australia; because the gold mine that sits inside the noodles of Australians is what is going to ensure that Australia has a manufacturing industry that value-adds right into the future. But for that to happen, we need you. We need you breaking that ground. We need you out there like Jimmy Kirk, or Jimmy Cook, or Janie Cook, whichever you like. But we need you out there discovering those new frontiers, breaking open the ground, being the inquiring mind, having the passion whether you’re teacher infusing that passion like good old Mark Reed did when I was much younger and let them see the potential and the excitement and the opportunity.
I’ll finish with this and it’s a tribute to the great champions who work at the CSIRO. One of its former leaders the late Sir Malcolm McIntosh – and tonight we’ll have an award in his name presented to the Physical Scientist of the Year and I want to acknowledge Lady Margaret McIntosh and members of the McIntosh family here also tonight. Not long after Malcolm took up the top job at the CSIRO, he spoke with a science magazine about the importance of getting good science out of the laboratory and into the industry and community. He said this.
“It simply isn’t possible to live sensibly in this society without having some understanding of science. If we’re to progress the society and keep the standards of living of Australians high, then it has to be more than that. It has to be an active participation in science. It’s not actually you do with a big bang, but to inculcate a scientific community is a very long process. It doesn’t start with people like you and me making speeches, you’ll be pleased to know, it starts at school”.
I couldn’t agree more. Now Karen Andrews the Minister for Science, Industry and Technology, I couldn’t have been more pleased to appoint her to that role in my Cabinet. She’s a scientist and she’s a female scientist.
[Applause]
She’s an engineer, she has sat where you are, she worked in industry, she’s someone who absolutely gets it and she’s a great asset in my Cabinet. Both of us are looking forward to working with you in all of your fields of endeavour and giving you whatever encouragement we can to go out and make the difference you do on a daily basis.
I want to wish all the award recipients tonight congratulations and I want to thank you very much for the opportunity to be here with you this evening, an honourary scientist of sorts.
[Applause]


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Mick Tsikas
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks to you all for coming out here this morning and I particularly thank Fiona for arranging this breakfast this morning. As you know, we’re sitting this week and it’d be very… it’d be impossible, frankly, to be here at any other time. So I thank you for coming out this morning and joining me so I could share a few thoughts with you. Can I also thank the Vice President David Jochinke and CEO Tony Mahar as well.
It’s great to be here with you. Tony Pasin is here as a colleague, it’s great to see him here. I was just with him down in Murray Bridge and out through the river lands in South Australia just on the weekend and over the course of the last eight weeks, I’ve had a great opportunity to get from one end of the country to the other. And that has included quite a bit of time actually working through issues that is impacting on rural and regional Australia, in particular the agricultural sector.
Last night I was handing out the Prime Minister’s science awards and it was quite a tremendous evening, but I feel like it’s a continuation of the same conference this morning, the same event. Because the best scientists I know are working in the agricultural sector. They’re farmers, they’re working out there on the land. They’re understanding it, and they have been doing it for generations and generations. The best environmentalists in Australia are farmers. No one knows it better than they do and no one understands it better about how you’ve got to strike the balance between caring for the environment, ensuring the productive use of the resources that we have available. And importantly, the contribution to the social cohesion and community of rural and regional towns all around the country. Farmers get this. You’ve always got this and we get it that you get it. That’s why I’m very pleased to be here with you today.
One of the things that I’m sure you will be appreciative of is that we live in a country that has a strong economy. And that doesn’t happen by accident. It only happens where you don’t take your economy for granted and that you have policies that are designed to keep growing the economy. Because, you know, you can’t have greater fairness without greater prosperity. That’s always been Australia’s story. The two working together. It’s no good having policies that are trying to argue about how you carve up an ever-diminishing pie. You want to grow they pie so there’s more for everybody. You don’t lift some up by pulling others down. That’s what we believe as a Government.
You don’t help your environment by pulling your farmers down. You don’t help your communities by pulling your farmers down, you actually try and lift everybody up. And the agricultural sector in rural and regional parts in our country I think have always understood that you get much further together than you get apart. In our rural communities, our regional communities, that has always been understood and I think it’s something that this place, here in Canberra, needs to focus more on. Actually solving and working through problems together, rather than trying to drive people apart.
That strong economy is of course a function of many things. Lower taxes, which our Government has championed and just this week passing through the Parliament will be further reductions in taxes for business of less than $50 million in turnover to just over 25 per cent. From 30 per cent where we started down to 25 per cent for businesses, and that would be encompassing businesses, rural and regional businesses, agricultural businesses all across the country. It’s a tax cut for farmers and it’s a tax cut we have fought for every single day since we have been elected to ensure that is what invested on a farm which may have a turnover of less than $10 million – the instant asset write-off, the pool depreciation, the GST on the cash basis – it wasn’t there before. It was only reserved for the smallest of businesses. And we have recognised that small and family businesses, which are farming businesses, deserve to have a government that supports them by lowering your tax. We belief that you should keep more of what you’ve earned. Because we believe that you are better placed to invest what you’ve earned than the government is. You’ll invest it in your farm. You’ll invest it in your future. You’ll invest it in your family, in your children’s education. You’ll invest it in your community, and so that’s why I want you can have it so you can invest it rather than it coming down here to Canberra.
Now, no disrespect to the public officials and the government departments. You work closely with them too. But you know, if I’ve got to choose where the money is better off to stay – in communities, in the hands of rural and regional businesses, for farmers – that’s where it should remain. That’s why we believe taxes should be lower. But we also think your markets should be bigger and yesterday, the TPP-11 passed our Parliament. Your sector more than any other knows the opportunities of trade. We have always been an open, trading nation. That is one of the pillars of our national prosperity. We are in our 27th year of consecutive, economic growth. It’s a world record. The fact we are an open, trading nation is one of the most important reasons for that success. And our Government will never give up on expanding our limits for trade. Wherever we have to go, wherever that negotiation is taking place, wherever the opportunity is. Simon Birmingham, before that Steven Ciobo and before that Andrew Robb, out there crunching deals to ensure there are more markets for where you can sell what you grow and what you produce. That’s what… we believe it. Because without it, Australia’s prosperity is diminished. The economy does not grow.
The TPP-11 means improved access for our farmers when they need it most. This landmark agreement strips 98 per cent of tariffs for eleven countries with a combined GDP of more than $13.8 thousand billion dollars and close to half a billion customers. Now as a Government, we believed it was important to fight for it. I remember I was in Germany at a G20 meeting. After everyone said, “It’s all done, this Trans Pacific Partnership.” In fact that Labor Party mocked us, it was like the dead parrot sketch out of Monty Python. That was the joke they were saying about the TPP. We didn’t believe it, because we believe in trade and we said, “We’re going to fight for this.” And our Government did, and Malcolm did and Steven did, and we teamed up together with the Kiwis and the Japanese and Prime Minister Abe in particular. And Prime Minister Turnbull pursued that with a dogged determination that I will also pursue these arrangements and they got the deal. And it stuck. And now we’re the fourth country to ratify that agreement, and there are two more to go and then it comes into effect. The modelling also shows Australia is forecast to see some $15.6 thousand million, $15.6 billion in net annual benefits to national income within just over the next decade from this agreement. So I would call that a good deal. I would call that a deal that is worth pursuing, to ensure that we can realise the opportunities that are out there.
Now I want to have a fair dinkum conversation with you about labour on farms. There has been a lot of talk about this and I want us to have a really honest conversation about it today. Our Government does support moving towards an agricultural visa. There has never been any question about that. There have been plenty of people who want to kick up dust about it, commentating on it. We have never, ever said we don’t think that’s a good idea. But we have to go about it in the right way, and it’s not a silver bullet and it doesn’t solve all the problems in relation to the forthcoming harvest. I want to see fruit picked. I want to see the strawberries picked, I want to see the mangoes picked, I want to make sure that this gets off the vine and it gets to market. And we’ve got a three step plan to achieve that for the harvest. You can’t just introduce and agricultural visa overnight and then all of a sudden everyone turns up and they’re on the farm picking fruit. That’s not how it works.
I’m a former Immigration Minister. It is true that I barely know one end of the sheep from another, or one end of the paddock from another. But I tell you what, I know a lot about how to get things done here. That’s my record, whether it’s on the budget, whether it’s on social services. We now have the lowest level of welfare dependency of the working age population of this country in more than 25 years. On immigration, you know of our successes with Operation Sovereign Borders. So I get it. I don’t know how your farm works, but I do know how this place works and I do know how you can get things done here. So this is how I believe we can solve this problem coming into the harvest. Yes, we will work to establish an agricultural visa. That is the long-term solution that is even the medium-term solution. And we need to work to that and make sure it has integrity and we need to make sure that it can deliver against the requirements of the Australian people when it comes to our immigration programme. But this what we need to do to deal with the problem in the short term.
Now at no stage did I say the only thing that we were going to do to is get Australians into Australian jobs and I still believe that and I’ll never resolve from it. If someone is out there and they are fit and they are able and they are willing to work and they live in those communities, they should be taking those jobs. Because it wasn’t that long ago that they did. I was up in Glass House Mountain a few weeks ago and I was talking to the strawberry farmers and they told me that it wasn’t that long ago that it was the locals picking the strawberries. About ten or fifteen years ago, they said. But it’s not happening now.
And I know down in Tasmania when it comes to the apple orchards that they have had the problems of getting local young people who weren’t in work to come and do this work. And I get that, I’ve always known that. But it doesn’t mean you give up on it. It doesn’t mean you say, “Oh that’s all right, they can sit at home and not have to take work that they should be taking in their local communities, that supports their local communities and just pick up the dole.” That’s not ok, so I’m never going to say it is. And every opportunity I have to connect a young person to a job in their town, I will do it. But I’m not naive. I don’t think and never have I said that I think that’s going to solve the immediate problem.
And so what I ask you to do and I implore you to do this today – and I know that Fiona will as well – and that is, I need you to register the jobs that you need filled on the National Harvest Labour Information Service, 1800 062 332, or go to jobsearch.gov.au/harvest.
I need you to register those jobs because I need to know where are the jobs? When do they start? How long do they run for? What are you paying them? What’s the deal?
Now, where there’s a mismatch between the jobs that are needed and those that are available to do it, we will be moving quite quickly because we’re doing it even now as we speak, parallel with this other process to ensure that the Working Holiday Maker Visa Program and the Pacific Labour Scheme and the Seasonal Worker Program – those two Pacific Island Schemes are very important to us and I’ve spoken to many farmers around the country who use them and they’re successful.
Can they meet all the demand? Unlikely. But then my first port of call when it comes to our partners in the Pacific – and I don’t want to see that program undermined because it’s a very important part of Australia’s national policy and relationships and it’s also good for the agricultural sector. But the reason why I need to know where the shortages are is we just can’t work off a hunch: “We might need a few more here.” I need to know where the jobs are because we will ensure that any relaxation we have around the rules for Working Holiday Makers Visas or any of these other schemes will be targeted to the areas where those shortages are. One of the biggest frustrations I have had as a Minister in this Government, and continues now as Prime Minister, is getting an accurate read on labour shortages. I hear plenty of anecdotes but I don’t see enough hard data.
Now, if we’re going to make these changes – and we will – I’m going to make sure they’re targeted to the areas where the labour shortages are because if they’re not, you know what we end up doing? We relax the visas and we get more Uber drivers in Melbourne. Well, that’s not getting any fruit off any trees anywhere so it must be targeted and I need you and I implore you to work with me, with David Coleman, with Alan Tudge and David Littleproud – and in particular, Michael McCormack because it has been Michael McCormack and I who have been working on this plan from the day we signed up as a Coalition under our respective leaderships.
Michael and I have been working to this plan from that very day and it’s a sensible plan. It acknowledges that we need an agricultural visa but it acknowledges, more importantly, that we have a more immediate issue to address and we all know – if we’re being really honest with each other – what some of the concerns are when you start liberalising the visas for agricultural workers because do you know who tells me about it? Farmers do. Farmers tell me this. They say, “We’re doing the right thing. We pay our people right and we look after them and we follow the rules. But so-and-so down the road is not.” Or: “I know of this case somewhere else.” And having been a former Minister for Border Protection, I know too because I’ve ordered the raids and I know what goes on and I won’t put up with it and you won’t put up with it either, I know, as an industry because I know when you hear those stories about abuse of workers and cash work and illegal work, you’re very disappointed because that’s not your show, that’s not your industry, that’s not your sector, that’s not how you do things.
And as the Prime Minister, and as the Ministers responsible, they need to protect the integrity of this program because, you know, Australians will lose patience with visa programs that fail and allow themselves to be rorted and abused. And so, we have to work together to ensure that when we get to the point where we can have this new visa, that it’s one Australians can support because they know that we’ve done everything we can to get Australians into those jobs, that we’ve done everything we can and will do to ensure that we’re targeting the measures to those jobs in the areas where it’s needed and that we ensure that the integrity of the system where the people who are coming and working are being treated properly, being paid properly and I think we all agree with all of those objectives, I’m quite certain we do and I reckon we can get this done so I’m asking you, and I’m sure I’ll be overwhelmed at the positive response to work with us to get this done.
We can get it done, I’m looking forward to getting it done, we know what the need is, we totally get it, we’ve got a plan to do it and I want to congratulate Michael McCormack more than anyone else for being the champion of working through this issue in a constructive and practical way because everyone can stand up and say, “We’re going to do this, we’ll do that.”
But if you’re not focused on the outcome, actually getting the result, then what’s the point? And that’s what I’ve found in Michael and the team that I’ve been working with and my regional team of Liberals like Tony and Rowan Ramsey and the whole fleet of working together to ensure that we get the right outcome on these issues. Now, in the time that I have available – which is not much, I really want to say thank you to Fiona and the NFF and to all of those who have been working so hard to ensure that we deliver on the ground for farmers and regional and rural communities that have been affected by the drought. When I went to Quilpie, I frankly didn’t realise people get so excited about me wearing a cap, it’s not that uncommon, now I have like a hundred caps, everywhere I’ve been since, everyone’s given me a cap. Which is nice, I like them, they’re great but…
[INAUDIBLE INTERJECTION FROM AUDIENCE]
PRIME MINISTER: Sorry? [laughs] A little later. But when I went to Quilpie and really – it seems funny to say this but – really enjoyed the day, met some wonderful families and the reason why I wanted to go to Quilpie, and it was one of the first things Michael and I talked about, was the drought has been affecting parts of my home state in the New South Wales terribly but in Queensland and out in Quilpie they’ve been doing it for a lot longer – six years and more. And I wanted to talk to people who’d been able to get themselves through that last six years and understand how they were achieving it because I thought if I can understand how they got through six years then that’s going to help me work out, well, how can I help those who are in the earlier stages and how they’re going to get through?
And I went up there not really knowing what to expect as a suburban mortgage belt boy from Sydney and what I was so pleased to see and so enthused to see was the optimism, the hope, the belief, the community, the resilience and the success under the most trying of circumstances and it filled me with hope. And I think, you know, when it comes to how we’re dealing with the drought, one thing we’ve got to keep giving people is hope. And I stood there out at Quilpie on that property and they showed me a picture of the field adjacent to where we were at the moment which was pretty brown and they showed me a picture where the grass was up to your thigh. So they understand as you do, it comes back, it goes in seasons, this one’s particularly tough – tougher than most, maybe than any in anyone’s living memory for some parts – but the hope remains, the commitment to the lifestyle remains, the passion for what that means for rural and regional communities remains, and that’s what our Government is investing in. We’re investing in that hope and that resilience and that determination.
I particularly want to thanks the CWA who’s here today, there are many charities and I probably offended many now by only mentioning the CWA and I hope I haven’t because I think they deserve great acknowledgement for the work that they’ve been doing in these communities as the many, many charitable organisations are out there doing. And I want to thank them, we need to coordinate that better, we need to target it better, on Friday week we will be having the drought summit and that’s really the job to get “a common operating picture”, as Major General Day would say, about what’s the situation, what’s the next step, how do we rebuild, what’s the long-term plan, issues around water infrastructure, issues about immediate relief and having the vision towards the longer term plan around fodder storage and fodder reserves and resilience both financially, environmentally, structurally. They’re the questions for next week and I want to thank Fiona for the NFF’s engagement on all of those issues.
Now, there’s one issue that I think probably encapsulates our attitude about how to deal with things when it comes to responding to the drought. It’s the issue we talked about with the heavy vehicle regulation and Scotty Buchholz. The issue was raised, you know, it’s a pretty simple thing. The hay bales, they come down and they spread. Now, that was news to me but that’s what happens and we’ve got these rules which meant the trucks couldn’t cross the line and they were getting fined. Numpty stuff. Total numpty stuff and it had to be fixed and within a very short period of time, Scotty and the team at the Heavy Vehicle Regulation Authority, working together with Government, just got it done. Just got it done.
Now, Ronald Reagan used to say, you get a lot more done when you don’t care who gets the credit. He was right about that. Credits. It doesn’t matter. What matters is we work together to get through the drought, what matters is we work together to deal with the real challenges that we face – whether it’s in labour shortages, whether it’s in science and technology and how we support the sector, whether it’s the finance of how we work for our rural and regional communities, whether it’s opening up new markets and opportunities for our farmers all around the world. You know, we stick together, we work together, we bring Australians together then this country’s just going to get stronger and stronger and stronger and as always, it’s going to be significantly off the back of the people who are in this room. Thank you very much for your attention.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (11:00): I move:
That the House apologise to the victims and survivors of institutional child sexual abuse.

Let me first welcome all of those who have come here today. Whether you sit here alongside us here in this chamber, in the Great Hall, outside elsewhere in the nation's capital, in your living room, or in your bed, unable to rise today or speak to another soul, your journey to where you are today has been a long and painful one, and we acknowledge that and we welcome you today wherever you are.
Silenced voices; muffled cries in the darkness; unacknowledged tears; the tyranny of invisible suffering; the never heard pleas of tortured souls bewildered by an indifference to the unthinkable theft of their innocence—today Australia confronts a trauma, an abomination, hiding in plain sight for far too long. Today we confront a question too horrible to ask, let alone answer: why weren't the children of our nation loved, nurtured and protected? Why was their trust betrayed? Why did those who know cover it up? Why were the cries of children and parents ignored? Why was our system of justice blind to injustice? Why has it taken so long to act? Why were others things more important than this, the care of innocent children? Why didn't we believe?
Today we dare to ask these questions, and finally acknowledge and confront the lost screams of our children. While we can't be so vain to pretend to answers, we must be so humble to fall before those who were forsaken and beg to them our apology—a sorry that dare not ask for forgiveness; a sorry that dare not try and make sense of the incomprehensible or think it could; a sorry that does not insult with an incredible promise; a sorry that speaks only of profound grief and loss; a sorry from a nation that seeks to reach out in compassion into the darkness where you have lived for so long.
Nothing we can do now will right the wrongs inflicted on our nation's children. Even after a comprehensive royal commission, which finally enabled the voices to be heard and the silence to be broken, we will all continue to struggle.
So today we gather in this chamber in humility, not just as representatives of the people of this country but as fathers, as mothers, as siblings, friends, workmates and, in some cases, indeed, as victims and survivors. In Ngunawal, 'Canberra' means 'meeting place'. And on this day of apology, we meet together. We honour every survivor in this country. We love you, we hear you and we honour you. No matter if you are here at this meeting place or elsewhere, this apology is to you and for you. Your presence and participation makes tangible our work today and it gives strength to others who are yet to share what has happened in their world.
Elsewhere in this building and around Australia there are others who are silently watching and listening to these proceedings, men and women who have never told a soul what has happened to them. To these men and women, I say this apology is for you too. Later, when the speeches are over, we will stand in silence and we remember the victims who are not with us anymore—many, sadly, by their own hand. As a nation we failed them, we forsook them and that will always be our shame. This apology is for them and for their families too. As one survivor recently said to me: 'It wasn't a foreign enemy who did this to us. This was done by Australians to Australians.' Enemies in our midst, the enemies of innocence. Look at the galleries, look at the Great Hall, look outside this place and you will see men and women from every walk of life, from every generation and from every part of our land crushed, abused, discarded and forgotten.
The crimes of ritual sexual abuse happened in schools, churches, youth groups, Scout troupes, orphanages, foster homes, sporting clubs, group homes, charities and family homes as well. It happened anywhere a predator thought they could get away with it, and the systems within these organisations allowed it to happen and turned a blind eye. It happened day after day, week after week, month after month, decade after decade—unrelenting torment. When a child spoke up they weren't believed, and the crimes continued with impunity. One survivor told me that when he told a teacher of his abuse that teacher then became his next abuser. Trust broken, innocence betrayed, power and position exploited for evil, dark crimes.
A survivor named Faye told the royal commission:
… nothing takes the memories away. It happened 53 years ago and it's still affecting me.

A survivor named Ann said:
My mother believed them rather than me.

I also met with a mother whose two daughters were abused by a priest the family trusted. Suicide would claim one of her two beautiful girls, and the other lives under the crushing weight of what was done to her. As a father of two daughters, I can't comprehend the magnitude of what she has faced. Not just as a father but as a Prime Minister, I am angry too at the calculating destruction of lives and the abuse of trust, including those who have abused the shield of faith and religion to hide their crimes—a shield that is supposed to protect the innocent, not the guilty—and they stand condemned.
One survivor says it was like becoming a stranger to your parents. Mental health illnesses, self-harm and addictions followed. The pain didn't stop with adulthood. Relationships with partners and children became strained as survivors struggled with the conflicting currents within them. Parents and siblings felt guilt and sadness for what they had missed, for what and whom they chose to believe and for what they did not see, while survivors contemplated what could have been. A survivor named Rodney asked the question so common to so many survivors. He wonders about:
… the person I may have become, or the person I could have become if I didn't have all this in my life …

Death can take many forms. In this case, the loss of a life never lived and a life denied. Another survivor, Aidan, spoke of not getting justice because his abuser had died. He said:
I was bereft because I was robbed. I was robbed of my day in court. I wanted to tell the world what he did. That was stolen. That was him again, taking control.

Today, as a nation, we confront our failure to listen, to believe and to provide justice. And again today we say sorry—to the children we failed, sorry; to the parents whose trust was betrayed and who have struggled to pick up the pieces, sorry; to the whistleblowers who we did not listen to, sorry; to the spouses, partners, wives, husbands and children who have dealt with the consequences of the abuse, cover-ups and obstruction, sorry; to generations past and present, sorry.
As part of our work leading us to this day I recently met with, as did the Leader of the Opposition, the National Apology to Victims and Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse Reference Group, who are with us here today. I want to thank this wonderful group of brave people. Many are survivors. They have all worked so hard to make today a reality. They said to me that an apology without action is just a piece of paper—and it is. Today they also wanted to hear about our actions. It's a fair call.
In outlining our actions, I want to acknowledge the work of my predecessors: former Prime Minister Gillard, who is with us here today, and I thank her for her attendance; former Prime Minister Rudd; the member for Warringah, who continues to serve us here in this place; and former Prime Minister Turnbull. I want to thank them for their compassion and leadership as they also confronted these terrible failings.
The foundations of our actions are the findings and recommendations of the royal commission initiated by Prime Minister Gillard. The steady, compassionate hand of the commissioners and staff resulted in 17,000 survivors coming forward and nearly 8,000 of them recounting their abuse in private sessions of the commission. We are grateful to the survivors who gave evidence to the commission. It is because of your strength and your courage that we are gathered here today. Many of the commissioners and staff are also with us today, and I thank them also.
Acting on the recommendations of the royal commission with concrete action gives practical meaning to today's apology. The Commonwealth, as our national government, must lead and coordinate our response. The National Redress Scheme has commenced. I thank the state and territory governments for their backing of the scheme. The scheme is about recognising and alleviating the impact of past abuse and providing justice for survivors. The scheme will provide survivors with access to counselling and psychological services, monetary payments and, for those who want one—I stress 'for those who want one'—a direct personal response from the institution where the abuse occurred. It will mean that, after many years, often decades, of denials and cover-ups, the institutions responsible for ruining lives will admit their wrongdoing and the terrible damage they caused.
The National Office for Child Safety is another big step forward to ensuring the prevention and detection of child abuse wherever it occurs. It was announced as part of our government's response to the royal commission and it was established from 1 July of this year within the Department of Social Services. As Prime Minister, I'll be changing these arrangements to ensure that the National Office for Child Safety will report to me. It will reside within the portfolio of Prime Minister and Cabinet, as it should, and the Minister for Social Services will assist me in this role, including reporting to me on the progress of royal commission recommendations and the activities of the Office for Child Safety.
The office has already begun its work to raise awareness of child safety and to drive cultural change in institutions in the community to ensure the systemic failures and abuses of power that brought us here today are not repeated. Importantly, children themselves are being empowered to participate in these initiatives, because our children must be heard. When it comes to the work of safety, it must be approachable and child-friendly. They must know who they can tell, they must be believed and they must know where they can go.
All Australian governments are now working together to establish a national database to ensure higher standards for working with children and that data about people's ability to work with children is shared nationally. Our work does not stop at our borders. We are ensuring children across the world are protected by stopping child sex offenders from travelling overseas without permission, which will disrupt, prevent and investigate the abuse of children globally.
We recognise that, as survivors age, those who were abused in or by an institution have real fears about entering into aged-care facilities. It's an understandable fear, given what happened during childhood. We will work with survivor groups about what we can do to alleviate those fears, and, indeed, the work of the royal commission into aged care will be able to address this as well.
To assist with lasting change, we recognise that there are many survivors who were abused in other settings, such as in their own homes and in their communities, who will not be covered by this redress scheme. These survivors also need to be heard, believed and responded to with services to address their needs. So, today, I commit to fund the establishment of a national centre of excellence, and I call on the states and territories to work as partners in this venture. This centre will be the place to raise awareness and understanding of the impacts of child sexual abuse, to deal with the stigma, support help seeking and guide best practice for training and other services.
All of this is just the start. The Australian government has not rejected a single recommendation of the royal commission. We are now actively working on 104 of the 122 recommendations that were addressed to the Commonwealth, and the 18 remaining are being closely examined, in consultation with states and territories. Today we commit, from December this year, to report back to the Australian people through the parliament to be held accountable each year—each year—on the progress we are making on the recommendations over the next five years and then beyond. We will shine a spotlight on all parts of government to ensure we are held accountable.
The institutions which perpetrated this abuse, covered it up and refused to be held accountable must be kept on the hook. Already, many of those organisations have made their own apologies and have signed up to be part of the National Redress Scheme, as they should, but there are others yet to join. Today I simply say: justice, decency and the beliefs and values we share as Australians insist that they sign on.
Today I also commit to establishing a national museum, a place of truth and commemoration, to raise awareness and understanding of the impacts of child sexual abuse. We will work with survivor groups to ensure your stories are recorded, that your truth is told, that our nation does not turn from our shame and that our nation will never forget the untold horrors you experienced. Through this, we will endeavour to bring some healing to our nation and to learn from our past horrors.
We can never promise a world where there are no abusers. But we can promise a country where we commit to hear and believe our children, to work together to keep children safe, to trust them and, most of all, to respect their innocence.
Mr Speaker, I present the formal apology to be tabled in this parliament today, which will be handed to those in the Great Hall shortly. It reflects all of the sentiments that I have expressed on behalf of the Australian people, this parliament and our government. I table that. As I do, I simply say: I believe you. We believe you. Your country believes you.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!


Prime Minister
Photo:&nbsp;AAP Image/Dan Himbrechts
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you Doug Ferguson, Chairman of the Asia Society Australia, and to the CEO Philipp Ivanov for the invitation to be here today.
I also want to acknowledge your event partner Bloomberg for this very timely Asia briefing in advance of Summit Season.&nbsp; And, of course, my friend and colleague, the Foreign Minister Marise Payne.
Since its foundation more than 20 years ago, the Asia Society Australia has provided a unique forum for bringing together those with a keen interest in Australia’s engagement with Asia.
Today, as I head into my first annual Summit season as Prime Minister, I would like to share with you some perspectives on my approach to Australia’s engagement with our region and more broadly.
Our foreign policy defines what we believe about the world and our place in it.
It must speak of our character, our values.&nbsp; What we stand for. What we believe in and, if need be, what we’ll defend. This is what guides our national interest.
I fear foreign policy these days is too often being assessed through a narrow transactional lens.
Taking an overly transactional approach to foreign policy and how we define our national interests sells us short.
If we allow such an approach to compromise our beliefs, we let ourselves down, and we stop speaking with an Australian voice.
We are more than the sum of our deals. We are better than that.
So what are the beliefs that guide our interests?
We believe that the path to peace and liberty demands the pursuit of prosperity through private capital, rights to own property, entrepreneurialism and free and open markets. That is what lifts people out of poverty.
We believe that acceptance should not be determined by race or religion. Rather, we accept people by their words and judge them by their actions.
We believe in freedom of speech, thought, association and religion.
We believe in peaceful liberal democracy; the rule of law; separation of powers; racial and gender equality where every citizen has choice and opportunity to follow their own paths and dreams.
A fair go for those who have a go - that is what fairness means in Australia.
We believe in the limits of government – because free peoples are the best foundation to show mutual respect to all.
We believe in standing by our mates, side by side with nations that believe the same things we do.
From the United Kingdom and the democracies of Europe to the United States and Canada. From the state of Israel to the city state of Singapore. From Japan and South Korea in North Asia to New Zealand, across the ditch.
We believe in being good neighbours – regardless of whether there are differences in how we see the world and run our respective societies.
We also believe this should be a two way street. We respect their sovereignty and their right to run their own show.
We simply ask for no more than the same in return. That our views and beliefs -- the decisions we make, the questions we ask and how we go about answering those questions and making those decisions -- is also respected.
When we do this, we can come together and engage on our common interests for the mutual benefit of our peoples, regardless of any other differences.
What we advocate for our region and the world are the same things that drive us at home.
I’ve been very clear about my domestic priorities— keeping our economy strong, keeping Australians safe, and keeping us together.
Prosperity, security and unity.
Our international agenda is built on these strong domestic foundations and were reflected in the key themes of the Foreign Policy White Paper released last year.
The tide of history is moving to our doorstep.
But we can’t pretend this tide of change happens seamlessly or smoothly.
As economic power shifts, it’s unsurprising that nations will seek to play a bigger strategic role in our region.
China, in particular, is exercising unprecedented influence in the Indo-Pacific.
At the same time, many of our partners globally -- from our most important partner and ally the United States, to others in Europe and elsewhere -- are debating the value of free trade and worry about the costs and risks of their global commitments.&nbsp;
We cannot wish away these debates and challenges.&nbsp;
Their political impacts are profound.
Australia is committed to ensuring the peaceful evolution of our own region in these times. It will take the right combination of both pragmatism and principle, always playing to our strengths.
Australia’s economy is growing, our country is confident, our budget position is getting stronger and stronger.
Our continued success depends on being open to trade and investment. We don’t get rich selling things to ourselves.&nbsp;
Just as we need capital and other inputs to build our economy, we need open markets and transparent rules.
Trade accounts for 1 in 5 Australian jobs, and employs over 2.2 million people. &nbsp;
We have skills and resources in abundance that the rest of the world wants. And we are a reliable partner.
Open markets for services give Australian consumers increased choice and provides businesses with access to a wider range of skills and expertise.
It’s estimated that annual incomes for the average Australian family are now $8,500 higher thanks to thirty years of trade liberalisation.
Also, Asia’s unprecedented growth over the past three decades has, as the Asia Society knows, transformed not just Asia, but the world at large.
There are now one billion fewer people living in extreme poverty than there were in 1990 and much of that is due to growth in our region.
That prosperity has been built on a web of institutions and rules that has supported economic openness and curbed beggar-thy-neighbour trade barriers.
The World Trade Organization has long been at the heart of this system.&nbsp; Its rules limit arbitrary trade restrictions and the use of unilateral trade measures so we can trade with confidence.
Now no system is perfect and we acknowledge that frustrations have been growing with the WTO’s rule-making, transparency and disputes functions.&nbsp;
Many members have legitimate concerns about the impact of policies such as industrial subsidies, which lead to overproduction.&nbsp;
Australia has been calling out similar practices for decades in relation to agriculture.&nbsp;
Equally, there are valid concerns about the protection of intellectual property and the rules governing the involvement of government entities in markets.&nbsp;
In responding our best tool is the negotiating table – not increased tariffs.
We will support efforts to improve and strengthen the WTO, recognising some of the legitimate frustrations of the United States and other countries.&nbsp;
We will also persist with a pragmatic trade agenda pursuing trade liberalisation wherever possible.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Nothing demonstrates that more clearly than the TPP 11 which Australia ratified just yesterday.
With six countries now on board, the Agreement will kick-in this year and Australia will get immediate tariff cuts from 30 December.
This agreement will give our businesses and farmers greater access to half a billion more customers.
Across the board, we are pursuing trade opportunities wherever we can.&nbsp;
Looking forward, we have a significant FTA agenda, including our Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement with Indonesia, and advancing negotiations on the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership with ASEAN and other key regional economies, with the EU and, post-Brexit, with the UK.
This agenda is built on a record of achievement, including the three free trade agreements our government signed with China, Japan and Korea that continue to deliver huge gains for our companies.
We are also looking to the long term. In particular, we want to enhance our partnership with India.
The foundations are already strong – we share values, a commitment to democratic institutions, enormous goodwill and strong relationships between our people. And we share a common strategic outlook.
The time is right to step up our efforts.
We welcome the India Economic Strategy to 2035 authored by the former High Commissioner to India and head of DFAT, Peter Varghese.
It’s the first step towards a long-term investment that cements India in the front rank of Australia’s partnerships. I will have more to say about this when the President of India visits Australia in a few weeks’ time.
Economic security alone is not enough. Prosperity requires security.
Security is a common endeavour with a common dividend.
At forthcoming meetings, I will be advancing our work with others to tackle terrorism and violent extremism, cyber-crime, people smuggling and nuclear proliferation.
I will discuss how, even as the prospect of peace on the Korean peninsula appears to be improving, we need to maintain maximum pressure on the DPRK to ensure the complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula.
I will reiterate Australia’s enduring interest in ensuring that freedom of navigation and overflight are respected by all states, large and small.
In all of these matters, the United States remains vital to the sort of region we want to see.
The alliance with the United States is a choice we make about how best to pursue our security interests.
And US economic engagement is as essential to regional stability and prosperity as its security capabilities and network of alliances.
Australia also has a vitally important relationship with China.
Trade, tourism and educational exchanges are at record highs.&nbsp;
Australia values and honours these tens of thousands of daily interactions between our peoples.
We are committed to deepening our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership with China, and I look forward to discussing how we do that with China’s leaders later this month.
Of course, China is not alone in being a force of change in our world.
But China is the country that is most changing the balance of power, sometimes in ways that challenge important US interests.&nbsp;
Inevitably, in the period ahead, we will be navigating a higher degree of US-China strategic competition.
A strong America — centrally engaged in the affairs of our region — is critical to Australia’s national interests.
Australia does not seek a free ride when it comes to regional security and prosperity.
We support the strongest possible US political, security and economic engagement in the Indo-Pacific in tangible ways, including by lifting our defence spending.
At the same time, it is important that US-China relations do not become defined by confrontation.
There must remain room for dialogue and cooperation.
The period ahead will, at times, be testing but I am confident of our ability to navigate it. And once again our values and beliefs will guide us.
Australia has always sought to be a citizen that plays its part in the world.
This has been particularly true in the Middle East.
From the Great War a century ago to Iraq and Afghanistan more recently. We have turned up, we have played our part, we have done our share and we have paid the price through great sacrifices.
We have done this because we believe it is right. Being true to our values and principles is always be in our interest.
Our support for Israel and our passionate desire for the success of a two state solution in the Middle East is based on these same beliefs and our desire for a lasting peace, and will continue to drive policy in this area.
Closer to home, Australia will continue to deepen cooperation with Japan, Indonesia, India and the Republic of Korea to help forge a balance in our region that supports openness and ensures the rights of all states are protected.
I look forward to warmly welcoming Japanese Prime Minister Abe to Australia soon.
The strength of our relationships with these democracies will advance our interests however the regional order evolves in the future.
It was no accident that my first international visit as Prime Minister was to Jakarta. It has become an Australian Prime Ministerial tradition.
Australia has a vital partnership with Indonesia. Indonesia is one of democracy’s greatest success stories in recent times, in my own lifetime.
It is a relationship compelled by geography, but nurtured by mutual respect, both in understanding of our differences and appreciating common goals, interests and values.
I look forward to meeting President Widodo again soon to extend our achievements in the relationship to date.
ASEAN has played a critical role in supporting regional stability and prosperity, and is at the centre of regional architecture.
Australia’s vision of the Indo-Pacific has ASEAN at its heart.
ASEAN’s success is fundamental to the interests of all the main players in the Indo-Pacific, including Australia.
Australia’s commitment to ASEAN was made clear at the Special Summit in March this year and through the Sydney Declaration which set out an ambitious agenda to deepen our cooperation.
I will be advancing that agenda at an informal summit with ASEAN leaders soon, in areas such as counter-terrorism, infrastructure and maritime cooperation.
And I will be discussing opportunities to work more closely together on transnational crime, to scale up oc-operation on cyber issues and to strengthen our defence engagement.
Just as important as the stability, prosperity and openness of Southeast Asia, is our engagement with our neighbours and family in the Pacific.
As family, we deal with each other openly and honestly, and above all with respect.
But like all families we sometimes take each other for granted.
The Government I lead is committed to the Pacific as one of my highest foreign policy priorities, because this is where we live.
This is a relationship that I want to see rise to a new level of respect, partnership, familiarity and appreciation.
I want us to do better.&nbsp; I want to set right how we engage with our Pacific family - our Vuvale, our Whanau. I will not be taking our Pacific family for granted.
My first meetings with foreign leaders in Australia were with the Prime Ministers of Solomon Islands and Fiji and this afternoon I’ll meet Papua New Guinea’s Prime Minister O’Neill.
I’m also looking forward to meeting my Pacific counterparts after APEC in Port Moresby. APEC will be a great opportunity for our closest neighbour to tell its story to the world.
We’ll work more closely than ever with the Pacific islands on those issues of greatest concern to them - including climate solutions and disaster resilience, and we will keep the international commitments we have made in these areas.
We are building labour mobility opportunities for Pacific countries to Australia, and ensuring Pacific countries will always take precedence.
We’re providing Australia Award scholarships to the Pacific - 1,474 last year alone.
We’re majority funding undersea cables to Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, including a domestic network in the Solomons - which will deliver faster, cheaper and more reliable communications.
And we want to continue working with others - traditional partners like New Zealand and the United States, as well as newer ones such as China - to ensure our engagement strengthens the common goal of enhancing sustainable economic development and the wellbeing of our Pacific friends.
I want to strengthen our engagement with the Pacific for the Pacific’s sake. Because this is our home.
We will build on the ‘Boe” Pacific Regional Security Declaration to drive greater security co-operation, build greater economic linkages and strengthen the integration of our economies.
We are also working together to increase safety and security -- delivering bigger and more capable patrol boats and aerial surveillance, and sharing more information, to help the Pacific stop drug trafficking, people smuggling and illegal fishing.
And the new Australia Pacific Security College will train the next generation of security officials.
We have negotiated a Bilateral Security Agreement with Solomon Islands and we are working with Fiji to develop the Blackrock regional peacekeeping and disaster training hub.
As well, we will take take steps with Vanuatu to further strengthen our partnership, including on security.
And later this afternoon, my friend and partner, Prime Minister Peter O’Neill of Papua New Guinea and I will formally commit to a joint initiative to develop the Lombrum base on Manus.
We will also confirm a new long-term police partnership.
And commit to new annual leaders meetings, recognising the importance of each country to the other.
Like all families we are strongest when we listen to each other, stand with each other and show respect.
At a time of change, uncertainty and strategic competition, Australia will need to act with even greater purpose and conviction.
We also need to think about how our national power can be applied to protect and advance our interests.
This begins with our substantial investments in building a more capable, agile and potent Australian Defence Force.
Over the past five years, our government has been strengthening the Australian Defence Force.
Our Defence White Paper is fully funded and outlines how we will invest $200 billion in Australia’s Defence capability over the next 10 years.
Since our election in 2013 our Government committed to and has set about restoring our defence spending to 2% of GDP.&nbsp; We will achieve this three years ahead of time, in 2020-21.
It hasn’t been easy.
While reluctant to strike a partisan note in this presentation it must be observed that while the Labor Opposition now say they support these goals, when they had the responsibility, defence spending as a share of our economy fell to the lowest level since prior to the Second World War, with not one naval ship commissioned during their term of administration
We are now undertaking the largest regeneration of the Royal Australian Navy since the Second World War, including the doubling of our future submarine fleet, a new fleet of nine frigates and a new fleet of 12 offshore patrol vessels to ensure our borders remain secure.
The F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program will give the Air Force unprecedented air capability to combat future threats.
And the Army is being backed in with new Armoured Reconnaissance Vehicles and new weapons as well as new body armour and night fighting equipment.
All of this is being done because the best way to keep Australians safe is to give the best capability to the men and women of our ADF.
Our influence internationally is built on our strength at home.
On our democracy and open society that binds us together.
On our belief in freedom and the fair go.
And it’s built on a strong economy that enables us to fulfil our promise to the Australian people.
I go to “summit season” - to the East Asia Summit in Singapore, to APEC in Papua New Guinea and to the G20 in Argentina - clear-eyed about what we believe, what we stand for and ready to advance Australia’s case.
While we live on an island — the best one on earth — we can’t afford to have an island mentality.
We embrace free trade, global engagement, and an international system where we agree to rules, stick to them and honour our commitments.
We embrace an open, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific region.
Because shrinking into ourselves will never work.
If we want to keep our economy strong, if we want to keep Australians safe and if we want to stay united as a community we must engage with the world.
And seize the opportunities presented with both hands based on the beliefs and values that have always underpinned our success.


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Michael Chambers
To our hosts, Commander 3rd Brigade, Brigadier Scott Winter AM, 3rd Brigade’s RSM, Warrant Office Brent Doyle OAM, and Commanding Officer 3rd Combat Engineer Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Jennifer Harris CSC. To the men and women of 3rd Brigade, thank you for your service. Thank you for your welcome here today, thank you for what you do for our country.
It’s important for me to come here today and make this presentation which I could have done to a lecture theatre down in the southern states or do it in Parliament House or somewhere like that but I thought it was important to come and make this presentation here today to the men and women who I will be asking and our Government will be asking to be part of the fulfilment of the plans that I am setting out today for our government and our nation.
It is great to be here at Lavarack Barracks.
Many Australian Prime Ministers have visited these Barracks and rightly so.
The first though was Harold Holt, who came to open them in 1966.
At the opening he let everyone in on a secret, that was the Army didn’t want the Barracks in Townsville.
They wanted the new barracks to be on the Mornington Peninsula in Victoria.
They wanted it to be close to the existing Defence infrastructure.
Apparently that was a cheaper exercise as well.
But Harold Holt had a very different view. He convinced the Cabinet to actually override the Army’s recommendation.
He said at the opening of these Barracks: “if this continent is to be held secure, if we are to develop its potentialities he said, then we must press on vigorously with northern development”.
And that argument still holds as fresh today, which is why I’m delighted to be back in Townsville -- backing Townsville, backing Lavarack.
And supporting our defence forces and on coming to office a little over five years ago, our Government committed to increasing the Defence budget to 2 per cent of Australia’s GDP within ten years of coming to office. &nbsp;
We will achieve that in 2020-21, three years ahead of schedule.
That shows you the seriousness of our Government’s commitment to the capability of our defence forces and our serving men and women.
The long-term funding commitment is critical to executing the Government’s plans for Defence, and ensures that defence strategy, capability and resources are fully aligned.
Defence must have confidence in its funding so it can develop and implement long-term plans. Australian defence industry also needs funding certainty to confidently invest in the infrastructure, skills and capability so that it can play its part as a fundamental input to defence capability. They are part of the Defence team.
It's because of these long-term commitments that our Government can invest in programs like LAND 400 Phase 2, which I know is particularly popular up here, which will deliver 211 world-class Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles for the Australian Army.
These world-class vehicles will be manufactured and delivered by up to 1,450 Australian workers, using Australian steel, right here in Queensland.
But the beauty of our commitment to Defence capability is that these benefits actually flow right across the country. &nbsp;The supply chain for these new vehicles will reach right across the country – with up to 40 companies expected to be involved.
Indeed right here in North Queensland, there are small to medium sized companies who will have the opportunity to secure work on this&nbsp; $5.2 billion project.
Now of course, our Defence capability plans do not end there – from new frigates and patrol vessels, to the Joint Strike Fighter – all of these platforms draw on small and medium sized enterprises from right across the nation. &nbsp;
And ladies and gentlemen I am here to day to honour the service of the men and women of these Barracks, your pledge to service our nation in times of war and peace is no idle one. 3rd Brigade has acted on that pledge. In Iraq and Afghanistan and your role in the Philippines is vitally important. This year 3rd Brigade has deployed 800 members in some eight countries. From engineering support to amphibious landing training and command and leadership mentoring. And much of your efforts are in your own neighbourhood.
That’s our defence industry plan in action – creating the world’s best capability while investing in Australian industrial capability and know-how and securing highly-skilled and paid Australian jobs across the nation.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am here today to honour the service of the men and women of these Barracks. Your pledge to serve our nation, in times of war and peace, is no idle one.
3 Brigade has acted on that pledge – in Iraq and Afghanistan. &nbsp;And your role in the Philippines is vitally important.
This year 3 Brigade has deployed 800 members in some eight countries.
From engineering support, to amphibious landing training and command and leadership mentoring - and much of your efforts are in our own neighbourhood, in your neighbourhood, the Pacific – a long way from the Mornington Peninsula! As lovely as the Mornington Peninsula is.
You have done tremendous work with two of our biggest military partners in our region, Papua New Guinea and Fiji.
Their forces can now take on bigger responsibilities, working hand in glove with the ADF towards regional stability and security. That would also build on the ADF’s tremendous humanitarian response work in the region.
Australia’s national security and that of the Pacific they are intertwined - as the 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper made clear, when it identified the Pacific as one of Australia’s highest foreign policy priorities. &nbsp;
My Government, the Government that I have the privilege to lead is returning the Pacific to where it should be – front and centre of Australia’s strategic outlook, our foreign policy, our personal connections, including at the highest levels of government.
This is our patch. This is our part of the world. This is where we have special responsibilities. We always have, we always will. We have their back, and they have ours. We are more than partners by choice. We are connected as members of a Pacific family.
It’s why the first leaders I hosted in Australia as Prime Minister have been from Solomon Islands, Fiji and Papua New Guinea.
It’s time to open, I believe a new chapter in relations with our Pacific family.
One based on respect, equality and openness. A relationship for its own sake, because it’s right. Because it’s who we are.
Last week in Sydney, I set out the foundational beliefs and values that guide our Government’s engagement with the world and to ensure we remain a prosperous, secure and united nation.
In Queensland - our gateway to the Pacific - I want to outline in more detail our ‘step-up’ now in the Pacific and why we are taking our engagement to a new level. And I wanted to do it here in Lavarack because it is with you who are charged, along with all our servicemen and women to put our plan into action.
Australia has an abiding interest in the Southwest Pacific that is secure strategically, stable economically and sovereign politically.
This is not just our region, or our neighbourhood. This is our home.
It’s where Australia can make the biggest difference in world affairs.
A strong, stable region keeps us more secure and enables our economies to grow and for our peoples to prosper.
While we have natural advantages in terms of history, proximity and shared values, Australia cannot take its influence in the Southwest Pacific for granted. And sadly I think too often we have.
Notwithstanding we build from strong foundations our Government has refocused more of our aid contribution to the region. &nbsp;We remain the largest aid donor to the Pacific. We maintain high standards of governance while aligning our assistance with the practical priorities of Pacific Island countries.
The Pacific Labour Scheme is a genuine win-win partnership.
It helps strengthen our economies.
It will give Australian farmers and businesses from aged care providers to tourism operators critical staff to run at full capacity, and gives Pacific workers the chance to earn higher incomes, gain skills and secure opportunities for their own families at home.
The Seasonal Worker Programme gives our fruit growers and crop farmers the workers they need at their busiest times of the year.
Since 2012, the Seasonal Worker Programme has provided an extra $144 million in income for families and villages in the Pacific and Timor-Leste. That’s life-changing for them, absolutely life changing and a massive help for our farmers as well.
Pacific labour mobility is one of the most important solutions for tackling workforce shortages, right now and into the future.
Australia is committed to building on those labour mobility opportunities for Pacific countries and ensuring that Pacific countries take priority.
Pacific labour to Australia is growing and we want to see this growth continue - so we are prioritising the expansion of Pacific labour mobility to help fill critical workforce shortages, where no Australian is available. And it is always our first priority to ensure that Australians are doing these jobs.
We will work closely with industry and Pacific governments to ensure the quality of both the Pacific Labour Scheme and its integrity and the Seasonal Worker Programme. &nbsp;
There are some 1,500 Pacific island students studying at Australian universities on scholarships, gaining the knowledge and skills needed to create opportunities in their home countries.
They’re matched by nearly two-and-a-half-thousand young Australians who have studied in the Pacific since 2014 as part of the New Colombo Plan that was pioneered and initiated by the former Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop and I commend her for that initiative.
As well, thousands of young Pacific islanders have received vocational education through the Australia Pacific Training Coalition, giving them Australian-standard qualifications.
We’re working with PNG and the Solomon Islands to install a high-speed undersea internet cable so their people can take advantage of the digital era and the digital economy.
We’re moving towards ratifying the PACER-Plus regional trade agreement to open up new markets and opportunities for ourselves and our Pacific neighbours and partners.
It’s a very solid base, but of course, economic development relies on security and stability.
Under the “Boe” Pacific Regional Security Declaration, we and our Pacific partners have committed to work more closely to keep our countries safe, secure and more prosperous.
The Pacific Fusion Centre, announced at the Pacific Islands Forum, will build on existing security architecture, including the Pacific Transnational Crime Coordination Centre in Apia, and Forum Fisheries Agency Regional Fisheries Surveillance Centre in Honiara. &nbsp;
We are also working to deliver national security and law enforcement training in the Pacific at the executive middle management level through an Australia Pacific Security College.
Under our Pacific Maritime Security Programme we are delivering bigger and more capable patrol boats and aerial surveillance, and sharing more information to tackle drug trafficking, people smuggling and illegal fishing in the Pacific which is robbing Pacific Islanders of their livelihoods.
With Fiji, it’s turning the Blackrock Peacekeeping Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief Camp into a regional hub for police and peacekeeping training and pre-deployment preparation.
With Solomon Islands, it’s a bilateral security agreement, building on the hard work of RAMSI.
With Vanuatu, it’s a boost to law enforcement assistance as we negotiate a new bilateral security agreement.
And last week, I signed an agreement with PNG Prime Minister Peter O’Neill to elevate our relationship with an annual leaders’ dialogue.
We’re cooperating to develop the PNG Defence Force’s Lombrum Naval Base which I’ve visited on many occasions on Manus Island to increase the inter-operability between our defence forces and our ability to tackle challenges like transnational crime.
It will mean more Australian ships can visit PNG. And after APEC in Port Moresby where I will be shortly, our police will continue the close relationship and cooperation they’ve built in the lead-up to that important meeting.
So the strategic architecture of our Pacific ‘step-up’ is taking shape, it’s in place. It is part of a larger vision of Australia as a force for good in the Pacific, working with others to ensure our region is secure, stable and sovereign.
We seek cooperation with others -- New Zealand, the United States, Japan, China, France and the UK all active in the region to ensure our engagement supports common goals.
Let me turn now to some of the other steps that I am announcing we are taking today, practical measures that we believe will make a difference.
The ADF already plays a pivotal role across a wide canvas, from traditional military engagement with counterparts, to humanitarian and disaster relief, to Operation Render Safe, where we assist in safely disposing of World War Two explosive remnants.
As part of our commitment to the Pacific, the ADF will play an even greater role, working with our partners on training, on capacity building, on exercises, on building interoperability to respond together to the security challenges we face.
To help achieve this, we will establish an enduring rotational ADF Pacific Mobile Training Team, which will be based in Australia, and will travel in the Pacific when invited to undertake training and engagement with other forces.
This will see ADF members like yourselves working more with regional partners in areas such as humanitarian and disaster response, peacekeeping, infantry skills, engineering and logistics and planning. &nbsp;
The Government will also put in place arrangements to ensure that Australia has a dedicated vessel to deliver our support to our partners in the Pacific. Its duties will include humanitarian assistance and response.
The Royal Australian Navy will also undertake more deployments to the Pacific so that they can conduct maritime training exercises with our neighbours. This will enable them to take advantage of the new Guardian Class Patrol Boats we are gifting to them, to support regional security.
We are also strengthening our links with Pacific police forces.
A new Pacific facility at the Australian Institute of Police Management will help train the next generation of police leadership in the Pacific.
Australian and Pacific police have a long history of working closely together and the new Institute will bring together police leaders from across the Pacific for professional, leadership and executive development opportunities.
We will deepen our already strong people-to-people links with Pacific security forces.
We will establish annual meetings of defence and police and border security chiefs and deepen our collaborative efforts. &nbsp;
We will establish a security alumni network to maintain connections and deepen relationships with the many emerging and senior police, and the civilian and military leaders who have participated in the Defence Cooperation Program over decades. Harvesting their experience learning from the experience, passing on the legacy of their experience.
We’re also expanding our diplomatic footprint. &nbsp;Our diplomatic network is already larger than any other country in the Pacific as it should be and we are going to expand it.
Today I announce that we intend to open diplomatic missions in Palau, the Marshall Islands, French Polynesia, Niue and the Cook Islands.
This will mean Australia is represented in every member country of the Pacific Islands Forum. &nbsp;
Of course, it’s not just about the number of diplomatic posts; it’s about the people we send there. &nbsp;And those working on the Pacific at home.
The Foreign Minister and I have made it clear that we want our best and brightest, our young and experienced diplomats alike, working in and on the Pacific.
We must also deepen our commitment to economic engagement in a way that addresses the specific challenges of the Pacific.
The Pacific region is estimated to need US$3.1 billion in investment per year to 2030. So today I’m pleased to announce two major new initiatives that will help address the infrastructure needs of the Pacific region.
The first is the creation of an Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific (AIFFP).
This $2 billion infrastructure initiative will significantly boost Australia’s support for infrastructure development in Pacific countries and Timor Leste.
It will use grant funding combined with long term loans to support high priority infrastructure development.
This will also enable these projects to leverage broader support. It will invest in essential infrastructure such as telecommunications, energy, transport, water and will stretch our aid dollars even further.
The second major announcement I’m making today is the Government will ask Parliament to give Efic, Australia’s export financing agency, an extra $1 billion in callable capital and a new more flexible infrastructure financing power to support investments in the region which have broad national benefit for Australia. It’s in our interest that’s why we need to do it.
These new measures will enhance Efic’s ability to support Australian SMEs to be active in their region. &nbsp;Working with the support and aid that we are putting into the region. Private capital, entrepreneurialism, open markets are crucial to our mutual prosperity. These are our beliefs, these are values, they are shared with the Pacific and we stand with those who share our beliefs and values.
It’s my genuine ambition for this work on infrastructure to be a bipartisan endeavour, as indeed should our wider engagement be in the Pacific.
This is something I hope we can achieve together, in our national interest and that of our neighbours.
Not long ago the former Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, led her annual bipartisan delegation to the Pacific.
These visits built on the cross-party visits to the Pacific initiated by Alexander and I want to see more such delegations of politicians and journalists deepening ties with our neighbours.
Our personal ties extend deeply into rituals, pastimes and shared obsessions like sport. You all know that when you would have been up in the region, PNG in particular and other places.
Following the success of this year’s Prime Ministers Men’s and Women’s XIII games against their PNG counterparts which was a topic of discussion when I got in touch with Peter O’Neill recently when we played the Kumuls and the Orchids – a new sports programme will strengthen sporting pathways between the Pacific and Australia.
I’ve been speaking to Free-TV Australia and the commercial TV networks about how we get more of our Australian content into the region. Our pacific family switching on to the same stories, news, drama and sports we are watching at home. What better way of staying connected than through the people, the lifestyle and the every-day experiences we are lucky enough to enjoy.
That’s why I am pleased to announce that the Government will be working with our commercial media operators to ensure our friends in the Pacific have access to more quality Australian content on television&nbsp; and other platforms.
This will include things like lifestyle programs, news, current affairs, children’s content, drama and sports potentially.
This is an initial step towards providing more Australian content that is highly valued by the Pacific community.
Just the other day, Prime Minister O’Neill reminded me that they have a holiday for Melbourne Cup Day as well.
And that it’s very hard to find anyone at work in Moresby the day after a State of Origin game.
These are small reminders of just how much we have in common and the heritage we share, the lives we share, the values we share.
You might ask how we’re going to pay for all of this. The answer is simple. We are doing it from within budget.
We have undertaken a rigorous prioritisation of our foreign policy and aid and defence and police strategies and plans to make the Pacific a priority.
Government is all about making choices, it’s about setting priorities, it’s about focussing on the things that you believe are most important and that’s what we have done as a Government. Not by running up a big bill but by making choices to make a priority of the Pacific, whether it’s in our aid program or elsewhere.
Nothing proves the strength of our people partnership more than the massive welcome the Duke and Duchess of Sussex received in Tonga and Fiji the other week just like they did in Dubbo and Sydney and Fraser Island.
But our connections go so far beyond our shared Commonwealth membership.
We support a fantastic Australian volunteers program, one that translates into thousands of stories of people changing lives.
I recently heard about a young bloke called Michael Nunan. Michael was a volunteer to Solomon Islands and spent two years as a pharmacist there.
He discovered that poor communication meant local health clinics couldn’t do simple things like let him know what supplies and medicines were that they needed, or whether they needed training.
So, with some support from DFAT’s Innovation Exchange, he developed an online tool that’s now being used in six countries to provide timely and reliable data about health clinics and medicine stocks.
His tool, that he called it “Tupaia” now Tupaia was on Captain Cook’s legendary voyages as they particularly went around New Zealand and when they first came to Australia, in a little part I know pretty well in Kurnell in Sydney. He named it after Tupaia because it’s all about communication, Tupaia was a translator or intended to be as he had served with the Polynesian peoples. And this has made a huge difference this translation tool, this communications tool to healthcare in small villages
Over the next five years, another 5000 people like Michael will volunteer in 26 different countries, and the difference they make will be life changing and it will be immeasurable.
Let me tell you about the community in Mundubbera in Queensland. &nbsp;After Cyclone Gita hit Tonga earlier this year, the local community stepped up to send help.
It was a sign of the same community spirit that prompted Tongan seasonal workers to be among the first to help evacuate people and property when the Burnett River flooded in 2013 and a third of the town was underwater.
The local deputy mayor has recently visited Tonga to donate relief supplies. What goes around is coming around. We’ve got their back, they’ve got ours.
These stories are happening right across Australia and in the Pacific. It’s about who we are and what we do. &nbsp;
It’s what I meant when I talk about family. Whanau as they call it in Polynesian and Maori. They are the real ties that bind us. &nbsp;On sports fields and in churches, in schools and universities and between our defence and our police forces.
So in conclusion let me say this for all these great stories of human connection, our relationships with our Pacific friends need to be nurtured and valued.
And if our standing and influence in the Pacific is to grow, our commitment must be genuine, authentic and enduring.
The world is changing, it’s true and we need to ensure that our Pacific partnerships get stronger with time, that we never take them for granted, that we are a reliable and steady member of the family.
I want to see a new level of respect, familiarity and appreciation between us. &nbsp;Where our shared interests sit alongside shared values.
That’s not to say we will always agree. &nbsp;But that’s not the true test of friendship or family. Tell me a family that always agrees.
The real test is showing respect, love, commitment, and knowing that together we can make our region and all of our communities even stronger.
Let me say my final words to 3 Brigade.
I want to thank you for two things, well three you’ve been standing for a little while, thank you.
But on two things, you are known throughout the ADF and government for the way you look after each other when wounded.
Please keep doing what you are doing. &nbsp;“Mates helping mates”. That’s what it means to be Australian. And one of our core values of the Defence Forces and Australian Army.
Second, for most of Australia, summer-time is the time to kickback – cicadas, cricket, the beach – long days, relaxing nights, good times. Times to remember, times that matter.
But it’s wet season up here again, and you are always ready for the people of North Queensland in particular. You were the backbone of the clean-up after Cyclone Debbie. &nbsp;I want to thank you for the sacrifices you make and always being at the ready to help your fellow Australians and to go where ever your need is required, where your service is required.
It’s been an honour to be amongst you once again here today. It is one of the great privileges of being a Prime Minister to be able to thank Australian Service Men and Women whether it’s here at 3rd Brigade or anywhere else around this country or anywhere around the world for their tremendous service. We deeply respect it, we deeply thank you for it and we thank your families and friends for the sacrifices they make to enable you to serve and do the job that you love. It’s an honour to be with you here today you are part of a noble tradition -- here at the Barracks, in the Pacific and beyond.
Thank you for your service.


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Joel Carrett
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you very much John. Can I also acknowledge the traditional owners of the land and any Elders past and present. But can I particularly acknowledge Philip, and if you’ve got one pf those, fill it out, give Philip some hope and his family some hope.
It’s very important we’re all here today, we’re here as guests of others, we’re here in our own right, bringing tables. It’s a generous community that I grew up in here in Sydney. It’s great to see so many of you here being generous here today.
But when you hear these stories, there’s only one thing we can respond in doing and that is fill this out. And I’ll make sure we’re going to keep filling them out from the Commonwealth Government’s point of view as well and I want to talk a bit more about that today.
[Applause]
It’s good to be here with John and John I worked together some time ago. And he used to speak, and he’ll remember this, about being ‘strong and compassionate’ and I’ve thought a lot about that as the years have passed.
It does sort of reflect the tension in public life. The need for strength, but also the need to be compassionate. And in the opportunity to work together with Lifeline I think we can do both.
And that’s certainly what John has been able to do and I want to thank him for his great service. Not only in chairing Lifeline but I think in being an advocate and being someone who demystifies and destigmatizes the issues of mental health in Australia. And so congratulations John.
[Applause]
Thanks you for your service John. And Lucy is great, Lucy does a great job as we know…
[Applause]
She does a terrific job as Chair of Australia’s Mental Health Commission and we really thank you for the work you do there.
And I was thinking of Lifeline only recently. We were announcing some funding for some support down at a spot we’re all pretty familiar with, down there near the Watson’s Bay Hotel, over near the cliff. And we were making some announcements there about how we were doing improvements to lighting and those sort of things that has been part of the programme of that area to make that less of a hot spot.
And what it reminded me of was, it was a lonely place. And people are in lonely places and they can be in dark places.
But what we have an opportunity to do through organisations like Lifeline is that we can bring light to them and it’s not just light down at the gap.
These places can be offices, they can be classrooms, they can be kitchens, they can be bedrooms, they can be shop floors, and they can even be hotel ballrooms here today.
What might seem full of light to all the rest us can be dark, it can be lonely, it can feel windswept, it can feel isolated and disconnected. And what we’re trying to do is bring light to that. An acknowledgment to those situations people find themselves in.
And Julian Leeser who is here today and other colleagues who are here today and I welcome them as well as they’ve already been acknowledged today. Julian and I were talking about the issue of suicide.
Julian is one of the great champions of suicide prevention in our national Parliament. Just like Jason and Paul and others who are here. And it doesn’t matter which side of politics you are on. When Julian speaks about these issues, people stop and they listen, and so they should.
Because as you know Julian lost his father to suicide – and we were talking about trying to see the signs of depression, the sadness and distress in others and being alert to it.
Because often we’re not. And one of the stories Julian will tell you about it is how he wished he had been able to interpret more of what those signs are.
And it’s our responsiveness to this that gives us an opportunity to intervene, to step in, R U OK Day is another great initiative that was started by a mate of mine I went to school with and who we lost some years ago. Not to mental illness, actually to another illness.
But this stop and observe each other I think is important, and that’s what we’re all here doing today.
It can be very human to miss these signs. It can be very human to try and mask the signs that you’re in fact feeling. And so picking up on these things is very important.
For people in distress in Australia, Lifeline is one of these disruptors that can actually come in and intervene in these moments.
It can be that little voice to someone in distress that says “call Lifeline” and they see it, as John said, every other day at the end of an article somewhere. It disrupts, it makes a difference.
Or it could just be the number that you see elsewhere.
For tens of thousands of people, countless Australians, it has already been an important disruptor for their own battle with mental illness or of their family or friends.
I particularly want to acknowledge today, as I know John would also, all the counsellors who are making this difference every single day – if you have been or are a Lifeline counsellor I’d like you stand in your seats right now if you’re here because we all owe you a great debt of thanks and I want to acknowledge you in this room today. If there are any counsellors here, we want to say thanks.
[Applause]
We don’t know and we’ll never know who these counsellors have helped. It could have been one of our siblings, or one of your children, it could have been your football or netball coach or that that of your kids’ coach, it could be your kid’s school teacher, it could be your neighbour, it could be your parent or it could even be your local member of Parliament, and it could have even been you at some point in the future.
And yes, Lifeline does so many other things that supplement their mighty phone counselling service – and I also acknowledge that good work too.
But there is one call we should all remember. It took place in fifty-five years ago in 1963.
It was a time when they had rotary dial telephones, timed STD calls and phone boxes on street corners.
And Reverend Alan Walker, took a call at his Beacon Hill home. It was from a man named Roy. He got Reverend Walker’s number out of the phone book, we all remember what they were. Some of us do.
Roy was lonely, distressed and struggling under a weight of debt and they arranged to meet. But before the meeting took place, Roy took his own life.
Now Reverend Walker was a man of deep faith. He understood the admonition that faith without deeds is dead.
And he turned his faith into action. He turned his faith into real deeds.
And along with a small band of volunteers established Lifeline as an expression of his deep faith. Because he knew there were thousands of Roys in the country.
From its inception, Lifeline understood that, at times, we all need a helping hand. And there is nothing wrong in asking for help.
Now my dad was a police officer, so was my uncle – and you didn’t think or inquire about the emotional toll of a difficult job. The same is true for nurses, paramedics, firefighters, ambulance officers, and we thank them for the wonderful job they do.
They were just expected to deal with it. Just like returning veterans. Just like our Vietnam vets, who came back and were not recognised when they came home, one of the most shameful acts in Australia’s history. They were just expected to deal with it, and many just couldn’t.
It was not and will never be the right way to do things.
That’s why when Prince Harry was here, it was so great how he talked so freely in his recent visit about it and acknowledging the challenges and the need for greater awareness of that mental illness.
And when he and I met together privately, we spoke about this, and he was so interested in the work of whether it was Lifeline or whether it was Kookaburra Kids which we talked about passionately or the work of so many wonderful organisations. Whether they be with youth, with Headspace or any of these projects.
On the Sunday I was able to introduce the Prince to John and many others who were involved in all of these projects. And when he was out in Dubbo he said, “How easy is it for you guys to talk about your mental health?”&nbsp;He asked the students out there in Dubbo.
It’s a great question – and the kids all looked at the floor. Like many of us do when this topic still comes up today.
The honest answer for us adults is “it is not as easy as you think” – so we all have to keep working at this.
The good news is asking for help is no longer seen as weakness, but it is seen as a strength.
Offering help is no longer seen as “not my business” but my responsibility as a family member, a friend, an employer and a neighbour.
I said a few months ago, that if you love Australia, which I know we all do passionately, all around the country, it means you love your fellow Australians. That’s what it really means to love Australia.
You can love the beaches, you can love all the great history, you can love whether it’s generations or centuries, you can love all these wonderful things about Australia. But if you really love Australia, you love your fellow Australians.
Mateship, I believe, is the Australian word for love.
“Who is my neighbour?” It’s a question as old as time.
You have answered it at Lifeline with “we are”. We all are, you are, everyone is my neighbour.
And everyone here knows the statistics. One in seven of our children four to seventeen will experience a mental health challenge in any year. For adults, it’s one in five.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;
There is good work happening across our country, but there is more work to do.
As a Government, yes it’s true, as John said, we have been very active in this space and I assure you with Lifeline will be more active in this space and John and I will be working through those issues now.
There was a $33 million funding boost to Lifeline – part of $72 million provided to suicide prevention initiatives that I announced in this year’s Budget. And for Lifeline, John said, that was the first significant increase to Lifeline since John Howard was in office.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
Almost $200 million a year for 24/7 counselling support for veterans and their families. If you’re a veteran today, whether you’ve served one day or you’ve served decades, you get access to free mental health in this country as you should. As you should as an acknowledgement for your service and the fact that we owe a memorial not just to those who have fallen but we owe a service to the living.
110 headspace centres for our young people and extending the e-headspace service, over $50 million which we put into that and I have announced in recent weeks.
$11 million in mental health funding for drought affected areas across our drought stricken New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Victoria. I just got a report last night from the difficulties that people are facing up there in Scone at the moment in terms of the drought.
And Lifeline will be there with our farmers and doing what they can along with the mental health counsellors who are there and working with those communities. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
$102 million for mental health in aged care as people in the residential aged care facilities deal with depression and loneliness and isolation was one of the key issues that was raised with me before the last Budget about the need to ensure people in aged care were being treated for the mental illnesses that they were suffering from.
And $125 million in the “Million Minds Mental Health Research Mission” to support one million people through better prevention, diagnosis and treatment.
There is still so much more to do in this area and you’re here doing it today. And our Government, and state governments right across the country, will keep doing what we need to do.
I think this issue has transcended politics and I hope it always will. That there will be a bipartisanship, a multi-partisanship, as we all work together to try and raise awareness and support those who are in the front line like they are here at Lifeline.
But it starts with us all listening to each other, and respecting each other and caring for each other.
To look for the signs. To stand by our mates.
To treat mental health in the same way we treat physical health – free of any stigma.
So I want to thank you all for the work you do. It is a pleasure to be here advancing the good work of Lifeline and a great privilege and I thank you very much for your attention.


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Mick Tsikas
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Silence. At last, silence. A silence from that day to this that beckons a prayer for a dawn of peace, and a lasting peace.&nbsp;
On this day a century ago, as citizens across the Allied nations celebrated the end of war, Australia’s official war correspondent, Charles Bean, chose to mark the Armistice solemnly.
Returning to&nbsp;Fromelles&nbsp;in northern France where two years earlier Australian soldiers had fought their first major action on the Western Front, Bean walked in silence over the trampled battlefield.
“We found the old No-Man’s-Land simply full of our dead,” he wrote.
“The skulls and bones and torn uniforms were lying about everywhere.”
On that day, perhaps Bean reflected on the unfulfilled dreams of the almost 2,000 Australians who had fallen at&nbsp;Fromelles&nbsp;in a single day, or the suffering of the more than 3,000 who had been wounded.
Perhaps he thought of the tens of thousands of our war dead lying on the steep hills of Gallipoli, or on the blood-soaked fields of Flanders, and &nbsp;the searing deserts of the East.
Perhaps he dwelt on the grief of families who would never again embrace loved ones, or on the loss to communities across the nation of a generation that had made victory possible.
As we commemorate the centenary of the Armistice and cast our minds back over the years, we know too well the deep scars of war and long to prevent them from touching an Australian soul.
Our human predisposition, our Australian predisposition, is for peace.
It is to be in accord with family, friends,&nbsp;neighbours, community. To love, to live.
That’s why war is always a failure of our humanity.
Yet we know there are times when even the most peaceful of men and women are called upon to defend the beliefs they live by, and there have been too many such times over the course of the past century.
This is not to say that our reflections on those conflicts must be unquestioning.
But the sacrifice demands that we reflect, ponder, and learn from every conflict because that’s what free societies like Australia do — to learn from the past so that we can better navigate the changing currents of our own times, for our own children and for the next generations.
Over this past century, I believe the tenor of our conflicts has tended towards upholding the highest ideals of humankind – to preserve freedom, to safeguard democracy, to stand against tyranny.
And we have done so at a great cost.
It is easy from the vantage point of a century to lose sight of the sacrifices made in our name.
Much harder to cross the span of generations and put ourselves in the boots of someone landing at ANZAC Cove, or charging into Beersheba, or struggling against the rattle of death on Flanders Fields.
Those who fought in the Great War had the same and normal flaws and frailties of any other Australian of any other generation.
Yet their selflessness at the darkest of times has set them apart for eternity in our nation’s consciousness.
Andrew&nbsp;Gillison, a chaplain, heard cries coming from No Man’s Land while in a trench at Gallipoli.
Despite having been warned about the snipers, he tried to crawl out to rescue the wounded soldier, calling.
He did know what the risk was, but he did know what it was to do the right thing, and he lost his life for it.
Alice Chisholm, a mother of five, sailed to Egypt to be near her son who had been wounded.
She stayed to set up food canteens and shelters for Allied troops serving in the Middle East, and after the war she supported our diggers by establishing a Returned Soldiers’ Club in&nbsp;Goulburn.
William Rawlings, a horse trainer from near&nbsp;Warrnambool, risked his life to clear a path for his fellow infantrymen during an attack at&nbsp;Morlancourt&nbsp;on the Western Front.
He was one of a thousand Indigenous Australians who volunteered when their country did not properly recognise them or their people, and he would die just a few months before the Armistice. They saw our country not just for what was then but what they dreamed it would become.
We often say that men and women like this were fearless; but I actually don’t believe that.
Because bravery is not the absence of fear. It is the choice to commit to a purpose greater than your fear. That is the moment when fear is conquered.
They feared greatly but acted nonetheless, and it is this that embodies our highest aspirations as a nation and as people – to live for others even when to do so is unimaginably hard and the cost extreme.
Tragically, the hardships continued even for those who rode out the storms of war.
Many suffered the physical marks of battle; yet more, the deep emotional scars of memory.
Thousands of our servicemen and women would die from injury as well as despair within a decade of coming home.
Their struggles were as much an act of patriotism and love of our country as their enlisted service, and that is true to this day for those who wrestle daily with these memories.
Despite hopes that it would usher in a lasting peace, the Great War was sadly not the war to end all wars.
By the time this memorial here to the Great War as was originally proposed was opened, another war was upon us.
The Australian original ANZACs who left our shores for Gallipoli have been followed by those who fought in the jungles of Kokoda, and struggled in the mud of Long Tan, and battled in the dust of&nbsp;Uruzgan, and risked their lives in the skies over Germany and in the waters of the Mediterranean and the Pacific.
To all who have served our nation in wars, in conflicts and peacekeeping operations, to those of you who serve to this day here or all around the world, we owe you a debt of gratitude as a nation and as individual Australians.
Through it all, we can’t avert our gaze from citizen-soldiers of the First World War though, who defined so much of who we are as a people today.
They believed in country over self.
They believed in each other, when all seemed lost.
They respected the chain of command, but it was their character that drove their actions, as it is today.
They laughed, they smoked, they told stories, they wept,&nbsp;they&nbsp;were as earthy as the land in which they were born from.
And though it was hard to see during the fog of war and even harder to appreciate the scale of their sacrifice, they nevertheless changed the world, together.
As Charles Bean did one hundred years ago, today we solemnly commemorate the Armistice.
In silence, a silence that beckons and prays for peace, we honour the 102,000 Australians who have lost their lives in war for us.
For our tomorrows, they gave their today.
In silence, we commit ourselves to standing by those who have returned home.
In silence, we honour the great leadership of General Monash.
And in silence at the hour when war subsided, we resolve to sustain the peace today and beyond.
So that when the bugle calls, we will in the words of our great Australian poet:
“Stand four-square to the tempest,&nbsp;
whatever&nbsp;the battering hail,
No foe shall gather our harvest,
Or sit on our stockyard rail”.
Lest we forget.
&nbsp;


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Michael Franchi
PRIME MINISTER: I’d like to recognise that we are here on the lands of the First Australians from this district – the Larrakia people – and we acknowledge their elders past and present.
It’s terrific to be here with so many friends.
To Chamber President Greg Ireland, VP Stuart Kenny and CEO Greg Bicknell, thank for the invitation to address the NT Chamber of Commerce today.
It’s great to be in Darwin, a tropical city with its own unique rhythm and feel.
I’m especially pleased to be doing a number of things today.
This morning I signed the Darwin City Deal with the Chief Minister and the Lord Mayor.
I know many of you have been waiting keenly for this day, especially Senator Nigel Scullion and Gary Higgins who have been champions of the cause.
This City Deal will unlock investment in Darwin, grow the population, and support greater business activity.
And very soon I will have the pleasure of welcoming the Japanese Prime Minister His Excellency Mr Shinzo Abe to Darwin, along with Mrs Abe. &nbsp;
This will involve marking with Prime Minister Abe the fruition of the biggest ever investment by Japan in Australia – the Ichthys LNG project here in Darwin, the benefits of which will flow for many years to come.
Benefits that will further complement our economic plan for Australia where this week we again saw clear evidence that this economic plan is working.
We witnessed yet another strong employment number with 32,800 more jobs in the month of October, with full-time jobs in Australia increasing by 42,300.
Since our Government came to office just over 5 years ago, nearly 1.2 million jobs have been created.
At 5 per cent, the unemployment rate is the lowest since April 2012.
When we came to Government, the NT unemployment rate was 5.2 per cent – it’s now down to 4.6 per cent.
Nationally, we’re also seeing a recovery of business investment off the back of increased business confidence.
And pleasingly, we are seeing a pick-up in wages growth across the country.
But we are not complacent. &nbsp;We recognise that not everyone is feeling the benefits of a strong economy, including here in the Territory.
That’s why we have a plan for an even stronger economy that delivers for all parts of Australia.
So as a country and as a society, we grow together – not grow apart.
That’s my goal for Darwin. &nbsp;That’s my aspiration for the Territory.
That’s our Government’s plan for Australia.
Our economic plan has several inter-connected threads.
Let me highlight just some of them:

Lower tax for individuals and small and medium-sized business owners like many of you in this room
Lower electricity prices so energy customers get a better deal from the big electricity companies
The largest integrated infrastructure plan in Australia’s history - $75 billion of investment over 10 years
A broad-based industry strategy that recognises traditional strengths such as resources and agriculture, but also looks to develop areas of growth in services, the defence industry, medical industry and science and technology
A trade strategy that continues to break down barriers for Australian exports, especially here in the Asian region. &nbsp;That’s a big part of what I have been doing this week and what I will continue to be doing as I head to APEC in PNG tomorrow.
A bold new agenda for small business growth, including major announcements this week by the Treasurer on small business finance and cutting red tape.
All the while within a framework of fiscal responsibility – a Government swinging the Budget back to balance so we live within our means and reduce our debt over time and deliver the essential services Australians rely on.

Let me say a bit more about small and family businesses.
We’re bringing forward small business tax cuts by five years.
Small and medium-sized businesses with a turnover less than $50 million – thousands of them here in the Territory – will pay a tax rate of just 25 per cent in 2021-22 rather than from 2026-27 as planned.
Similar timing changes will apply to the roll-out of the 16 per cent tax discount for unincorporated businesses.
3.3 million small and medium sized businesses across the nation, employing around 7 million Australians, will reap the benefits.
This includes the more than 19,000 businesses in the Territory who employ over 58,000 Territorians.
At the same time, we’ve extended the Government’s $20,000 instant asset write-off through to 30 June 2019.
Some 350,000 small businesses claimed the instant asset write-off in 2016-17.
It’s a great opportunity to reinvest in your business by replacing or upgrading an asset.
But we have much bigger plans to turn small businesses into bigger businesses beginning with small business finance.
In my time as Treasurer, I became very concerned about the ability of small business to secure access to competitive finance – relative to large businesses.
If small business can’t access finance at reasonable terms they can’t grow.
Our Government has listened, recognised this problem and now we have acted.
This week the Treasurer announced a $2 billion Securitisation Fund to help businesses better access the loans they need to grow.
The fund will help to provide an additional source of funding for smaller banks and non-bank lenders who, in turn, will be able to lend to small businesses at more competitive terms.
It will be administered by the Australian Office of Financial Management – providing a long overdue boost to liquidity and competition in the small business lending market.
The Government is also working with financial institutions (including APRA and the major banks) on establishing an Australian Business Growth Fund that would provide longer term equity funding to small businesses.
This would be modelled on similar funds that have been operating in the UK and Canada where this issue of access to small business finance has been highlighted as well.
We’re reducing red tape and the regulatory burden on small business. &nbsp;All up, the Government has cut $6 billion in Commonwealth red tape, which is reducing the regulatory burden on small businesses.
We’ve streamlined GST reporting for small businesses by simplifying the BAS. &nbsp;When fully implemented, this is estimated to save each small business, on average, $590 per year.
Today we have announced we’re going to reduce the reporting burden for small and medium businesses by doubling ASIC financial reporting thresholds that have become outdated.
Around 2,200 companies will no longer be required to comply with financial reporting and audit requirements. This is estimated to reduce regulatory costs by $81.3 million annually.
Complementing plans for business, our City Deal will unlock investment in Darwin, grow the population, and support greater business activity.
Darwin will get a new Education and Civic Precinct in Cavenagh Street.
Its centrepiece will be a new city campus for Charles Darwin University, attracting more students here – 1,100 more.
Those students are going to flow into the centre of the city to study, live and work.
And there’ll be hundreds of university staff in that consumer mix too.
International students spend around $500 a week on living expenses, while hosting visits from their friends and family too. That’s going to be a new source of strength to the local economy.
Analysis by Deloitte Access Economics has found that the new city campus could increase economic output in the Darwin region by more than $250 million over the next fifteen years.
The City Deal will revitalise the look and feel of Darwin.
More green space. &nbsp;More landscaping.
It will attract new visitors, residents, students and businesses, improving the experience for all and help ensure more stay for the long-term.
It provides business the confidence it needs for the future.
With an agreed 10-year plan, between all levels of government, to grow and transform Darwin, we’re sending a strong signal to today’s business community and tomorrow’s investors.
There’s much more to the City Deal and I encourage you to examine the detail.
Now of course, the NT is bigger and broader than Darwin.
My Government is taking steps to adapt the successful City Deals model for regional development.
Just last weekend, I wrote to the Chief Minister to formally invite him to partner in a Regional Deal for the Barkly Region.
Discussions were well underway in the lead-up to that invitation – the Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack, and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs Nigel Scullion, had met with the Barkly Regional Council and leaders of the Barkly Aboriginal community.
We have begun a formal process. That’s an important step.
Ultimately, the community will determine the specifics of this deal.
Of course, our City Deals build on a larger pipeline of infrastructure investment in the Territory.
Since 2013-14, the Government has committed $1.5 billion to fund infrastructure projects in the Territory.
I mentioned briefly at the outset as part of the Government’s economic plan our defence industry strategy.
The NT is vitally important to the Australian Defence Force and the Government is continuing to invest strongly in capability, personnel and facilities in the Territory.
More than 5,000 serve in our defence forces in and around Darwin.
Under the umbrella of the Defence White Paper, we are investing $200 billion investment in defence capability and around $8 billion in Defence infrastructure projects over the next decade.
Under our Local Industry Capability Plan we’ll be working to ensure local Territory businesses and tradies get their share of work on important defence projects.
I know many of the Chamber’s members are in tourism.
Of course, Kakadu is one of the icons of Australian tourism.
I want Kakadu tourism to keep delivering for the Territory.
I want to see people from all around the world continuing to enjoy the beautiful gorge and waterfalls of our largest national park.
Our Government is working with the Territory Government on how best to manage and continue investing in Kakadu so we continue to tap into its amazing tourism potential.
We’re also working with the Territory Government and Traditional Owners to ensure the future of Jabiru is settled as soon as possible, to provide some certainty there.
Jabiru is already a major service centre for Kakadu and the surrounding region, and although the mine is closing, there’s certainly a lot of potential for a future built on tourism.
Our Government’s commitment to the Territory can be seen too in the changes we have made to GST distribution.
We know the mining boom created real volatility in the GST distribution.
So we’ve legislated a fairer and more sustainable GST deal for everyone. It’s now law.
I promised that back in July as Treasurer and it’s now delivered.
In addition to the already paid extra $260 million, under our new legislated changes, the NT is forecast to be $258 million better off over the next eight years.
That includes $69 million in top-up payments over the first three years.
We’re also changing the formula to address this issue in the longer term.
It’ll be the biggest change to the GST since it was introduced and this is why we took our time to get it right.
Our GST plan is about ensuring your fair share, so that the services you rely on – schools, hospitals and law enforcement, as well as infrastructure and other important projects – are delivered.
This is crucial to the ongoing strength of the Northern Territory and its economy.
In April 2018, the Commonwealth announced it would invest $550 million over five years in housing for NT remote communities.
The NT Government has agreed to match this funding as part of a new National Partnership Agreement.
Our negotiations are focussing on addressing overcrowding, providing transparency about how money is spent, a decision-making role for land councils and ensuring works are delivered by local Indigenous Territorians and businesses.
We expect to finalise the agreement before the end of the year.
And all of this is being done without increasing your taxes.
On what you earn, on your investment, on your business, your retirement savings, housing – 16,000 Territorians negatively gear rental property.
So Ladies and Gentlemen, I come back to where I started.
All of these investments in the future can only be made if you have a plan for a strong economy.
I strongly believe that the next election will be fought over those defining issues of who can manage the economy best and who can keep Australians safe and protect our sovereignty.
We do recognise that not everyone is feeling the benefits of a strong economy, including here in the Territory.
The nature of the Territories economy means you are often called on to buckle down through periods of uncertainty.
It can be a grind, especially if you are running a small business.
We get that. &nbsp;That’s why everything we do as a government is geared towards strengthening our economy and ensuring all Australians can share in the benefits of a strong economy.
I want to thank the NT Chamber of Commerce for the invitation today and for everything you do to advocate on behalf of a resilient and forward-looking business sector in the Territory.


Prime Minister
Photo:&nbsp;AAP Image/Mick Tsikas
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you very much for that very warm welcome. It’s great to be here in Port Moresby and I want to thank you all very much for the invitation to speak here today.
I also want to recognise the commitment of all of those who have given of their time and their efforts to be here and form part of the APEC Business Advisory Council. ABAC plays a very key role in ensuring that these APEC meetings get on with business, literally getting on with business as I am sure you are doing here today as you’re engaging with each other.
It is great to be here in Port Moresby. Papua New Guinea is not just Australia's closest neighbour geographically, we are family - wantok - and it’s right -
[Applause]
Thank you. But that’s true also if we were talking about Fiji or throughout Polynesia, we’re whanau. We see ourselves as part of a family in the Pacific. So it’s right that we gather together here in Port Moresby because we honour and recognised that he “P” in APEC; the Pacific and particularly the Pacific Island economies, as I said, that we refer to as our Pacific family.
I have already made it clear as Prime Minister that Australia is stepping up. We will step up as part of our ‘step-up’ initiative in Pacific. We are taking and will take our engagement in the Pacific to a new level. I was reminded recently of another new Australian Prime Minister addressing his first APEC ministerial meeting. It was 1996 and it was then Prime Minister John Howard. He said there were three preconditions for growth in our region. The first was responsible domestic economic management. The second was market access for exports and the third was tackling infrastructure constraints. As we gather today I believe those guiding principles for economic prosperity are as relevant today as when John first mentioned them all those years ago.
You know, no country gets rich selling things to itself. That’s why APEC encourages trade and by taking practical steps on the things that matter to business - faster customs procedures, facilitating supply chain connectivity, promoting sustainable development, facilitating the digital economy and digital connectedness. APEC must remain a very practical forum. It cannot be about talk, it has to be engaged in very practical measures with a focus on facilitating business and a business environments that set the right conditions for business. While most of you in this room understand full well the benefits of trade - if you didn’t you would not be here - we are living in an age though when leaders and business need to proactively prosecute the case for open markets and a market-led economy. We are witnessing a rising tide of trade protectionism around the world in our constituencies, along with financial market volatility in some emerging markets. Fortunately for all of us, the strong relationships between APEC economies and the strong relationship we share with the business community, gives us the right foundation to tackle global challenges together.
The test for us now, for all of us, is to stand up for the economic values we believe in. To show how they work, to demonstrate it. How they lift living standards and have lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, as those key, core economic values have led to policies and achieved those goals. As they have done. To show people, all of our people in our APEC economies and nations around the world, what happens when you are open and when you work in partnership; that you create jobs, build prosperity and you create a more stable, secure and more peaceful region.
When it comes to trade, Australia's actions match our words. We have among the lowest tariffs in the world and we have a consistent record for negotiating free-trade agreements with partners. Stay still long enough and our Trade Minister will do a deal with you.
[Laughter]
We all need to look beyond our own market if we are to boost our prosperity and Australia has always looked outward to achieve our prosperity. In Australia, trade liberalisation has benefited our people, just as immigration has, just as foreign investment has. You know, one in five jobs in Australia exist because of our trade activities and recent research has shown that the average Australian family now earns $8,500 more a year than they would have, if we have not lowered barriers to our trade for the last three decades. That’s a generational shift. More than 50,000 Australian businesses are exporters, which contributes nearly $390 billion to our economy.
Australia is not alone in this success. More than 1 billion people have been lifted out of extreme poverty since 1991, in large part because of the jobs and access to more affordable consumer goods that free trade has enabled. It works and you should do what works and you should keep doing what works. That is what Australia is going to do. Nowhere have we have we seen that more, than in our own Asia-Pacific region. No single country would have been able to create this prosperity alone. Success has relied on all of us together, making a commitment to lower barriers, to support openness to play by the rules we set and ensure those rules remain in place.
In Australia, for every big business that benefits from free trade, there are dozens of small and medium-sized businesses who benefit as well. You don’t have to pick and choose. I believe APEC needs to find new ways of making it easier for&nbsp; SMEs to embrace export opportunities, because small and medium businesses are the engine room of so many of our national economies. They have the capacity to really drive job-creation and the prosperity gains throughout our region.
So my message to you today is that Australia's commitment to free trade remains strong and always will. Of course we recognise that there are many challenges. But the solution is not throwing up protectionist barriers. Tit-for-tat protectionism and threats of trade war are in no-one’s interests economically and undermine the authority of the global and regional trading rules that benefit us all and importantly, the people, the families who live in our economies and are supported by our economies.
So our efforts must be about persuading and convincing our peoples again, about the domestic benefits of what we are doing here. I know there are legitimate questions around trade arrangements. But the solution to perceived unfair trade practices is more likely to be found around the negotiating table, than it is in building a tariff wall. Australia will continue to advocate for trade disputes to be resolved by negotiation and within WTO rules. But we know the WTO is not perfect. We will work with like-minded countries around the world to ensure that it is improved and to understand the issues that they are raising, independently listening and seeking to understand. We want to strengthen and improve the WTO and we will continue to pursue liberalisation wherever we can.
That is what we must do and that is what I will be discussing with APEC leaders and colleagues here at every opportunity. We do so because Australia practices what we preach. We recently ratified the TPP-11 agreement which sets 21st Century rules, modern rules, for trade and investment between 11 of the 21 APEC economies and create free trade partnerships where previously there were none.
The door to the TPP remains open. More can join and we welcome and look forward to those opportunities in the future. It set the standard for what an agreement should look like into the future, by being modern. With six countries now on board - and more - the benefits will kick in from the 30th of December this year. The TPP-11 shows that Australia is a nation committed to economic integration and to opening up new opportunities for businesses across the region. It shows that Australia will act and we will deliver on free-trade and that we have partners who are willing to do the same. Still, more nations, APEC members and others in the region are working towards the conclusion of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership which we committed at the East Asia Summit and the RCEP summit, to ensure that this is concluded at the end of next year. As well, I believe the PACER Plus free trade agreement will open opportunities even further across the Pacific. PACER Plus has been negotiated between Australia and New Zealand and 12 other members of the Pacific Islands Forum, including six who are not members of the WTO. When in force, PACER Plus will foster trade and economic integration by aligning align regulatory regimes and allowing a smoother flow of goods, capital and people within regions. This is a region in the Pacific, full of opportunity where innovation and new business opportunities are being embraced. Whether it’s the already successful tourism industry, coffee from the PNG highlands or Bougainville’s award-winning chocolate, there is growing market for the output of the Pacific Islands. Australia, New Zealand and the UK are already buying Fiji-made sports uniforms and Fiji water has become ubiquitous across the world. Total two-way trade between Australia and Pacific Island countries is now worth more than $11.5 billion. The Pacific’s commitment to free trade and growth is another chapter in the extraordinary story of our region's economic transformation.
Across APEC, Australia wants to see more done to tackle non-tariff barriers to trade and structural reform, but no single economy can make this happen on its own. It does require reciprocity. As nations look for new trade opportunities they must also provide them. Trade is a two-way process by definition. There are plenty of opportunities before us, like developing digital infrastructure and creating the right regulatory environment that protects privacy, while enabling data to move across borders. Business tells us that we need rules that ensure the free flow of data and facilitate online trade, but at the same time protects consumers and recognises cyber risks. Australia is focused on creating that environment, which is why our Productivity Commission, working with New Zealand, is examining priority areas for removing barriers to growing the digital economy. But when we think about the reforms needed, particularly the potential for digital technology, we need to look out across our entire region and that includes the island states of the Pacific. Digital technology offers transformational opportunities for Pacific Island economies. It is why PNG's theme for APEC, “Harnessing Inclusive Opportunities, Embracing the Digital Future,” is so apt. The World Bank estimates digital transformation will grow GDP by more than $5 billion US and create 300,000 new jobs in the Pacific by 2040. That’s why Australia is supporting the construction of high-speed telecommunications cables from Australia to PNG and the Solomon Islands. Fiji has already shown us the commercial opportunities of high-speed telecommunication cables, leading the way in the Pacific with successful call centres and a business process outsourcing sector.
Together with partners we are looking at other projects in the very near future in this region. There is so much opportunity in the Pacific for citizens, businesses and governments and your attendance here is demonstration and affirmation of that.
This leads us to the third pillar of growth; infrastructure. The Asian Development Bank estimates the Pacific region needs $3.1 billion US in infrastructure investment, each year until 2030, a tall task. To contribute to that, last week Australia, the United States and Japan signed a memorandum of understanding to support trilateral cooperation in the Indo Pacific region and I had the opportunity to further the discuss those issues with Prime Minister Abe in Darwin yesterday. The MOU formalises the trilateral partnership for infrastructure investment in the Indo Pacific which was announced in July. Under the MOU, the three countries will work together to finance infrastructure projects and mobilise private sector investment to drive future economic growth, job-creation and poverty reduction. We will work closely with partners to identify projects for the trilateral partnership to support. So, together with the United States and Japan, we are working closely together, closely together, to drive this agenda.
As well, the Australian Government is setting up a $2 billion Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific, which will significantly boost our support for concessional infrastructure development. I am looking forward to giving EFIC, Australia’s export financing agency an extra billion dollars in callable capital and a new, more flexible infrastructure financing power to support at commercial rates, investments in the region which also have a broad national benefit for Australia. These new financing options have the potential to boost partnerships between the public and the private sectors, to create more projects like the Tina River hydropower project in the Solomon Islands, which when it opens, will be a great example of public-private infrastructure investment, bringing together the World Bank with public and private sector investors from Korea and Abu Dhabi. We are open to working with all partners in the region, all partners in the region. We want to see infrastructure investment though, that is transparent, that is non- discriminatory, that is open, that upholds robust standards to deliver long-term benefits that meets genuine needs and avoids unsustainable debt burdens. It must be in the interests of the country in which you are seeking to invest, to ensure we can deliver those projects that can benefit their economy which in turn benefits our entire regional economy.
We want a rules-based system that respect the sovereignty and the independence of every single country and a commitment then to regional security that is always the precondition for prosperity. But all of us in here in the room know there is more to do and always is. So the challenge is to strengthen our domestic economic foundations - which I can happily report is the case in Australia - to improve our market access for exports - because you never get rich selling things to yourself - and to finance and build vital infrastructure. That is as vital today as it has ever been.
Australia is committed to this proven path because we believe in it. Our external affairs policies are not just the sum of our deals. They are an expression of our values and our beliefs, whether they are economic or otherwise. And so we do this, motivated by our convictions, by our beliefs and our values, with a deep commitment to a strong, stable and secure Indo Pacific region.
That is why Australia is a trusted partner and a long-term partner; because our commitment is based on beliefs and values that have long been recognised in this region. It is the guiding principle for our foreign and trade policy.
No one country, no one economy can prosper without engaging with others. That is the lesson of the past half-century that has delivered so much to the people who live in our region. It is the lesson governments and the private sector must continue to use to guide us in the years ahead and to make the case, to make the case that this is the right way to go forward. To make that case in our communities, in our constituencies, in our boardrooms, whatever table we’re sitting around, the kitchen table or anything else, we need to make the case that trade is the right way forward to lift people out of poverty, to provide stability and peace in our region and to lift living standards.
Thank you very much for your attention.
&nbsp;


Prime Minister
Photo:&nbsp;AAP Image/Joel Carrett
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you for inviting me to speak with you this evening. It is a great honour to be delivering the 2018 Bradfield Oration, marking the legacy of one of the great visionaries of our city of Sydney in John Bradfield.
From a young age I have always been fascinated by the energy and flow of cities. Each one unique – like living organisms, with their own rhythms, patterns and personalities.
Each a living history of the choices people, businesses and families have made and what they have been trying to create for their future and the generations to follow.
Choices about work, about proximity to family, and to opportunity. Choices shaped by access to housing and services like schools, health care and shopping precincts. And conditioned in turn by a search for belonging and a sense of place.
From Lachlan Macquarie to Sir Henry Parkes and now Gladys Berejiklian, they have worked to respond to and anticipate these demands as well as dream and plan out the future they hope to create.
We are continuing to tell our stories as a people through our cities. And along the way we have been informed, guided and blessed by the Greenways and Bradfields, whose great genius has been to lift our aspiration by redefining what we know to be possible.
It would also be a mistake to think of them as just engineers and architects. They were true planners.
You don’t build a bridge with that many lanes in 1932 because you enjoyed the engineering challenge. You did it because you were planning for the future and you got it. You had a vision for Sydney being a great city and you planned and built for it.
Today’s Greenways and Bradfields are not only developing Western Sydney Airport and the Aerotroplis, they are also the scientists from the CSIRO at the new Urban Living Lab in Darwin, Australia’s tropical capital, established as part of our new Darwin City Deal with $4.8 million in new funding to get it up and running.
For the first time we will be bringing together experts in the area of managing tropical cities. Everything from waste management to how urban vegetation can be better planned to more effectively cool these urban environments.
This is also a significant services export opportunity for Australia.
With more than billions of people living in urban environments in tropical regions of the world – including some of the world’s largest cities – I am excited about how we can link our expertise and learning to these significant commercial opportunities.
To this end, we have just launched an initiative to link up with ASEAN’s Smart Cities Agenda. It will draw on Australia’s world class expertise in green infrastructure, water governance, renewable energy, innovative technologies and data analytics.
For a while, I tossed up becoming a Town Planner. Eventually, I found myself studying Economic Geography at UNSW.
I was one of only about eight students – studying everything from crop rotation to Walter Christaller’s “central place theory”.
I can see now that I’ve really piqued your interest! For the one person who may be interested, we can talk later.
But my studies and later experiences reinforced some important lessons about cities.
In short, cities are a solution to a human problem. How do you support a growing population?
Cities are not about buildings, bridges, roads, railways, hospitals and airports. They are about the people who use them. They are about the people who live in the cities.
Cities are a response to population growth and are the product of a developing economy.
Bradfield understood this. His focus was not on building infrastructure as public monuments, but addressing positively and aspirationally the challenges of a growing population.
When you understand that Cities are actually about people rather than concrete it changes your perspective.
Firstly, this is why each and every city has its own unique character.
You don’t then try and transform Sydney’s built form into Singapore’s, any more than you try and make Brisbane Perth or Townsville Newcastle.
Just like us as people, we should let our cities be themselves, a product of the people who live in them, their geography and climate.
A city and the society it supports finds its own course, like a river finds its way to sea, negotiating the geological features along the way.
The city becomes the product of its experience and evolution, of how it responds to challenges and pressures – for better or worse.
As we acknowledge our our cities are about people, the decisions we make must be made with – not against – the grain of peoples’ choices – and in line with their aspirations. It means that our approach to decision-making or planning must have an eye and ear to community sentiment, cohesion and ambition. About what they want for their city.
So what has all of this got to do with my role as Prime Minister and that of Commonwealth Government?
First of all, my role you’ll be thankful is not to play town planner, be first architect, Lord Mayor or indeed Premier.
That’s not my job.
I will leave those tasks to the Bradfields and the Greenways of our current generation.
My levers are confined to the ensuring we step up to the big nation building projects and challenges, drive our economy forward to fuel the essential services and infrastructure Australians rely on and seek to manage population growth by adopting well targeted, responsible, and sustainable immigration policies.
Now on the big projects, like Bradfield, we are stepping up.
And like Bradfield we understand that infrastructure creates value far beyond the construction and land acquisition cost of the asset being built.
With a record $75 billion infrastructure pipeline, we are playing our part.
We are strengthening the road spine of the Eastern Seaboard with major investments in the Bruce Highway and the Pacific Highway.
As Treasurer, I announced a further $3.3 billion in this year’s Budget for additional upgrades along the Bruce Highway, increasing the Government’s commitment to $10 billion between Brisbane and Cairns.
This will improve safety, capacity and flood immunity – with major work targeting poor safety stretches along this vital 1,700 kilometre stretch of road.
Continuation of our $6.6 billion investment in the duplication of the Pacific Highway, from Hexham to Queensland including $971 million for the Coffs Harbour Bypass in this year’s Budget.
Our investment in the Pacific Highway has already halved road fatalities and cut two hours from travel times – a big benefit in cutting freight costs and for locals – and in summertime, holiday-makers as well.
This project has supported 14,400 direct and indirect jobs.
We are making further big road investments in South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria, including our standing offer of $3 billion for the East West Link.
I can help get this project moving next Monday morning, I just need a state Premier who wants to build this vital infrastructure, and only Matt Guy is offering.
We are making major investments in rail as well.
$9.3 billion in equity financing and grant funding for the Melbourne to Brisbane Inland Rail project – better connecting regional Australia to domestic and international markets
Preparatory work is underway and construction is due to commence soon. The project will support 16,000 jobs during construction.
In Western Australia, we are providing $2.3 billion to the METRONET – which is the largest Commonwealth commitment to the Perth rail network ever.
And in Victoria we are investing up to $5 billion on the Melbourne Airport Rail Link. A project people have talked about for fifty years – its Australia’s second busiest airport with 35 million passengers a year.
And that’s not the only project with a fifty year wait over.
You have heard every year at this lecture about the potential of a Western Sydney Airport.
Well this year, I have better news: the bulldozers are on the site – and earthworks to level the site are underway.
No longer are we saying we will build it – we are building it. &nbsp;Right now.
And we are backing in our $5.3 billion in equity financing for the airport with the Commonwealth’s contribution of $2.9 billion to the $3.6 billion Western Sydney Infrastructure Plan – because our Government said in 2014 we’d have the roads ready before the airport.
Through the Western Sydney City Deal we have also got the planning underway to have rail to the airport when it opens in 2026.
In the North of Australia we are investing in its potential with $5 billion Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility to kickstart a range of work – and $2.2 billion to upgrade roads in the north across Queensland, the NT and WA..
Earlier today, the Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack announced we will increase our funding of new water infrastructure projects across Australia by an additional $500 million.
This will lift spending on water infrastructure to more than $3 billion.
These investments will ensure we can fast track important water infrastructure projects that will deliver new, reliable and affordable sources of water to stimulate investment in irrigated agriculture, create jobs and underpin regional economic growth.
An infrastructure programme like this needs a strong economy to support it and that’s why growing our economy has been the core focus of our Government.
Without economic growth you cannot pay for the hospitals, schools, pensions, affordable medicines, defence forces, police forces, Medicare.
Poorer societies are never fairer societies. Getting an equal share of less is not my plan, nor do I think it represents fairness.
Fairness and prosperity go hand in hand. There are a billion people in the world today since 1990 who are no longer in poverty who can attest to that fact.
Our economic plan is getting results, with strong growth, lower unemployment record jobs growth, and a AAA rated budget coming back into surplus next year. We will keep on with our plan of:
Reduce taxes, so Australians households and small and medium sized businesses can keep more of what they earn
Reduce electricity prices by ensuring we increase the amount of reliable energy in the system and ensure the large electricity companies give their customers a better deal
Investing in the infrastructure that grows our economy and the services like health and education that enable our people to be successful in the economy they face today and in the future
Expanding our markets with record trade deals that have opened up new opportunities for our businesses large and small
A broad-based industry strategy that recognises traditional strengths such as resources and agriculture, but also looks to develop areas of growth in services, the defence industry, medical technology and manufacturing.
A bold new agenda for small business growth, including improved access to small business finance and cutting red tape.
A proven framework of fiscal responsibility – ensuring the Government lives within its &nbsp;means.
Population growth has played a key role in our economic success. But I also know Australians in our biggest cities are concerned about population.
They are saying: enough, enough, enough.
The roads are clogged, the buses and trains are full. The schools are taking no more enrolments. I hear what you are saying. I hear you loud and clear.
That’s why we need to improve how we manage population growth in this country.
We have become, especially in Sydney and Melbourne a victim of our success.
Our population growth has three sources, natural growth occurring from the life decisions of Australian families, permanent overseas migration, and temporary migration made up of students, temporary workers and so on.
Over the current decade, around 42 per cent of the growth has occurred naturally and migration has accounted for about 58 per cent.
Over the two decades to 2016, our national population grew by 6 million and migration made up 54 per cent of that increase.
Population growth has provided our country with benefits that we often take for granted.
It has added a dynamism to our economy and society that you don’t find in most other advanced economies.
It is a key reason why we have been able to sustain strong growth in our economy and national incomes that are the envy of the developed world, contributing almost a fifth of the growth in Australia’s GDP per person over the past 30 years.
Population growth, along with productivity, will become even more important for sustaining strong growth in national living standards over the next 30 years as the ageing of the population weighs on workforce participation.
The median age of a migrant to Australia is between 26 years of age.
This compares to our national average age of 37.
Mostly, new migrants are working and as such, contributing to the welfare of the nation, rather than drawing from government.
Without migration, Australia’s workforce would be shrinking by 2020. With migration, the Productivity Commission estimates that labour force participation will be around 10 per cent higher in 2060.
And contrary to what is sometimes claimed, the Productivity Commission has found that migration confers no negative outcome to employment for those who are Australian born. In fact, it increases opportunity for Australians.
It is worth remembering that because skilled migration supports the economy, Australia does compete with other countries in bringing those additional skills to our shores.
We must also recognise the economic benefits of temporary migration.
This year, we have almost 600,000 foreign students studying in Australia. From the cafes of Glebe and the bars of Parramatta, to the computer stores of Canberra and the laundromats of Coffs Harbour, these students are supporting jobs.
Far too often, planners have treated population as one amorphous blob.
But that doesn’t work for Australia. We’re too big and diverse.
Talking about average population growth is like talking about our average rainfall. It fails to recognise the different experiences and outlooks of different cities or regions.
Over the past decade, our population has had an annual growth rate of more than 1.6 per cent. I stress well below our economic growth rate of over three per cent, which means per person we have been doing better as well.
According to the World Bank, Australia’s population is growing faster than most OECD countries including the United States – and faster than the projections of past Inter-Generational Reports.
And within that growth there are variances with Sydney, Melbourne, Hobart and Canberra experiencing population growth during 2016-17 above their respective average growth rates for the previous 20 years.
While migration has accounted for 54 per cent of Australia’s population increase in the two decades to 2016, 75 per cent of migrants are going to Sydney, Melbourne and South East Queensland.
Here in Sydney migrants accounted for around 70% of population growth last year.
This has created its own pressure points – and pressure points in population always manifest themselves in housing and infrastructure.
Now I should add, this focus on migration in capital cities is not a new phenomenon, but there has been a tick-up. In 2016, 83 per cent of the overseas-born population were in capital cities, compared to 81 per cent in 1996. For, the Australian born population it was 61 per cent in 2016, having ticked up from 60 per cent in 1996.
It mirrors an age-old truth – and that is, since the dawn of time, people have moved to where they believe they can they see the best economic and social opportunities for them and their families.
In our big cities, interstate migration is also an important component of population change.
We saw that very clearly with the mining boom as Australians moved to areas that were thriving. That is a natural part of a national economy and government has no control, nor any desire for control, over that aspect of population.
Indeed, this movement of people is an important way of capitalising on the economic opportunities available to us.
I believe that we need a new discussion with the state and territories and local governments about how we manage and plan for our changing population.
Of course, the Commonwealth will always have national responsibilities in terms of determining migrant intakes, security, our international obligations and the economy, but that does mean we should not engage with the States and Territories in a discussion about local population growth.
It should be a discussion grounded in data, economics and community sentiment.
A responsible population discussion cannot be arbitrarily about one number, the cap on annual permanent migration. It is certainly relevant, but you have to look at what sits behinds those numbers
For a start more than half the people who become permanent migrants are already here on temporary visas.
To contemplate our permanent visa settings, would also require up stream changes to how many people are coming in on temporary visas as well. The implications of this need to be understood, in lauding by state and territory governments.
My approach will be to move away from top-down discussions about population to set our migration intake caps. I anticipate that this will lead to a reduction in our current migration settings.
This is to be expected since our current permanent intake is almost 30,000 a year below our current cap. So we will look to make an adjustment as we go forward in to next year and this should not be surprising.
But we must do our homework first and make sure this is implemented in a way that does not disadvantage those states that are looking for greater growth and that we have the mechanisms in place to direct new migrants to the areas where there are the jobs, services and opportunities. That’s why the planning partnership with the states is so important.
Managing population change is a shared responsibility, involving all levels of government.
It is the states who build hospitals, approve housing developments, plan roads and know how many kids will be going into their schools in the future. The states and territories know better than any what the population carrying capacity is for their existing and planned infrastructure and services. So I plan to ask them, before we set our annual caps.
The old model of a single, national number determined by Canberra is no longer fit for purpose.
While the benefits of population growth are widespread – in terms of economic growth and a more skilled and enriched society – the pressure points are inevitably local and varied.
It’s about getting the balance right and understanding there is variation between our cities and regions.
For example, Tasmania has a different history and approach to population than Sydney and Melbourne.
Under Will Hodgman the state has worked to turn its fortunes around – and the Federal Government has worked with them.
And do you know the best thing when you look at Tassie’s interstate migration figures – it’s that the turnaround is happening with young people.
Tasmania wants a bigger population. They want growth. They don’t want to lag, they want to lead.
Many of the smaller cities – and the regions – want more people. South Australia, the Northern Territory, Western Australia, communities in North Queensland like Rockhampton have all said the same.
In Sydney, we face a different issue.
A booming economy – with 4.4 per cent unemployment – and over 300 cranes up over this skyline – this city has become a magnet for Australians wanting a better life.
We know the story in Sydney: congestion – on roads and public transport, pressure on services like schools, and until recently, ever increasing house prices.
And this is in a state with a good government that is investing $87 billion in new transport, schools and hospitals in the next four years.
In 2016-17, Sydney’s population increased by 107,000. In other words, Sydney grew by almost 2,000 people a week, every week. A suburb a week.
Of that overseas migration claimed the lion’s share – with 90,100 people.
But the Sydney story on population is not just a migration story. It’s also a quality of life story.
In 2016-17, a net 18,500 people left Sydney for other parts of Australia.
While some of that is older Sydney-siders cashing in on their capital gains and retiring to other parts of the state, those figures also reflect concerns about densities, congestion and other questions that relate to quality of life.
So we need a more targeted and tailored approach to conversations about population.
To this end, I am writing to the Premiers and Chief Ministers inviting them to contribute to a national strategy and framework on population, and putting this on the table for COAG at our next meeting on 12 December in Adelaide.
I want the states to bring forward their population plans targeted to their states. This process can also involve local government. This will feed in to the setting of our migrations caps and policies for next year, ensuring that migrations is finally tied to infrastructure and services carrying capacity.
Further details of this process will be discussed directly with Premiers and Chief Ministers.
In conclusion I want to congratulate the Daily Telegraph for being a voice for Sydney.
In 2014, there was a lot of nervousness about our decision to build the Western Sydney Airport. There was fifty years of resistance.
But the government felt that the time had come – and to the credit of the Telegraph you did too.
This is a paper that is not just proudly Sydney – but persuasively puts the case for a Sydney with more roads, better services, and a stronger economy and safer communities.
We don’t agree every day – but you are a clear, persuasive voice in this city and country and I thank you for your support of this Oration and our Emerald city.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:02): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. On Friday, 9 November, a lone Islamic extremist launched a terrorist attack in Melbourne. The terrorist thought his actions would divide us and frighten us. Instead, he met the will and resolve of Melbourne and Melburnians: two brave police officers who stepped up and confronted the terrorist; bystanders who refused to be cowed; first responders who put themselves in harm's way; and every part of government, state, federal and local, standing as one.
In a moment, a great city understood a simple truth: we are stronger together because we have each other. That strength is needed to deal with the grief, and we grieve for who and what was attacked on that day. We grieve for Sisto Malaspina, known to many in this place, a man who in so many ways embodies everything marvellous and wonderful about this great country; a man who came to this country as a young man and brought with him his Italian joy and an unquenchable openness of heart. We think of his family and we grieve with his family. Our thoughts go to those injured and those who are struggling with the violence they encountered on what should have been any other lovely day in Melbourne.
That day, everyone was tested and no-one was found wanting, particularly the two police officers, who thought they were going to attend a traffic incident. Having met with both of them and their families, their families have every right to feel very proud of those two police officers, as we do today—one very early in their service and one very experienced in their service. As the son of a policeman, I could only look into the eyes of his children and see that same pride in their eyes for their dad. They should always feel incredibly proud—as should all children of police officers around the country feel proud of the great service police officers provide to our country, in our cities and our rural and regional areas.
We can be proud of everyone acting as one on that day, the unflinching resolve of 25 million people. Sadly, we know enough about our modern world to know that we will be tested again. Last Tuesday, the Victorian Joint Counter Terrorism Team arrested and charged three men for undertaking preparations for a terrorist attack. I applaud the Victorian Joint Counter Terrorism Team for thwarting their heinous plan. ASIO has no information to indicate any further related threat following from this incident. Our overall threat level remains unchanged at 'probable'. This means, sadly, that there are groups and individuals with both the intent and the capability to conduct a terrorist attack on our soil, so we must remain vigilant.
Since September 2014, our law enforcement and security agencies have undertaken 15 successful counterterrorism disruption operations in response to potential attack planning here in Australia, and they should be commended for doing so and thwarting those attacks. Ninety-three people have been charged during 41 counterterrorism operations. The Commonwealth is working closely with the states and territories to combat these threats. Though we will do everything—everything—to keep Australians safe, we must accept that being part of a free society means that what is targeted is our very freedom. The government has responded to the emerging threat. Since 2014 we have invested an additional $2.2 billion in keeping Australians safe and have passed 12 tranches, with the support of this House and the other place, of counterterrorism legislation.
We are a free people from many nations and many faiths. In this House I want to thank and acknowledge the many brave and passionate Australians in our Muslim community for their leadership and their courage in speaking out against the things which would seek to corrupt their very religion and put their own families and their own communities at risk. These are brave Australians who deserve our support, and they have mine. Last week, I met with leaders from our Muslim community, and I'm committed to working with all in the community, in partnership with them, to tackle violent Islamic extremism.
These have been testing days but days of strength as well. Last week, Melbourne and Victoria grieved at Sisto Malaspina's state funeral. I was pleased that Jenny was able to attend on that day, representing me, along with Assistant Minister Steve Irons. The Leader of the Opposition was also there, as many were. In cabinet that day we paused for a moment's silence during the funeral, and at the Ethnic Business Awards we also paused to celebrate an incredible life lived.
As I've reflected on the events of recent weeks I've been reminded about a small thing, which I remarked on at the Ethnic Business Awards the other night, that Sisto said when he was interviewed a few years ago. As those of Italian heritage will verify, if coffee has a spiritual home, it is in Italy. In Italy they follow a bible when it comes to drinking coffee. Italians usually don't drink cappuccinos after midday, I'm told, and it is unthinkable to have one after dinner. But in Australia Sisto didn't follow those rules. He'd say, 'People should drink their coffees how they like it; the way they like it, when they like it.' It might sound like a small thing, but that respect for others—the tolerance and the acceptance of difference—is the foundation of modern Australia, the most successful immigrant country in the entire world. It is something we should be very proud of. Sisto got it. He lived it. He displayed it. He demonstrated it. Though his life was taken from him in that terrible terrorist act, he overwhelmed it and conquered it through the life that he lived and the freedoms that he enjoyed.
It is a sad day, as we pause and reflect here again today, but it is a day when we can think about his great achievements as a migrant who came to this country and fulfilled every moment of freedom he had to make Australia a better place. We thank him and we thank all of those who stood as one on that day.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:01): Mr Speaker, on indulgence, I rise to acknowledge the passing yesterday of Bonita Mabo AO. Bonita Mabo was a remarkable woman who possessed a deep, quiet strength. The wife of Eddie Mabo for 32 years, whose long fight for Indigenous land rights made him part of our national pantheon, Bonita was once described as the silent woman behind the man. But while she was reserved, she was much, much more than a supportive spouse. Bonita was a leader in her on right and in her own way, and we honour that today as we mark her passing.
For many years Bonita worked in the background. As Eddie attracted the headlines, continuing what Bonita called his fight, she held the family together and raised the couple's 10 children—an extraordinary achievement. Bonita's children often said, 'Mum, I don't know how you did it.' She'd reply, 'I don't even know myself.' But she instilled in them what she knew, a lesson to us all: love, honesty, generosity and humility. Bonita had the instincts of a teacher, and it was during those years that she cofounded the first Aboriginal community school because she was unhappy with the education her children were receiving. Eddie saw his wife's talents and more than once encouraged her to study, but fear would always take hold, and Bonita thought she would be laughed away. Fortunately, those fears lessened as the years passed.
Eddie's death in 1992, while devastating for Bonita and her family, was a turning point. That was when her quiet strength truly emerged. Bonita was determined to fight her own battles. As an Australian South Sea Islander woman, she spent decades seeking greater understanding of the history of her people, of the suffering and pain inflicted on them. She would travel, she would talk and she would listen, and people listened to her, captivated by the strength of her character and the depths of her integrity. Eddie was a constant presence for her, even after his death. As Bonita said back in 2004:
Any time I go for conferences or anything like that he [Eddie] seems to show up. When I went down to Adelaide he was dancing—all hours of the morning it was. While he was dancing he just looked at me and had the biggest smile. He gives me strength to do the things I do.

Bonita was a firm believer in smiling. 'A smile goes a long way,' she would say. It helped her to persuade, to reassure and to calm. It helped her to move the interests of her people forward whilst also advocating passionately for Indigenous schooling and the rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
In this building we know a lot about leaders. Every leader is different, and so was Bonita—different from the all the others and different from her husband, Eddie. Bonita was often quiet, sometimes unassuming, but no less effective and no less powerful. Her strength was quiet, drawn from her history, her family and her deep sense of justice. Bonita's wisdom and her generous, open heart will be missed, especially by her family. As someone who's grown up in a family where, fortunately, my parents have been together all of their lives, and to also be blessed to be in such a marriage myself, I know how much it must grieve the family to lose both of their parents now. They saw so much love, so much connection, so much inspiration from their partnership over so many years, and saw that carry on even after their father passed away and the achievements we've seen. Bonita's warm and generous and open heart will be missed; her legacy, however, will endure. Like her husband, Eddie, Bonita will always be part of the story and the heart of her land, of our land. To her beloved family, I offer the heartfelt sympathy of this parliament and our nation.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;It’s wonderful to be here with you and I’ve got a lot of colleagues who are here tonight and if I was to read them all out, we’d be here all night. So I want to give them a general shout-out, as well as to other parliamentary colleagues who are here and my Ministerial colleagues. It’s good to be back here again, I was here last year and when I was here as Treasurer I said to you; “You’ve got to vote for the economy. You’ve got to focus on the things that are going to do the right thing for the economy”. That doesn’t mean you’re partisan or anything like that, but you run businesses and what’s good for the economy is good for business. So it’s important to back the policies and it’s important to back those who are putting in place the policies that are good for the economy. Now why is that important? Many years ago people used to talk about strong economy management. The Coalition is very good at it.
Peter Costello was Australia’s finest ever Treasurer. Kelly O’Dwyer is here, she worked with Peter, we both worked with him when we worked in the treasury portfolios together. We often seek his counsel. Our finest ever Treasurer produced outstanding economic management. But it’s not something you just put on a wall, a strong economy and go: “Well gee, isn’t that lovely, we’ve done terribly well for ourselves, let’s pat ourselves on the back.” For me and for my team, a strong economy is not an end in its own right. It’s the essential thing that this nation requires in order to deliver the services the infrastructure, the thing that matter to Australians. That’s what it’s for. That’s it’s utility, it’s not some sort of academic exercise. It’s not some economists picnic, it is what is absolutely essential for those of us who serve in public life, go into public life for. To ensure that Australians can have the services and the infrastructure, the opportunities that they rely on.
And you create it; businesses represented here and well beyond this room, you create the economy that enables us to pay for affordable medicines. Spinraza is a drug that deals with spinal muscular atrophy. We listed that in this year’s Budget, saving kids lives. That’s what a strong economy does. We’re going to invest $30 billion more in hospitals over the next five years. That what a strong economy does. $37 billion more in schools around the country, a 65 per cent increase in per student funding. Backing in independent schools, non-state schools, state schools all of them, that’s what a strong economy does. It is helping Australians realise their opportunities.
Fiona Simpson is here tonight, $7 billion in support for our farmers and rural and regional communities in response to the drought. You can’t do that if you don’t have a strong economy. Its doesn’t happen and you don’t create a stronger economy by killing it with taxes. That’s what I said to you this time last year. You don’t do that, you cannot have a stronger economy, an even stronger economy, if you take a wet blanket of higher tax and throw it over the top. You’ll douse it, you’ll frustrate it, you’ll suffocate it, you’ll switch it down, you’ll turn it off. When you do that, they you cannot deliver on the essential services and the things that really, really matter to Australians.
Now, some will tell you: “Oh, we can pay for that with higher taxes.” It’s a false economy, it’s a false economy. You turn the taxes up, you turn the economy down, a zero sum game, it’s a trick, it’s a lie. Lower taxes, that’s what produces a stronger economy.
You know, I was up in Darwin recently and I spoke to the Chamber up in Darwin and I talked about our plan. I said; “Our plan for creating this stronger economy was about tax relief to encourage and reward hard-working Australians, whether they’re running their own businesses running their own farms, whether they’re hard=-working wage earners, we’ve legislated tax relief for all of them. $144 billion worth of personal income tax relief legislated through the Australian Parliament.
Now, if you tell Australians that you get to keep more of what you earn - because it’s their money by the way and it’s your money, running a small family business - you are able to keep more of that and invest it back into your business, more of what you earn is what you get to keep, then that can only be supporting what is going in and around the economy. If floats everybody’s boat, it lifts everybody up.&nbsp; That’s why we believe in our heart of hearts as Liberals and Nationals that we need to ensure that we keep taxes down. Because we believe that Australians should keep more of what they earn.
They have worked hard for it, you’ve worked hard for it, why should you give more of it to me?
People say: “Oh, you need to pay higher taxes so we can pay for hospitals and we can pay for schools and we can pay for affordable medicines”, well I’ll tell you how we pay for that; we pay for that by the economy being stronger and stronger and stronger and stronger.
See, we are delivering all of those things at record levels and not in increasing your taxes. In fact we are cutting your taxes, because that is what we believe as Liberals and as Nationals. We believe in having a stronger economy, not being an end in its own right, but we believe in what it can produce.
How we can make the economy stronger, that focus on a stronger economy is getting the Budget back into balance. I announced this week, yesterday, that we will deliver a Budget on the 2nd of April. Josh Frydenberg will be the most successful Treasurer since Peter Costello.
[Applause]
I suspect he won’t be recognised by Euromoney, to his great disappointment.
[Laughter]
Apparently delivering surpluses is not what Euromoney recognise as being the essential ingredients for being the world’s greatest treasurer. But I’ll tell you what; he will be the next Treasurer to deliver a surplus in this country and the last one was Peter Costello. Now, I will tell him I gave him a bit of help. And I’m sure he will make mention of it or else –
[Laughter]
But the Budget is coming back into balance and that has been hard work, really hard work. Hard decisions, getting expenditure under control. The lowest growth in public expenditure growth in more than 50 years - that’s fair dinkum more than 50 years - we have constrained expenditure growth, we have constrained growth in taxation we have put a cap, a speed limit on taxes. You know, if you’re serious about controlling expenditure in this country you’ve got to be serious about controlling taxes.
I have sat round and chaired ERC for many years now. The best way to control how much people spend is making sure you only take in what you need and that’s what we’re doing as a Government. We’re keeping taxes under control, we’re keeping expenditure under control and it is bringing the Budget back into balance. Next year we are hitting surplus again and that’s a great achievement. It means that the Western Australia Chamber of Commerce and Industry – who I would argue have had the most successful lobbying efforts over the last few years, I don’t know whether you give out a prize within the Chamber for these sorts of things –
[Laughter]
I tell you they made their case and they convinced me. The reason they convinced me is that it was important and it’s been enabled by a strong economy and getting our Budget back into balance, that we can finally fix the unfairness that existed with how the GST was distributed across our states and territories. Western Australia was held back for too long and we’ve been able to fix that without holding or taking any from any other state or territory in the Commonwealth. Why? Because we have managed the economy well, we have managed the Budget well.
So we are guaranteeing that funding for schools and hospitals and essential services. We have record investments in infrastructure. I’ve got to say one of the proudest days I have had as a Member of Parliament, as a Minister, as Prime Minister, was to turn the first sod of Western Sydney Airport. I have been involved in that issue for decades and it’s now happening, because of a government that decides it is important to build things, that build our economy. People have talked about it -
[Applause]
Give yourselves a clap, you’re all part of it. People talked about this for decades, but as a Government over the last five years we set about doing it and ensuring that the top sod has been turned on Western Sydney Airport. That is now reality which is transforming Western Sydney, Craig Kelly will know this, out in Liverpool Western Sydney University has built their vertical campus in the middle of Liverpool. It’s the biggest training centre for nurses anywhere in New South Wales. The reason they decided to put it in Liverpool, which is a city which is transforming before your very eyes - it reminds me of Parramatta 25 years ago - they decided to put it there, because of the Western Sydney Airport. Because of what was happening in Western Sydney, because of the investment in infrastructure that our Government had put in place. That led them to make that investment and then others made investments and then others make investments. You know how it works, that’s how an economy grows and that’s why we’ve made those investments in infrastructure, the Inland Rail, the list goes on, the North South Corridor, the M1 up in Queensland, the new water pipe line up in Townsville. All of these infrastructure investments are designed to do one thing; Grow our economy. We want to have an industrial relations system - which I know Kelly O’Dwyer belives passionately in - which does not set employers against employees. I joked the other day - but it is not a joke it is a serious deal – that Labor’s industrial relations policy is a throwback to the 1970s. It was written by people with flares and long hair.
[Laughter]
This is a policy that will divide workers and their employers. You know, when I walk into businesses, particularly small and medium sized businesses I see people working together. That’s what I see. I see people who want to work together. I see people that have arrangements that enable them to all benefit from the success of the organisation, of the enterprise. That’s a healthy workplace and that’s what we want to see. We want to see Australian work places working together, employers, employees, managers all of them understanding that the way you get ahead, is not to pull some down and lift others up, but everybody gets ahead. That’s our vision for workplace relations in this country.
The result of our plan is pretty straight forward; we’ve got growth running at over 3 per cent. It’s got a 3 in front of it. We have got unemployment down to 5 per cent. 50,000 less people are unemployed today than in the last election. Over 100,000 Australians, young Australians, have got a job last financial year the strongest grown in youth employment in Australia’s economic history. How many weddings have you been to, how many bar mitzvahs, how many christenings, how many 21sts have you been to as business employers, as owners, of your staff? How many weddings and how proud were you when you looked at those young people that you gave a job to? How good is that? I mean you’re in it to make a living, but you’re passionate about what you’re doing and how you change lives, when it comes to how you run your business. That’s what small and family businesses are all about and that’s why we back small and family businesses. That’s why we see small and medium sized family businesses as being the engine of our economy.
Michaelia&nbsp;Cash is here tonight and she is responsible for that portfolio and she is doing a stunning job and together with Josh Frydenberg and Kelly we have been working on some packages and some plans to further support small and family businesses in Australia.
You already know that we’ve reduced taxes, as we were doing before, to 25 per cent and we have brought that forward. You already know that we have extended the instant asset write off. You already know that we have lifted the small business definition from $2 million to $10 million, so you get access to pool depreciation and GST on a cash basis and things like that. You already know about that, that stuff we’ve already done that has encouraged small businesses all around the country.
On that alone, the biggest support for small and family businesses from any government in generations, true to the Menzies foundations of our party as Liberals, supporting those small and family businesses. But in recent months I’ve decided as Prime Minister that we need to go even further. That we need to give even more support for small and medium family sized businesses across Australia.
The first one deals with cash, getting paid. Cash flow always starts with getting paid. If the invoices you issue are not being paid, that hurts your business, that makes it harder for your business. Businesses, small businesses should never be treated as a bank by governments or large businesses. We should all pay on time.
[Applause]
I am pleased to say that our Government has been working to do just that. 97 per cent of Australian Government bills under $1 million are being paid within 30 days and we are taking this down to 20 days by the 1st of July 2019. I’m also taking payment times to COAG in just under a month, to encourage all states to catch NSW where they’ve gone to 20 days for those payments, where we are also going. I want State Government and Commonwealth Government to pay small businesses on time and recently when I spoke at the BCA dinner, I talked about their supply code. Qantas is here tonight, Trent is here, they are part of that. They’ve got 13,000 small businesses that are part of Qantas’ supply chain. They have signed up. That’s at 30 days, I’m hoping not just Qantas, but the whole lot will go down to 20 days as well. What we have said is that anyone who wants to work with the Commonwealth Government, you’ve got to agree to those terms as well. You’ve got to pay businesses on time, because the quicker the money moves around, the better the economy does, it’s just common sense. So we are working to deliver that.
We are also requiring that more businesses with a 100 million turnover, that’s 3,000 business to publish information on how they pay their small businesses. I want to see the score board. You need to see the score board if you are a small or family business. Who are the big businesses that pay on time? Now we already know that there are large businesses that are already dropping - as a result of what I announced only a week ago - their payment terms from 90 days in regional areas of Australia particularly Queensland, down to 30 days. That’s a big shift, that is a big shift and it is called leadership. It’s called leadership when you say as a Government you’re going to do it and you expect others to do it as well. We are already seeing others follow and we appreciate that. But there is more than that. You need to get access to capital, you need to get access to finance if you are a small and family business. So we are setting up the Australian Securitisation Fund, $2 billion to invest in deepening the capital base, the finance base for new lenders in the marketplace to be able to source their finance at a lower cost so they can lend it on to you, at a lower cost.
We need more competition in our banking and financial system, we want more of these new lenders, who get small business, who don’t say to you; “Give me your house and a mortgage over your kids and all the rest of it, and we’ll give you some money if we feel good about it.”
No. We want to see all these other businesses who are getting out there and establishing new payment models, new systems, new fintech companies who are going to go out there and they need to access lower cost finance to deliver that to you.
And we’re backing that in with $2 billion investment in the securitization market to ensure that is freed up.
We’re also working to establish with the banks the Australian Business Growth Fund modelled on the UK experience. Now that fund, together with the small business finance arrangements actually work together, as we’ve seen happen in other places.
Getting access to the capital, which can then be backed up by the access to the finance. Then, you’re realizing the ambitions the you have for your business.
But it’s not just about that. It’s about tax complexity and red tape.
Now, it may be a dry topic but if you’re running a small and family business, it’s a critical topic. As well as putting more incentive in the tax system, we’re working to ensure that it is fair, not only when it comes to the design, but to the implementation of the tax system.
As a former Treasurer I know the good work the ATO do. Now, I know there will be at least 200 stories in this place that won’t be that flattering to the ATO, but I suspect there will be some that are. Their job is to ensure the integrity of our taxation system, so we can deliver the essential services that all Australians rely on.
Taxes should be lower, but everyone should pay them. That’s also a rule I think it’s good to follow and the ATO seek to ensure that occurs.
But I understand the concerns, as does Michaelia, of small business when it comes to dealing with the ATO. There is no denying the complexity involved and we are focused on reducing that complexity. We know you’re focused on running your business, not studying the Tax Act or sifting through rules and determinations. The ATO recognises this too and they have taken steps – you’ve got to give them this - to improve the way they work with over 3 million small businesses. &nbsp;
They’ve opened up more lines of communication with their after-hours call back service, gone out into the business community with their roadshows and they’ve looked at their debt collection and penalty relief processes. Small business interactions with the ATO should be smooth and the vast majority are. Ideally once you’ve lodged your return, paid your tax bill, or received the refund that you are entitled to, that should be it. &nbsp;But for those who experience an audit or a dispute we understand the impact this has on you and your business. It can be stressful, intimidating and confronting and you will rack up some expenses when you deal with this. Under our Government, you’ll be able to deduct those expenses. Under the Labor plan, you won’t, it’ll be capped so if you’ve got a big fight with the Tax Office, your legal expenses will not be deducted over a certain amount. But those who experience an audit, we understand how it can impact you and while there are many good things the ATO does to make the process easier, we need to do that. The dedicated complaints hotline for small business, independent reviews of audits before they are finalised, advocates to support vulnerable and unrepresented taxpayers through the objections process and independent ,trained mediators to resolve cases.
But there is more that we have to do. That’s why I’m announcing tonight that we will be establishing ten new tax clinics, in conjunction with major and regional universities, to provide free assistance to small businesses and individuals with disputes with the ATO. These tax clinics will ensure small businesses in need have access to specialist advice from tax practitioners and students in the field on a pro bono basis.
The Government will also be reviewing the avenues through which small businesses are compensated if the ATO’s handling of the case causes an economic or personal loss. The review will be run out of the Department of Finance and they will report back in the new year.
A small number of cases go through the ATO’s disputes process all the way to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Tonight, I’m announcing a range of measures to make this path towards resolution easier. &nbsp;Our Government will establish a small business concierge service within the Small Business Ombudsman’s office, to provide support and know-how about the AAT process before application. We’re creating a dedicated Small Business Taxation Division within the AAT, so small business will have a case manager supporting them throughout the entire process, a standard application fee of just $500 and decisions fast-tracked to within 28 days of a hearing.
This is just another step the Government is taking to ensure a level playing field for small business. It’s proof that we’re on your side, when it comes to what we want for you small businesses.
[Applause]
We want small businesses to succeed. Of course that’s in addition to the many other measures that we’ve announced, that include raising the thresholds for asset financial reporting, through from 25 to 50 on consolidated revenue, $12.5 to $25 million of assets and 50-100 employees. That means 2200 companies won’t be required to complete those annual asset financial reporting arrangements, saving $80 million in red tape costs over the year, which we think is a good thing.
Now finally, it’s also about the people who work for you and the skills that they need. Those skills are also key to the economic futures of Australians in a modern economy. We know the strength and dynamism of our economy has increased demand for new skills and a higher level of skills over someone’s entire working life. Providing a skilled workforce, especially for small businesses, depends on the vocational education and training sector, it comes not just from our universities. We believe in this form of education. We believe it equips Australians and it’s not just about training school-leavers to attain employment. It’s about ensuring people can update their skills throughout their entire working life. So in the VET sector, to be able to respond and adapt to future demands for higher skills, changing industry composition and structural change especially in regional and rural Australia and people working longer and in varied roles over the course of their working lives.
We need to strengthen our VET system, not simply as an economic imperative but to ensure Australians are equipped for the workforce of the future.
So tonight, I’m announcing that the Government has commissioned an important review of our vocational education sector in Australia, which will be conducted very promptly and quickly to make sure we’re training the right people for the right jobs in the years ahead. Now the person I have asked, with Michaelia Cash, to do this job has pretty good experience in doing it from across the ditch.&nbsp; Steven Joyce the former New Zealand Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills and Employment and was also the former Minister for Finance in New Zealand. He will bring a fresh perspective on what is needed here and what we can do here, based on his extensive and successful work and reforms that he put in place in New Zealand.
He is the architect of those reforms to their apprenticeship and industry training system and was one of the most senior and most successful ministers in the Key Government in New Zealand. We’ve asked Steven to consult widely and I’m sure ACCI will be very involved in that process and that is the task that he has. The Review will have a particular focus on ensuring Australian businesses have the skills they need to support their business growth.
The Review will build on the work Minister Cash is already leading, including&nbsp; the reforms to the Skilling Australians Fund. That fund, some $1.5 billion, supports state and territory governments to increase apprenticeships and every single cent of that fund, every single cent will be spent on vocational education and training in this country. Even where some states and territory governments – as is the case in Victoria and Queensland - where they haven’t signed up to that. That’s disappointing, that’s unfortunate and I would still hope they will look carefully at this arrangement with the Skilling Australians Fund and sign on to ensure they are getting the access to those funds to deliver the programmes that are important in their states and territories. But every single cent will be spent, of that Skilling Australians Fund, in vocational education and training in Australia.
But there’s one thing further I’m announcing tonight which will be supporting apprentices in Australia; I’m pleased to announce that we will be expanding eligibility of the Support for Adult Australian Apprenticeships Initiative, so that it will include apprentices aged between 21 and 24. Previously this initiative was only available for those 25 and older, but given that adult apprentices, for wage purposes, are now defined as being over 21 years of age this has left those between 21 and 24 at a disadvantage. This will mean about 12,500 adult apprentices over the next three budget years will be supported by a one-off $4,000 payment. We are doing this because getting young Australians to learn skills for meaningful employment is not just something that helps the economy; it’s something that can change people’s lives and ensure they’re on a path to a better life.
You know, under our Government we have reached the point where we have the lowest level of welfare dependence of the working age population, in more than 25 years.
[Applause]
That’s what turns a budget deficit into a budget surplus. It’s the old 12 point turnaround; you stop them scoring at the other end, your end, and you score down the other. You get someone who was receiving the welfare payment and you turn them into a taxpayer with a job. That’s what our Government has been doing and these initiatives I’ve been announcing tonight are all about that.
So I’ll conclude where I started; all of this is about building a stronger economy. Why? Because that’s the only way you can look Australians in the eye and say: “I’m going to fund your hospital, I’m going to fund your medicine, I’m going to fund your school, I’m going to fund the Disability Insurance Scheme.”
We’re going to make Australia stronger and you do that with a stronger economy. You can’t do it with higher taxes. You do it by encouraging the people who are in this room, the people who run businesses all around the country in our cities, in our suburbs, in our rural and regional areas all around the country. That’s how you create a stronger Australia and that’s what our Government is delivering, by focusing on delivering the stronger economy.
Thank you very much.
[Applause]


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:00): I rise on indulgence to update the House on the storms and the bushfires. The storms were in New South Wales, of course, and the bushfires are in Queensland.
As we know, Sydney and other parts of New South Wales are mopping up after a major storm—one of the worst in Sydney's memory. The storm system that moved across greater Sydney yesterday brought about 200 millimetres of rain, more than one month's average in a single day, as well as damaging winds, hail, severe thunderstorms and hazardous surf. Roads were closed due to flash flooding, fallen trees and landslides, and in Western Sydney a number of vehicles were trapped in floodwaters. There were blackouts and school closures as well. In total, 18 floodwater rescues took place, with the New South Wales SES receiving 2,063 requests for assistance. The Central Coast, and I know that the member for Robertson would be concerned here, and the south coast region, so the same for the member for Gilmore, were also hit by this system.
Three deaths have been attributed to the storms. This is a terrible tragedy. One of those deaths was an SES volunteer who was responding to the storms—out there helping others when he lost his life. He was a volunteer with a young family. It is truly heartbreaking and our thoughts are with his family at this terrible time for them. Nine people have also been injured, including two police officers—again, selflessly serving and out there for all of us.
I have spoken with Premier Berejiklian and conveyed the Commonwealth's willingness to assist as and when is needed. There has been no formal request for assistance from New South Wales at this time, and I want to commend the New South Wales State Emergency Services and other authorities for the tremendous work they've done in supporting their citizens.
While these events have unfolded in New South Wales, Queenslanders have been facing challenges of a very different kind. Major bushfires are burning—more than 105 active bushfires and grassfires—and extreme conditions are expected to continue in the northern and eastern parts of the state over the next seven days. The Bureau of Meteorology has assessed that the current conditions are easing, which is welcome. However, they remain concerned, as winds are set to increase this afternoon.
As well, forecasts are for severe to extreme heatwave conditions from Cooktown to Gladstone and extending into Central and north-western Queensland over the next seven days. Emergency warnings are current for fires burning at Deepwater and seven watch-and-act fires are burning across the state, and also one advanced fire. I should also say that there is an emergency warning at Captain Creek.
Evacuation centres are open at Rockhampton Showgrounds, the Central Queensland University at Rockhampton, Miriam Vale, Gladstone and Sarina. To those Australians in these areas, or who face similar warnings in the days ahead, I simply say this: please take the advice you are given. You can rebuild a home, but you cannot rebuild a lost family. It's now time to listen, to stay calm and to put those you love first.
I commend the response of Queensland authorities. That tremendous response is being bolstered by support from around the country—New South Wales, the ACT, Victoria and Western Australia. Tasmania is also in the process of sending assistance. Their contribution is being coordinated out of the State Disaster Coordination Centre in Brisbane.
I can report that I have continued to keep in contact with Premier Palaszczuk and that the Commonwealth disaster assistance plan has been activated. This is the formal mechanism which creates an open channel between the Queensland state government and the Commonwealth for Queensland to seek assistance in any range of areas from the Commonwealth.
The ADF are providing support, as required, and stand ready to respond to any request that is put to them, according to their capabilities, from the Queensland government. That includes, currently, the refuelling of firefighting aircraft out of Amberley. In the last 24 hours we have responded to a call for such assistance, from the Queensland government to help the Gladstone local government area, and this is what we will continue to do in the days and in the months ahead.
Earlier today the Deputy Prime Minister and I, with the Assistant Minister for Home Affairs, attended the Crisis Coordination Centre here in Canberra, where we were further briefed on both of these situations. Our emergency services around Australia are doing tremendous work. Our state governments are doing a tremendous job, whether in Queensland or in New South Wales. I commend Premier Palaszczuk and Premier Berejiklian on the work of both of their governments.
The members for Capricornia and Flynn are not here today; they are with their communities in Queensland, as is Senator Canavan. They attended the local disaster management meeting in Rockhampton overnight. They are a vital conduit between the Commonwealth and these communities. I know there are other members here in the chamber who represent these communities, like the member for Leichhardt, the member for Wide Bay and other members. They, I know, will be keen to get back to their communities. Everyone is lending a hand and stepping up. Mates are helping mates. They're stepping up, they're reaching out and they're helping and comforting those in need. That's the Australian way.
I conclude with these remarks. This is going to be a tough summer ahead for all of us. This is the brief and the warning we've already seen from Emergency Management Australia. There is currently material being prepared by Emergency Management Australia that will be available to all members which will assist them in working with their communities to ensure that they can provide any role they can in supporting their communities to prepare for the summer season ahead of us. It may well be that more homes will come under threat, and we pray they will not be lost; that more hectares could be ravaged, and we pray that that won't happen; and that more lives could be affected, and we'll pray and do everything we can within our power to ensure that that does not occur. To those affected already: on behalf of this parliament, I offer our thoughts, our prayers and the support of 25 million people who will stand with you for as long as it takes.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:01): I rise on indulgence to acknowledge the passing of the Hon. George Herbert Walker Bush, the 41st President of the United States. George Bush lived a remarkable life. He was a congressman, the first American Envoy to China, Director of the CIA, Vice President of the United States, President of the United States and father of a president. George Bush was a great friend and true friend of Australia, from his days as a serviceman in the Pacific theatre to his time as President working with Prime Ministers Hawke and Keating on the formation of the modern APEC.
He was part of what was to become known as the greatest generation—the generation of men and women who fought and served during the Second World War to provide the world that we have today. He joined up on his 18th birthday and became America's youngest naval aviator. He completed 58 missions. In 1944, on a mission to attack a Japanese stronghold, his Avenger was shot down over the Pacific. He ejected from his burning plane and miraculously was picked up by a US submarine, the USS&nbsp;Finback. The silent price of war escapes no man or woman, and late in life the former President admitted that every single day of his life he thought about the two crewmates who did not survive that mission.
His life experience during the Second World War deeply influenced his thinking as president. It guided his values and tempered his hand towards prudence. When Kuwait was invaded by Iraqi he saw parallels with the 1930s and famously declared, 'This will not stand,' and it didn't. With a UN mandate he drew together a 32-nation coalition to expel Iraq from Kuwait. Australia proudly contributed to this coalition that freed Kuwait and restored the international order. He showed incredible international and personal leadership. He resisted the calls that America chase Saddam Hussein all the way to Baghdad, because he did not want to be a conqueror or an occupier.
Under his watch the Cold War ended without a shot, the Soviet Union was disbanded and the Berlin Wall fell, not from a barrage of tanks but from the hand picks of thousands of citizens. When the wall fell, President Bush was criticised for understating the triumph that it surely was, but he was prudent again, knowing the risk to Gorbachev being overthrown by hardliners.
He was a man who embodied the best of public service. George Bush and Bill Clinton fought a bruising campaign in 1992, yet Mr Clinton arrived in the Oval Office to find a letter from his predecessor, as is their custom, that said: 'You will be our President when you read this note. Your success now is our country's success.' In the years that followed, they became friends. In time, his son George W Bush would even refer to President Bill Clinton as 'his brother from another mother'. When President Bush passed, his family had a code word to let each other know what had happened. It was 'CAVU'. Throughout his life, he kept that word on his desk. It stands for 'ceiling and visibility unlimited'. And he once wrote to his family:
CAVU was the kind of weather we Navy pilots wanted when we were to fly off our carrier in the Pacific. We had little navigational instrumentation, so we wanted to CAVU—"Ceiling and visibility unlimited."
…&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;…&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;…
… because of the five of you … whose own lives have made me so proud, I can confidently tell my guardian angel that my life is CAVU; and it will be that way until I die—all because of you.

We remember today the late Barbara Pierce Bush, his wife of 73 years—perhaps President Bush's greatest achievement. And we extend to President Bush's children—George, Jeb, Neil, Marvin and Dorothy—and his extended family our deepest condolences.
On the weekend, I had the opportunity to pass the condolences of our nation directly to President Trump, who, when I met with him, advised me that President Bush was very, very gravely ill and close to death. Indeed, the next day that proved to be the case. We have no greater friend than the United States. We have no greater ally. We have been together for a century and more. It is a bond that is built in what we believe and the sort of world we want to live in. George Bush personified that vision and those beliefs as much as any other great President of the United States could have. We thank him for his friendship, we thank him for his service and we pray for his family. May God bless America.
The Speaker:&nbsp;The Leader of the Opposition, on indulgence.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (15:44): Well, ho, ho, ho, Mr Speaker! It has been quite a year for all of us—for every single member of this House and the other place. All of us have the opportunity to serve here because of the great love and affection that comes from our families, and when we leave this place we will go and be with them. We will have the opportunity to spend the most joyous time of the year with them and be with our families for Christmas and New Year's and share stories, experiences of the year and our reflections, but, most of all, just hold each other in our arms. It will give us an extra opportunity, as we go into next year, to remember those fond times that we have had over the Christmas break.
I particularly want to be mindful of those who will not have such a merry Christmas and those who will be under great stress and strain, because I must reflect on the fact that the issue this year that I believe was most penetrating, most humbling and most significant was the day we stood in this place and offered the national apology to the victims of sexual abuse. It was a day that I think the Leader of the Opposition and I will certainly never forget, and I hope it's a day that those who suffered that abuse will also never forget. It can't change what happened. As they go through their Christmas and holiday period, there won't be the same warm smiles for many of them. There will be the same confusion. There'll be the same sense of hurt and damage and things that they will never feel they can get over.
So I would suggest that, as we go off to our break and spend our time with our families once again, we think of them and think of what they're going through over these periods, because we know that, at Christmas and holiday periods, for those of us who are blessed—as I have been with Jen and the girls and a wonderful family—this is the most joyous time of the year. For others it's a time of terrible isolation, a reminder of the things that really make life so hard for them. That's why I'm so thankful for the services, like Lifeline and others, who will be there for them and who will be turning out and volunteering on Christmas Day all around the country and serving Christmas cheer to others.
Christmas is a religious season. It is a reminder of our Lord who came into this place and brought new hope but, most of all, a message of love. In that message of love, there are so many Australians who take the opportunity—and God bless them for doing it—to go out there and extend that love and care to their fellow Australians and try to ease what might otherwise be an even more difficult day. So we thank those volunteers who will be doing that this Christmas, and we thank them for doing it each and every day of the year. We hope that, through their comfort, they will bring some measure of joy to others over the Christmas period.
I also thank all of those of our Defence Force who will be serving far away from this place—and, indeed, here in our own country—and will be away from their families. They might be at sea. They might be serving in Afghanistan or other places in peacekeeping missions around the world. We are mindful of the service and the sacrifice that they are making on our behalf, and we send them our best. We will always seek to do our best for them in this place and at every opportunity we have.
We think of those who are serving as volunteers on our beaches, in the rural fire services and those out there caring for our community over the holiday season. With the fires still burning up in Queensland, thankfully, their intensity has diminished. Just during question time I received advice that there are fires burning in South Australia right now. The warnings have not escalated to a high level at this point, but it's just a reminder.
As I've said in this place, we are going into one of the most difficult fire seasons for many, many years. So, as we go around the many Christmas events and other things we will have in our electorates and communities over the next few weeks, all of us will have the opportunity to remind fellow Australians to have those conversations as communities and families and at the street parties to say: how will we work together; what will we do? Make sure that the first conversation you have about evacuation or responding to an emergency is not when it's happening for real and you have to make those choices. I would encourage all of us to be out there carrying that message to everyone over this Christmas season. Whether it's our police officers, our firefighters, our nurses, our doctors or others who will be out there providing care, we thank them all for their service over the course of the last 12 months. They are called to do what they do in their vocations, as we do here, and we thank them for the great work they do.
I extend to the Leader of the Opposition, his family and his wife, Chloe, all the best for the Christmas period. I hope they have a great break. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his personal kindnesses to Jenny and me. And I thank Chloe for her kindnesses to Jenny; they are able to take refuge in each other's company on occasion when we are attending various events. We appreciate them and we wish them all the best. And I extend that to all the members of the opposition and, of course, all the members of my own wonderful team on this side of the House. I also extend it to the Leader of the National Party and to the Treasurer, as well as to Senator McKenzie, the Deputy Leader of the National Party in the other place. To the Leader of the House—what would we do without the Leader of the House! He completely embodies a sense of Christmas cheer and is an adornment to the House—I wish you and your family all the best for Christmas.
To the leadership in the Senate—Senator Cormann and Senator Birmingham—and to Senator Wong and the team in the Senate, I wish you all the best for your year. I thank very much the Chief Government Whip and the deputy whips. Well done, whips, for working so well together with the whips from the opposition and ensuring we get about our business and work through the important work of the parliament. I thank the Clerk of the House, David Elder, and all of your team—the deputy clerk, Claressa Surtees, and the clerk assistants. I thank the Serjeant-at-Arms, James Catchpole, and his team for the work they do.
I thank the House Parliamentary Liaison Officer, Anne Dowd, and her colleagues Luke Bulow and Tim Moore. From my own department, I thank Secretary Parkinson and all of his team—as I'm sure my colleagues in the executive would want to thank all of their department secretaries and all of those who work principally here and in and around Canberra. As a result of the policies of our government, a lot of them are working outside of Canberra these days, which is a good thing. I wish all of them the best for Christmas and I hope they can enjoy their time off so they can return refreshed for what will be a very busy year next year.
I also thank all of our staff. We had the opportunity last night as a coalition to thank all of our staff for their great work. I thank the attendants of this place. I thank the Federal Police and the security and support staff who look after us all and keep us safe. In my own office we have three cleaners—Lucia, Anna and Maria—who would be known to most people around this building because they've been here a very long time. Anna and Maria are sisters, and they have worked in the PMO since Prime Minister Hawke. They are loud and joyous and wonderful, and there is bipartisan agreement that we love them very much.
Ms Plibersek interjecting—
Mr Morrison: I've got to note the interjection from the member for Sydney. Seriously, can you leave it alone when I'm trying to thank them? It's the valedictories, for goodness sake! Just put it aside for five minutes.
Ms Plibersek interjecting—
The Speaker:&nbsp;The Deputy Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Morrison: I was just about to say, Mr Speaker, that earlier this week they lost their mother. I know we would all like to send our love and prayers to two sisters who have become part of the soul of this building. To them we extend our condolences, and our thoughts are with them at a difficult time.
I want to pay tribute also to Laura Gillies, who is the executive assistant to the Serjeant-at-Arms. Laura is about to retire. She has worked for the Department of the House of Representatives for over 33 years. She joined the service of the parliament in Old Parliament House when Bob Hawke was Prime Minister. She has seen everything in this building—and she has seen a lot over the last 10 years! On behalf of the government, I thank you for your service to Australia.
Christmas is a very joyous time, and we know it can be tough for many others. Those who it will be particularly tough for—as it has been for many years now, particularly in Queensland—are the communities that have been affected by drought. Whether up in Quilpie—and the Tullys—or anywhere else across the country, I think one of the most generous things we've seen from fellow Australians this year is the way that they, whether they're schoolchildren or seniors groups, have reached out and wanted to help our rural and regional communities, our farmers. And it is not just the farms but the communities, the shops, those who work in the schools. For all of those communities, Australians reached out and had their back this year. We're very pleased to be doing many things to help and support them at this time, but we pray that they'll have a wonderful Christmas, and I'll certainly continue to pray for rain for them. I suspect that would be a great Christmas prayer, as people go about their Christmas Day, that day of religious celebration. I think it would be a wonderful thing for the nation to join and pray for rain.
Mr Speaker, may I wish you also a wonderful Christmas, and your lovely family. We'll look forward to working together again next year as part of your parliamentary family you preside over—
An honourable member:&nbsp;With great distinction!
Mr Morrison: Yes, with great distinction and—
Mr Frydenberg: Great poise.
Mr Morrison: Great poise—yes, thank you, Treasurer—but also a great sense of spirit and a sense of humour, which I'm sure is well received by those who look in on these broadcasts. You very much are in control of this House, Mr Speaker, and we commend you for the way that you've done that, with great integrity. You really do bring a great authority to this House, and the House is incredibly well served by you. So, to all colleagues, I again extend my best wishes, from Jenny and I and our family, and may God bless you and yours.
The speaker:&nbsp;I thank the Prime Minister. The Leader of the Opposition on indulgence.


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Mick Tsikas
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, Gerard, and particularly to my ministerial colleague Senator Payne, it’s great to have her back straight off the plane from Myanmar where she’s been over the weekend, to Nick Greiner who’s here as well, I see an old Treasury secretary over there John Fraser, good to see you Frase. Thank you all for coming together on a Saturday and I want to particularly thank Gerard and Anne for bringing the members of the Sydney Institute here together on a Saturday, and so I thank you for your attendance.
What is most important to me as Prime Minister is that I seek to humbly do everyday things that make Australia even stronger than we are today, both now and in the future.
To protect what we already have as Australians, and to do everything we can to ensure that we are stronger so Australians can realise their opportunities for the future.
Keeping our economy strong through lower taxes, supporting small and medium sized family businesses, supporting infrastructure in our cities and our regions and all across our vast country, so I can guarantee the essential services Australians rely on. That’s what the stronger economy’s for. Medicare, hospitals, schools, affordable medicines, aged care, support for our veterans. That’s why I am so focussed on achieving a stronger economy because that’s what realises those services.
Keeping Australians safe, whether it’s protecting our kids on-line from cyber bullying, keeping families safe from domestic violence, protecting Australians from the threat of terrorism, keeping our borders strong, and the institutions and frameworks that keep our borders strong, or defending our values and our freedoms at home and around the world through our Australian Defence Force.
And keeping Australians together, by ensuring we show respect for each other, for older Australians in residential aged care, removing needless- and preventing needless conflict and provocation in our workplaces – so employees and employers can work together for the good of themselves and their enterprise. Listening to young Australians, in particular, who want to ensure our environment is protected for the future – and that we address climate change. And respecting migrants who came to Australia, whether recently or many generations ago, because we are a successful multicultural society and because they believe we would respect religious freedoms.
Even stronger, that’s what I want Australia to be.
And to protect Australia from the things that would make us weaker - a weaker economy, weaker borders, weaker protections for our national security, weaker respect for the freedoms and the values that have made Australia the great country we are today.
A stronger Australia will always stand up for what we believe in. And that’s why I have come here to address you today.
In my first major foreign policy speech in Australia as Prime Minister, I said that our foreign policy “defines what we believe about the world and our place in it”. Foreign policy must speak of our character and our values. &nbsp;What we stand for.&nbsp; What we believe in and, if need be, what we’ll defend. And I made this point: Those who see foreign relations through a narrow, transactional lens sell Australia short.
Australian is more than the sum of our deals. We’re much bigger than that.&nbsp;We are a principled and pragmatic people. Clear about our beliefs yet realistic about the world that is around us. We pursue an ambitious agenda in the Indo-Pacific, we are a regional power with global interests. We have a responsibility to contribute to debates that shape our world, and the world does listen. And to do so in a constructive and innovative fashion. Always seeking to focus on the problem we are trying to solve.
So much of our prosperity and security is dependent on the world beyond our borders, we’ve always been an outward looking country. Almost 40 years ago, Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, in the context of debates over the Middle East, the Cold War and Apartheid, explained why Australia should always participate in global debates. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
He gave three reasons. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
First, “Too many Australians have died in places remote from their home – in Europe, in the Middle East, in South-East Asia – for us to be unconcerned about the preservation of world peace. Their sacrifice not only confers a right but imposes a duty on Australia to speak on these issues”. Second, “the middle-ranking countries of the world should recognise they have a role to play. It would not only be foolish,” he said, “but a political and moral failing to assume that nations such as Australia should be seen and not heard on the great issues” as he described them. And third, “in a Western world characterised by a great deal of self-doubt and division, and by a degree of disillusionment which has not yet been wholly overcome, every contribution to clarifying issues and strengthening resolve is valuable”. I agree. In an age of renewed global uncertainty, Australia should seek to clarify issues and strengthen resolve based on the principles and the beliefs we hold dear.
To that end, today I want to update you on steps our Government is taking, as Liberals and Nationals, to add clarity to our voice on important issues, consistent with our values and our national interests.
The first issue I want to address is the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action or JCPOA as it is known – otherwise known as the ‘Iran nuclear deal’. Struck in 2015, the JCPOA resulted from a decade of negotiation. It included the United States, China, France, Germany, Russia, the EU and the UK, as well as Iran as its signatories. As we know, the United States withdrew from the agreement in May of this year.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Criticisms were made of the agreement including inadequate inspection and verification mechanisms and its narrow scope. In response to this, on the 16th of October I announced a without prejudice review of the JCPOA. We should take a look, we should assess these suggestions in light of concerns raised with me about its effectiveness including concerns raised here at home. I asked my department to lead a team of experts drawn from across government to examine these and other criticisms and potential weaknesses. The Review team consulted widely with Australia’s international partners in the US, Europe, Middle East and Asia and with the International Atomic Energy Agency. I sought views from experts outside government, I also discussed the matter with a number of foreign leaders during the recent summit season.
The review team examined if the JCPOA is delivering what is intended. The conclusion from the Review team is that, on balance, it is, and that’s welcome news.
Substantial restrictions on Iran’s nuclear activity remain in place. The International Atomic Energy Agency has verified on 13 occasions that Iran’s actions remain in keeping with the deal’s limits. The deal took Iran from the brink of having enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon to a place where the international community has daily oversight of its nuclear activities.
These are worthy achievements.
&nbsp;Iran is well-placed to expand its enrichment capacity rapidly if the deal were to break down. So maintaining support for the JCPOA serves our interests in nuclear non-proliferation and in reinforcing the rules-based international system. It is consistent with Australia’s position on other non-proliferation issues, for example, support for a negotiated deal on verifiable de-nuclearisation on the Korean peninsula. And it serves our interest in encouraging rules-based approaches to resolving other issues of international concern, including the South China Sea.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
But as the deal was only ever designed to cover nuclear issues, it’s not the full story and that’s where most of the frustration I think has been.
Our concerns about Iran relate not to what is in the agreement, but what’s not in the agreement. The agreement does not address Iran’s destabilising activities in the Middle East and beyond. It does not address Iran’s proliferation of ballistic missiles and technology, and activities undermining Israel’s security, and support for terrorist groups. These activities are ones the global community must act on. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
So today I am announcing that Australia will add to our already substantial support for international efforts, particularly in relation to Iran’s ballistic missile proliferation and Iran’s support for destabilising activity. &nbsp;
Australia continues to apply sanctions required under UNSC Resolution 2231 on nuclear and ballistic-missile related materials. We will also continue to apply autonomous sanctions on the export of arms and related materials. Working with our partners, and consistent with our obligations under UN Security Council resolutions, Australia will work to tighten the net on Iran’s missile proliferation networks and support for activities that are destabilising the region. We will keep the option of additional autonomous sanctions under active review. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
In the Financial Action Task Force – an international body tasked with combating counter-terrorism financing – we will support the imposition of countermeasures if Iran does not meet its commitments to address its anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing deficiencies. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Now turning to broader Middle East issues, I have also been concerned for some time about the ratcheting up of rhetoric and action aimed at isolating Israel.
We regard the biased and unfair targeting of Israel in the UN General Assembly in particular as deeply unhelpful to efforts to build peace and stability. The UN General Assembly is now the place where Israel is bullied and where anti-Semitism is cloaked in language about human rights. It is where Israel is regularly accused of what Rabbi Jonathan Sacks called the “five cardinal sins against human rights: racism, apartheid, crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing and attempted genocide.”
Think about it: a nation of immigrants; with a free press; parliamentary democracy; financially prosperous; the source of tremendous innovation in the world; and a refuge from persecution and genocide, is somehow the centre of cruelty in the world. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
It's ridiculous. It is intellectual fraud. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
To the point where we seem to be heading closer, now, to the dispiriting decade of the 1970s when it comes to ritualistic denunciations of Israel, compromised and hypocritical global processes, a capacity to look the other way when it comes to terrorist organisations, and widespread fatigue in Western societies about the lack of progress. &nbsp;
Last year, there were 17 UN General Assembly resolutions critical of Israel. This compared with a total of five for all other countries: Myanmar, the Syrian Arab Republic, Russia’s actions in Crimea and Ukraine; Iran and North Korea. But 17 in relation to Israel.
This year, the UN Human Rights Council passed six motions condemning Israel, compared to a total of 14 across the rest of the world. And last month, at my direction, Australia opposed six resolutions that attacked Israel in the UN General Assembly. These included the ‘Jerusalem’ resolution, which contains biased and one-sided language attacking Israel and denies its historical connection to the city, and the ‘Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine’ resolution, which confers on the Palestinian Authority a status it does not have. In the past, we had abstained on these resolutions. Not anymore and not on my watch.
The standard you walk past is the standard you accept. We all know that principle.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
We won’t turn a blind eye to an anti-Semitic agenda masquerading as defence of human rights as a nation like Australia. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Last week, Australia supported a UN General Assembly resolution to condemn the egregious and ongoing violent acts of the terrorist organisation Hamas. Hamas are violent extremists. Terrorists who use the Israel-Palestinian conflict as an excuse to inflict terror. They should have no friends at the UN. The failure of the resolution to pass with the requisite majority was appalling.
Australia condemns Hamas’ activities in the strongest possible terms. Why others failed to do so is evidence of the stalemate that has been reached where sticking with your side is blind to denouncing terrorism. That’s how bad it’s got.
Now that is not to say that we are not ever critical of Israel. Indeed, we will, if need be, openly rebuke a sincere friend, because friends should speak freely. The Australian Government has expressed our strong concern over Israel’s land appropriations, demolitions and settlement activity. I indeed have done that directly, Prime Minister to Prime Minister. The settlements undermine peace – and contribute to the stalemate we now see.
But we make the point, the international community must move beyond ritual denunciations of Israel, to urge a return to negotiations towards a two-state solution.
If anything, the ritual denunciations are getting in the way of that progress. Australia’s national interests are well served by our productive and increasingly diverse relationship with Israel. Australia has always been one of Israel’s greatest friends and I intend for that to remain the case. This is underpinned by our nation’s shared values, including our commitment to democracy and the rule of law.
Australia also benefits from a vigorous, creative Jewish community here in Australia who most recently welcomed not that long ago, along with all Australians, Prime Minister Netanyahu’s visit to Australia in February 2017, the first by a serving Israeli Prime Minister. Modern Israel is a vibrant multicultural democracy with a strong economy and world-leading industrial, science and research capabilities.
Despite having the most powerful military in the region, Israelis live each day under existential threat. Since 1948 Israel has fought numerous wars with their neighbours &nbsp;and thousands of skirmishes which are a constant reminder of the daily threats they face. My own visit to Israel many years ago and my interactions since have confirmed to me the future is not something Israelis take for granted. It’s not something they can take for granted. We should also not allow ourselves the indulgence of thinking otherwise for our great friend. We should understand what they live with everyday.
Over the past two years alone, Australia and Israel have expanded cooperation in defence industry and aviation security. It remains in our national interests to see Israel succeed as a liberal participatory democracy in the Middle East, and we regard it as imperative that Australia continues to strongly support its right to exist within secure and internationally recognised borders.
So this brings me to the Middle East peace process itself, including the status of Jerusalem.
Australia has a deep interest in seeing the emergence of a successful two-state solution. Not just as a country seeking to strengthen resolve and clarify issues, but because of our history as well. Last year, Australia commemorated the centenary of the Battle of Beersheba – a battle that is a proud part of Australia’s history. We proudly recall that it was Australia that chaired the Committee that recommended to the UN General Assembly the creation of the state of Israel and then voted in favour of the partition of Mandate Palestine. We are also proud to have been the first nation-state to vote to do so – and we did so because after the horrors of World War II, we wanted a refuge from man’s inhumanity to man.
We have turned up; we have played our part; we have done our share and we have paid the price through great sacrifice. That’s what gives us a microphone on this topic. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
As a practical demonstration of our ongoing commitment to peace in the Middle East, Australia has had military observers with the UN’s Truce Supervision Organisation since 1956. Our contribution to UNTSO forms the fifth largest contingent of the entire operation and represents Australia’s longest commitment to any operation. We continue to make substantial contributions to security and stability in the Middle East because it is in our interests to do so. Around 1,200 ADF personnel in the Middle East are promoting regional security including as part of the Global anti-Daesh Coalition and, at the request of the Iraqi Government, training Iraqi security forces. An Australian frigate patrols in the Gulf and Bab al Mandab Straits in support of regional security and freedom of navigation as part of a multinational naval force. An Australian commands the Multinational Force and Observers in the Sinai overseeing the Camp David Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel. We have made a difference to thousands of refugees in the region through our humanitarian contribution of over $600 million to Syrian and Iraqi refugees since 2011. And we continue donations to the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East of $41 million in 2017-19.
In short, our credentials as a force for security and stability in the Middle East are beyond question.
Our commitment to supporting peace in the Middle East and for Israel to peacefully exist within secure and internationally recognised borders has always been accompanied by our commitment to the two state solution.
The UN Security Council has consistently endorsed a two-state solution, negotiated directly between Israel and the Palestinians, as the way in which ‘final status’ issues are to be resolved. These ‘final status’ issues include the status of Jerusalem, the right of return of refugees, the status of Israeli settlements, and the provision of security and the future borders of a Palestinian state.
Successive UN Security Council resolutions have laid down expectations of UN member states on a range of related issues. Since the Oslo Accords of the 1990s, public support for a two-state solution has now diminished inside both Israel and the Palestinian Territories. Today, neither Israel nor the Palestinians view the other side really as a genuine partner for peace. Though a two state solution remains the only viable way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, the obstacles, we must admit, to achieving such a solution are becoming insurmountable. We hope not.
The lapse of time and the failure to progress the negotiations I believe has changed the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
A rancid stalemate has emerged. Slavish adherence to the conventional wisdom over decades appears only to be further entrenching this stalemate, providing a leave pass for continued inaction. For everyone to just keeping doing what they’re doing, and looking the other way. Don’t raise the issue, just keep doing what you’re doing.
Pious assertions about a commitment to a two-state solution strain credibility if we’re not prepared to question the conventional wisdom about how we believe this goal can be achieved. Expecting a different outcome while continuing to do the same old thing is not the way, as particularly my Cabinet colleagues know, is not the way I deal with problems.
So, Australia acknowledges that Jerusalem’s ultimate status, including its borders and boundaries, is a final status issue to be resolved between the parties. That’s uncontested.
We also know that as those issues are debated they are hotly contested in terms of their detail, and there are a range of strong views on these issues around the world. We acknowledge there are other views, and remain committed to engaging positively with all of our partners and neighbours who have different views on this topic. That’s OK. And we are confident that others will respect the views we ourselves form when we do so in a respectful and honest way.
Fundamentally, it is the right of every country to determine its national capital.
That is why the Government I lead asked the question about the position we have long adopted in relation to Jerusalem, with respect to achieving a two state solution. This very act of daring to ask that question drew the usual criticism. We hadn’t made a decision, we said we want to take a look at this, there are some rather persuasive arguments out there. As a country we should stop and look at this. And our very decision to do that was decried, it was mocked even, including from our political opponents. Now they either wittingly or otherwise wish to remain wedded to a status quo that is failing. They’re in the ‘leave it well alone category’. They can’t even tell us today whether they think we should ask the question, or even the answer we propose they can’t even agree with. Well people will know where we stand.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
So on the 16th of October in asking this question I announced a review of Australia’s policy on the status of Jerusalem.
I asked the departmental secretaries from Prime Minister and Cabinet, Foreign Affairs and Trade, Defence and Home Affairs to conduct the review. They met with a broad range of Australian community representatives, including some eminent Australian policymakers: former heads of various agencies and departments whether in Defence, Foreign Affairs or Prime Minister and Cabinet; they consulted Australia’s partners and allies overseas, including those most closely involved in the Middle East peace process. I did similarly as I went through a range of bilaterals over the last month or so. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
The starting point for their deliberation was Australia’s absolute commitment to a two-state solution, these are the guard rails, with a secure Israel and future Palestinian state living side-by-side in peace and security within internationally recognised borders. I also required that their deliberations respect Australia’s obligations under international law and UN Security Council resolutions – two things that are fundamental, I think, to Australia’s interests in a rules-based order. You can’t look at these things in isolation. Our foreign policy is guided by our fundamental interest in ensuring that internationally agreed rules continue to safeguard our security and prosperity. We don’t get to pick and choose.
In the United Nations and G20 we have promoted the benefits of a rules based order and in holding states to account. We have imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its violation of Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty. We have called on states to comply with Security Council Resolutions on a range of matters, including the downing of MH17, North Korea’s weapons programme and the Syrian conflict. Accordingly, respect for UN Security Council resolutions is a relevant factor for Australia that we can’t put to one side as we consider our position on these issues.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now, Australia is subject to UN Security Council resolutions that apply to the Jerusalem issue, including Resolutions 478 and 2334.
The review team made recommendations after they’d completed their considerations to the National Security Committee earlier this week, with the resolution of the NSC then confirmed by Cabinet the following day. Since then the Government has engaged in briefings with our neighbours and allies to outline Australia’s new position.
The Government has resolved that Australia’s position is now as follows: Australia now recognises West Jerusalem, being the seat of the Knesset and many of the institutions of government, is the capital of Israel. West Jerusalem is the capital of Israel. And we look forward to moving our Embassy to West Jerusalem when practical, in support of, and after final status determination.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; We have decided to start the work though now to identify a suitable site for an Australian embassy in West Jerusalem.
Out of respect for the clearly communicated preference of the Israeli Government for countries to not establish consulates or honorary consular offices in West Jerusalem, the Australian Government will establish a Trade and Defence Office in West Jerusalem. With deepening defence industry ties and Australia-Israel trade now running at over $1.3 billion per year, this will help continue to build our strong bilateral relationship.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;
Furthermore, recognising our commitment to a two state solution, the Australian Government has also resolved to acknowledge the aspirations of the Palestinian people for a future state with its capital in East Jerusalem. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Australia believes this position respects both our commitment to a two-state solution and longstanding respect for relevant UN Security Council resolutions. It’s a balanced view, it’s a measured view, it’s a well considered view. It reinforces our clear view that the status of Jerusalem can only be resolved through direct negotiations between the parties consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions.
All of our actions, from our efforts in the Pacific to our peacekeeping forces and our presence in the Middle East, are reflections of our commitment to an international order that encourages freedom, peace and prosperity. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
So in conclusion, I’m about hope for better. I’m optimistic by nature and by spirit. All of our actions, from our efforts in the Pacific – and I particularly want to commend Marise Payne and Christopher Pyne for the work that is being done on our ‘step up’ initiative in the Pacific – it has had an extraordinary response. From the Southwest Pacific nations themselves who we just see as family and who just see us as family. But to the broader world of France, the United Kingdom, the United States, Japan, Germany, all very keen to work with Australia and New Zealand in terms of our leadership of that initiative in the Pacific. To our peacekeeping forces and our presence in the Middle East. These are reflections of our commitment to an international order that encourages freedom, peace and prosperity.
Jerusalem - the home of the Al Aqsa Mosque, the Wailing Wall and the Via Dolorosa - deserves better than the rancid stalemate and better than the polarisation that marks its peoples.
When Anwar Sadat courageously addressed the Knesset just over 40 years ago, he said “there is no happiness to the detriment of others”. Those words are still true.
The Israeli and Palestinian people deserve a peace as worthy as the promise of their lands – and they deserve a lasting happiness that can only spring from a shared peace.
Australians have earned the right to call for such a peace and to make our contributions on how that peace can be realised, consistent with who we are and what we believe in.
At the end of the day, it all comes down to what you believe in.


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Mick Tsikas
Well good morning and happy Australia Day.
Today of all days I want to begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet today, the Ngunnawal people. To elders past and present, I say thank you for the wonderful inheritance you have given to us today, and to the elders of the future, I say thank you as well.
To Your Excellency the Governor-General and Lady Cosgrove, to all our honoured guests here today, colleagues, those who are serving all around the country today and right around the world.
To our new citizens, Australians all.
It was more than a century ago Sir Henry Parkes, the father of our federation, put forward a vision of a united and diverse Australia, intergenerationally bound together by a liberty that transcended race, ethnicity, history and even religion.
Parkes said:
“What we are doing by this great Federal movement is not for us, but for them, for the untold millions that will follow us; until this land of Australia shall gather within its bosom all the fruits of the culture of the world; and until the flag of freedom shall be planted here so firmly and guarded with such a fervent patriotism, that all the powers on earth shall never assault it.”
Today, on Australia Day, we celebrate Parkes’ vision for our nation. A nation that indeed has gathered the cultures and peoples of the world, the most successful multicultural nation on earth, that began with our first peoples.
Yesterday, Jenny and I took our girls to join with the Ngunnawal people here in Canberra, not far from here, to acknowledge and pay tribute to our first Australians and 60,000 years of Indigenous culture and history.
We honoured their resilience, their wisdom, their custodianship and stewardship. The world’s oldest living culture.
A stewardship of sea, mountains, rainforest, deserts, river and rock.
We sat together, Australians all, paying our respects – to those with us now, those who come before and for the future we share together. Acknowledging the first peoples who began our great Australian story.
The next great chapter in that story began 231 years ago today.
It was not a good day for my fifth great grandfather, William Roberts.
Bunkered down in the light starved bowels of the Scarborough with 207 other convicts, he had arrived ­in Port Jackson after a long and treacherous voyage from ­Portsmouth.
He was transported for stealing 5 and a half-pound of yarn valued at 9 shillings. It was January 26, 1788. It was a new beginning for him, but it would have seemed a particularly grim one at the time and life was indeed about to get a lot tougher.
Sick, poor, destitute, thrust into an unknown place and an uncertain future.
When the Scarborough returned to New South Wales with the notorious Second Fleet, below deck on the Neptune was Kezia Brown. She was a gardeners’ labourer who’d been transported for stealing clothing. She was my fifth great grandmother.
Seventy-eight female convicts, some with children and infants, were all accommodated on the Neptune, as were some 420 convict men.
The contractors were paid a bit over £17 for each convict embarked. There was no financial incentive to ensure those convicts arrived safe and healthy in New South Wales.
During her voyage, more than a quarter of the convicts died and over a third were hopelessly sick when they landed, with 124 to die soon after arriving.
The Rev Richard Johnson reported the misery of the scene of their ­arrival as “indescribable ... their heads, bodies, clothes, blankets, were all full of lice. They were wretched, naked, filthy, dirty, lousy, and many of them ­utterly unable to stand, or even to stir hand or foot”.
These were very humble and the worst of beginnings.
William and Kezia were married at St Phillips in Sydney a few years later. They then carved out a future for them and their family in a harsh colonial environment we now know as western Sydney. They are buried at St Matthews in Windsor together.
The wonder of our country is that out of such hardship and cruelties would emerge a nation as decent, so fair and so prosperous as ours today.
That is what we celebrate.
While our beginnings were marked with the cruelties and dispossession of empire, they were also accompanied by the idealism of the enlightenment age. Australia was to be a great project.

As Doctor Kemp has written this new settlement was “the ideal place to experiment with such radical ideas as broad individual liberty and equality, universal education, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, a new land without slavery, the rule of law, the classless society, private enterprise and later, the political and social equality of men and women”.
It was these ideas, not the cruelty and the dispossession, that prevailed to make Australia great.
These great ideas are the foundation of our modern Australia and that have transformed us into this most recent chapter of our great story – the one we write together today in the spirit of Parkes great vision.
It’s the one that the men, women and children who will join our company today as citizens will now have a hand in writing.
Across our land today 16,212 men, women and children will become citizens today in 365 ceremonies.
They – you – will be endowed with the same rights, the same opportunities, the same privileges and the same responsibilities as each and every other Australian.
You will be passed the inheritance of our history of over 60,000 years in all its chapters and those freedoms.
Recently I received a letter which to me captured what this day and this ceremony are all about.
It was a letter from a man named Vernon, who realised it had been 25 years since he had escaped war and he simply wanted to say thank you.

He wrote of his family’s Australian journey.
“We have not looked back since then, keeping our promise to Australia and its people.
“My wife is a nurse, my older son a teacher. I engage in my passion, art, and my family duties while also helping youngsters in cricket. Like the majority of migrants we pay our taxes without grudge, obey the law, and are grateful for the opportunities offered by this country to live as free and independent citizens.”
Vernon and his family, and the families and individuals here today are all making Australia a better place.
We can be so proud of our national story. Sure it is not perfect, but no country is. &nbsp;

The story of Australia is not the story of a land mass. It is the story of a living, breathing, good-hearted people making the best choices we can, but always striving to be even better.
And now as we begin this citizenship ceremony, you too get to become part of this great story of Australia.
I am glad William and Kezia made the journey, and I’m glad you have too.
Welcome.
Happy Australia Day.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:10): I would like the House to extend its deepest sympathies to the many people devastated by the Black Saturday bushfires, which scorched Victoria on 7 February 2009; place on record its profound regret at the deaths of 173 people; record its admiration for the courage shown by communities, families and individuals in the face of this natural disaster; and acknowledge the incredible efforts of the emergency workers, police, Defence personnel and volunteers in responding to this disaster and helping to rebuild over the decade that has since passed.
In the past weeks, many if not most of the members of this House, particularly those from Victoria, have been recalling the Black Saturday bushfires of a decade ago that impacted 78 communities across Victoria. I had the opportunity to be present with the Leader of the Opposition, the Speaker and other members at the service that was held in Melbourne to mark that event, joining together with those who endured those terrible days to be with them again together. Ten years have passed since that terrible day and the days that followed. Remembering it can be painful and is. It's unsettling but can also help make sense of the past, as we've sought to learn from it since. In remembering Black Saturday, we remind ourselves of what was faced but also what has since been overcome.
A decade on, the scale of the Black Saturday fires still defies explanation and comprehension. The human toll is unimaginable: 173 lives lost, over 400 injured, thousands stricken with emotional scars to this day and beyond, and the grief of loss. Nineteen thousand CFA volunteers and volunteers from other agencies fought hundreds of fires that eventually would burn over 450,000 hectares of our country. According to the RSPCA, over one million animals perished, incinerated.
Fire has always been with us in this timeless land, but these were no ordinary fires. I remember in this place when the member for McMillan stood here and gave what I would have to say was the most moving speech I think I've ever heard in this place. I want to thank the member for McMillan and the other members who spoke in that debate—those who were here at that time—because you helped the country grieve and understand the momentous nature of this loss. The member for McMillan had been a volunteer firefighter, as many are in this place, for many years, and he told the House about the fire coming up out of the Bunyip state forest. He said:
The awesome fury of this fire cannot be comprehended by the thinking of any reasonable person.

Of the scale of loss, he said:
I know there are people who will wake every morning believing that it was all a dream; that it did not happen. And then they will realise it was not a dream and they will cry and they will cry again.

And cry we did in this chamber. The Speaker himself will recall that well. The loss at the time seemed more than we could bear. When we heard of the bravery, though, and the selflessness, we shed tears again: firefighters who travelled from around Australia, as they have indeed been doing in recent weeks and months; volunteer responders who put the safety of others ahead of the defence of their own properties; neighbours who defended neighbours, only to be caught by the fires themselves.
Those who saw those terrible blazes will never forget them. They were days that rained fire, they said, when the smoke was so thick that it turned day into night. Through it all, people took refuge wherever they could: under lily pads, in dams, in fishponds, in creek beds. Emergency services were unceasing, pushing through so many physical limitations. Parents tried to be brave for their kids; kids tried to be brave for their parents. One young man, helping out a family he knew, was caught in the deadly fire's path. With no escape, he called his dad to let him know, and then he sent a text: 'Dad, I'm dead. I love you.' Ten years on, it still breaks the heart, as it does today, as we hear these things. The rescue efforts were nothing short of remarkable and astounding. The fire and emergency services, the police, the Defence Force, the hospital staff, the paramedics and the many support organisations that responded on that day and in the weeks that followed are heroes.
Yet, as so often happens in this great nation, terrible suffering walked hand in hand with kindness and generosity. Our whole nation rose up in support. Everyone dug deep into their pockets. In Ingham, in North Queensland—the member for Kennedy would know—where floodwaters at the time were still receding at the time, local residents arriving at the community recovery centre donated from their emergency grants to the recovery in Victoria. How amazing is that? How good is that? Some gave their entire grant. Ten years on we remember. At the memorial service that we attended together, Dr Kathy Rowe told a beautiful story of how first the parrots came back and then, as the land healed, the insect eaters came back. Then the honeyeaters came back, as the bush regenerated. She told us that two-thirds of the species are back, but the lyrebird isn't back yet. There's still healing of the land and the people to come.
So, we remember, 10 years on, that from deep suffering came deep selflessness, that from terrible consequences came lessons—lessons that have been and must still be learned and still must be implemented, even from the royal commission many years ago. Through it all, Australians turned to each other. They supported each other through the long, dark days of rebuilding. To everyone affected by the Black Saturday fires, as you contemplate these things and you relive the hurts and you look at the wounds and you look into your future—and especially as you look at someone dear—we offer our heartfelt sympathy of this parliament and the nation. We will never forget.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:25): I rise to update the House on the many floods and fires that have ravaged parts of our country in recent weeks and months. As we know, across our nation we are seeing incredible efforts from tens of thousands of Australians in response to the national disasters that we have faced. In north-west Queensland, flooding rains have brought devastating stock losses to lands and communities that were scarred by years of drought. The heartbreak that is occurring in those communities is hard for us to imagine in this place.
As a result of a monsoon low, Townsville's Ross River hit a record peak, with flood waters damaging thousands of homes and buildings. More than 7,700 damage assessments have been completed across the state. We know that two men lost their lives and another man is missing near Ayr, and our prayers and support are with their families. There is also a livestock tragedy in North Queensland currently unfolding, with stock losses at inestimable levels.
Right now, a whole-of-government response is underway, with Emergency Management Australia, the Defence Force, the Australian Taxation Office, Department of Health, the Department of Human Services and the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources all working with state and local authorities to direct the recovery and the response. The Defence Force has established a joint task force, which is working closely with local authorities and emergency services to help remote communities. They're helping farmers sustain livestock cut off by flooding and transporting patients and critical supplies. They are also involved in the removal, wherever possible, of the carcasses of thousands, if not tens or hundreds of thousands, of stock losses.
The ADF has liaison officers in Cloncurry, Julia Creek and Richmond to drop fodder to local communities, working closely at the direction of the local communities. The RAAF and the Army's 3rd Brigade, 17th Brigade, 6th Brigade and 1st Division—around 2,800 ADF personnel, all based in Townsville, many of them with flooded homes and properties themselves—have helped evacuate people and transport sandbags from Brisbane.
The Commonwealth government, working closely with the Queensland and local governments, has already contributed over $100 million in financial assistance to the recovery effort. That means payments to people whose property has been damaged to assist with their emergency needs; support for affected primary producers, raising recovery grants from $25,000 to $75,000, consistent with category D status; recovery grants for small businesses to help them clean up and reopen their doors; payments of $1 million each, as I announced yesterday, to the current eight council areas west of Townsville to help them with a broad range of recovery activities; and funding for the restoration of damaged infrastructure such as roads and bridges. As of two days ago, we've extended the availability of disaster recovery payments to eight flood-hit shires across western Queensland. We all know it is difficult to get things done when roads and communications are cut, and that's why I'm pleased at the speed of the response on the ground to date, but it must be maintained.
Over 33,000 claims for disaster payments have been processed in Townsville alone, already providing over $39 million directly into the pockets of those affected, and I particularly want to commend Home Affairs and the Department of Human Services for their swift action in getting that support to people as quickly as they can. As well, the government has extended a further $3 million to boost mental health services on the ground, complementing the support being provided by the Queensland government. My great concern is for those farming communities who are absorbing the horrible impact of this. They need our mental health support, and those services have been funded and provided and extended.
As we've seen before, while one part of the country is under water, another part is in flames. We've had fires in Western Australia and, as we gather, 28 bushfires are still burning across Tasmania. These fires have burnt more than 205,000 hectares, including almost 90,000 hectares in the World Heritage area. Firefighters have come from around Australia and across the ditch in New Zealand to help. Miraculously, no lives have been lost there. We've activated disaster recovery funding arrangements in the Derwent Valley, the Huon Valley, the West Coast and the Central Highlands to help cover the costs of firefighting and evacuation centres, as well as recovery payments for affected people and freight subsidies for farmers and producers. We have also activated the Australian government Disaster Recovery Allowance, providing assistance to employees, primary producers and sole traders who have experienced a loss of income as a direct result of the bushfires. There are also fires burning in Victoria, with three uncontrolled blazes at Walhalla, Thomson and Timbarra River. Again, there has been some damage and loss of properties, but thankfully no lives have been lost.
Every summer, as waters rise and fires rage, nature seems to hurl challenges and pose questions of readiness, courage and compassion that Australians answer in the affirmative every time, showing the strength and determination for which Australians are known. Once again, we have seen that response.
Our message to all affected, whether in the black-soil mud of western Queensland or the water-sodden houses of Townsville or the ravaged fire areas of Tasmania, is: as we've stood with you in this immediate response, we will stand with you in the recovery and we will stand with you in the rebuilding. Just as was said in the condolence motion relating to the 10th anniversary of the Black Saturday fires, this will be a decade worth of work, and perhaps more. I've engaged with local mayors throughout western Queensland and in Townsville itself. I want to thank all of those mayors. I must say that local government, state government and the Commonwealth government, from whichever political persuasion, have worked together hand-in-glove—no fingers pointing anywhere; just hands out to help each other. I want to thank in particular Premier Hodgman and Premier Palaszczuk, who have been open and direct and have been tremendous in their support, and we have responded in kind. There is much work to do and there is much rebuilding to do, and this place and our government will certainly support all of that.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:02): I refer to the death of the Hon. Gordon Scholes and I move:
That the House record its deep regret at the death, on 9 December 2018, of the Honourable Gordon Glen Denton Scholes AO, a former Minister and a Member of this House for the Division of Corio from 1967 to 1993, place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service, and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.

Gordon Scholes had a fighting spirit and a gentle soul. When he walked the corridors of this building and the more intimate ones of Old Parliament House, he wasn't hard to spot. He was a big unit, six foot three in the old measurements—190 centimetres tall. He was an imposing presence in the Australian parliament for a quarter of a century, and, as a former Victorian amateur heavyweight boxing champion, I'm sure he knew how to land a blow, but Gordon rarely brought, I'm told, that pugnacity to this place. Like Ben Chifley, he had been a train driver. He was inspired to enter politics after a local kindergarten was closed down. In 1967, Gordon won Corio for the Labor Party at a by-election—no small feat. In fact, former Prime Minister Bob Hawke had tried to capture that seat four years earlier.
Gordon said later in life, 'My prime interest in my early years in parliament was being in parliament itself.' He loved the parliament, and it was his lot to be the Speaker during what would become the most tumultuous time in our country's political history in 1975. But it says something about him that he was one of the few not diminished by those events nor embittered by those times. As we all know, the tide turned against his party at that election, but Gordon Scholes survived that term, having won by just 20 votes after three recounts.
Gordon Scholes served in the Hawke government as a minister, and during his time in this building and the other down the hill he was re-elected 10 times by his local community—a great tribute from his community. Gordon Scholes is remembered as a man who loved his family, who loved his community. He loved this parliament and he was a patriot. He loved our country. I offer the heartfelt sympathy of this parliament, of the government and the nation to Gordon Scholes' family—in particular, to his daughters, Kerry and Anne, and to his grandchildren.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you so much Vanessa for that introduction. I couldn’t agree more with the sentiments that you’ve expressed, talking about this most important of sectors which I want to talk to you about tonight. So members of the diplomatic corps and Parliamentary colleagues who are here, particularly the Deputy Prime Minister, Matt Canavan the Resources Minister I see over here, he’ll be talking to you at breakfast in the morning. Greg Hunt I can see here. But if I keep going and call the roll we’ll be here all night, because I know there are so many of my Coalition colleagues here. Maybe they might, if they’re here in the room tonight, maybe you could just stand so I can acknowledge you all in one round sweep.
[Applause]
Of course Melissa Price the Environment Minister and the president of the Senate and you can see the Government is very supportive in your presence here this evening. To the chairman of the Minerals Council of Australia Vanessa Guthrie, the directors of the MCA, to Tania Constable, ladies and gentlemen. Can I also acknowledge the Ngunnawal People, elders past and present and leaders emerging.
There’s a Shire expression. For those of you who don’t know what I’m talking about it’s that wonderful southern part of Sydney. We have our own language and if we like something, this is what we say; “How good is mining?” That’s what we say. That expresses with a strong statement that we get it. We understand the value and we understand the contribution, we understand the complexities, we understand what you manage and this produces a good result.
As&nbsp; Prime Minister, you don’t have to have been a former Treasurer to understand how important the mining sector is, I know your tax bills. Thank you.
[Laughter]
You don’t have to hold the industry leaders in great esteem – which I do, it’s wonderful to see you Hugh Morgan here tonight, a wonderful pioneer and legend of the sector and industry, it’s great to see you Hugh –
[Applause]
And you also don’t have to just appreciate, as you were saying, the connection between mining and agriculture. The thing that is most pressing on my mind right now, more than any other issue, is what is happening in north Queensland. The devastation we’re seeing particularly in the cattle industry, which I know is not your sector but I know you care about it. Because I know the mining sector will be working hand-in-glove in all of those communities in north Queensland as we all work together to rebuild that great industry on the other side of these devastating floods. Give yourselves a round of applause, because I know you’re going to be there.
[Applause]
In these rural and remote communities, I’ve seen it; the connection between these powerhouse industries that drive the local economy and infuse the local community. The public relations manager at Glencore up in Cloncurry is the president of the Cloncurry Bowls Club. That’s not unusual, to have those connections that exist within these communities. So as a Liberal National Prime Minister I want to assure you that we understand the contribution at every level.
We also understand and you don’t have to be an economic genius to work out, that you always play to your strengths. As part of the economic plan that I announced a couple of weeks ago up in Brisbane, I said it’s our plan to drive forward all of our industries – not just the bright shiny new ones. Now they’re exciting, they’re great, they’re tremendous, the medical industry as Greg knows, we had that in the last Budget, technology industries, tremendous. But agriculture, mining, always our strengths. You don’t walk away from your strengths as a country and you always play to them. That’s what we’ll always do, in recognising the mining sector here in Australia and the resources sector.
It helped make us the success story that we are. It helped build a strong Australia and as a Prime Minister who wants to see Australia even stronger, how could you not have the strength and viability and sustainably for the long term in the mining sector, in such a plan? So we do.
It has given life to regional cities and communities, from Ballarat, Bendigo and Broken Hill, to Mount Isa, Karratha and Kalgoorlie. It has shaped the contours of our development, the design of our inland railways and almost every port in the country. It has provided long-term benefits for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities through local jobs and opportunities for development. Warren Mundine is here tonight and it’s great to have you here with me Warren. It’s great to have you as part of our team.
[Applause]
Yeah, welcome Warren, a great Australian who understands this point very, very well. Cooperation has replaced conflict as Indigenous Australians and the mining industry have worked closely together over recent decades. Australian mining has resourced the astounding growth of our region, from Japan’s post-war development through to the rise of modern China. And I don’t have any issue, in fact I celebrate, as Australia should, the growth of China as an economic powerhouse. Its’ prosperity has meant prosperity for Australia. So don’t let anyone tell you that Australia does not similarly appreciate China’s continued economic growth, it’s been very important to our own success story and will continue to be. There are many companies represented here in this room that of course have been the mainstay of this history and it’s a proud one. It’s one that should be recognised, it should be defended, it shouldn’t be whispered, or not spoken about, as you just take the cheques and pretend the mining sector is not there, as some are prone to do. That’s something our Government will never do. We will celebrate the success of our mining and resources sector. We know the importance of that sector.
My time as Treasurer imprinted those lessons on me. Whether it was the monthly trade figures, the quarterly national accounts or the annual Budget. Mining accounts for almost 10 per cent of our economy. It drives our exports. Resources exports were at $221 billion in 2017/18, 55 per cent of Australian exports by value. You need these numbers. Now, Des was saying it’s more than the statistics; that’s true, but the statistics are pretty flash. Mining employs 240,000 Australians or thereabout, and pays the highest wages in our economy. I was also, as you’d expect, a close observer of commodity prices as Treasurer especially iron ore and coal. It’s 82 free on board US today. Knowing what an important role that plays in sustaining revenues in our tax system, mining remains the life-blood of many communities as I’ve said, directly and indirectly supporting jobs and the volunteer roles that exist around our country.
So we want to see you succeed. I want you succeed, because stronger mining industry means a stronger Australia. A weaker mining industry means a weaker Australia.
That’s why under the Minister for Resources and Northern Australia Matt Canavan, is guiding us in our policy to play to our strengths, while opening up new frontiers for Australian mining. Tomorrow, Matt will release the Australian Resources Sector Plan. I won’t spoil it tonight Matt. There you go, thank you. I could if I wanted.
[Laughter]
But in the spirit of our great Coalition, Michael.&nbsp;It plays to our strengths, it builds communities and I encourage you to come along in the morning and I want to congratulate you on the work that you’ve done on that Matt and engaging with the sector as you do, being a champion for the mining and resources sector.
[Applause]
We want to cement Australia’s resources sector as the world’s best. &nbsp;We’re working to boost minerals exploration and open new basins.&nbsp;Through our Exploring for the Future program, we’re investing $100 million to produce new pre-competitive geoscience data. Our Industry Growth Centres are driving innovation and competitiveness, including in our mining services sector. The Junior Minerals Exploration initiative is providing $100 million to assist junior exploration companies raise additional capital for greenfield exploration programs and I want to particularly acknowledge the work Mathias Cormann has done on that project. We’ve invested around $570 million in low-emissions technology support, through carbon capture and storage, methane abatement and low emissions coal projects. Through the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility, we’re investing $5 billion in loans over 5 years, for infrastructure projects to benefit northern Australia. I know they are now making loans, after we changed the mandate last year and I’m pleased to see that occurring. The Government is providing $84.4 million to two cooperative research centres conducting research into mineral exploration and today Karen Andrews the Industry Minister, who is doing a cracking job, announced $20 million for critical minerals under CRC project grants.
So we are determined to make sure your sector has the skilled workforce it needs to reach its potential and this is all part of our larger plan to keep the economy strong. At the heart of our plan is a mindset that says; “We want to see,” as I said “all industries grow and succeed,” making for safer, more productive, more sustainable mining, driving all industries forward.
Here’s another thing - I’ll say; “how good is mining,” in Townsville, I’ll say it here in Canberra and I’ll say it in Toorak. You won’t hear a different message from me about mining anywhere around the country, you’ll hear the same message and this is important, because if we want our mining industry to be successful in the future, we must counter those noisy voices which want to shut you down.
[Applause]
I was surprised when I went to Western Australia recently – another reason I like the mining sector is I like West Australians, There’s one down here, good on you Gary - but when they told me that mining engineers weren’t signing up to be trained, because they were being told by noisy, shouty voices that mining doesn’t have a future in this country. I was shocked. In Western Australia? This is something that has to be turned around and it’s not about money. It’s about countering these noisy, shouty voices that don’t understand exactly what Vanessa was saying about the sustainable contribution that will continue to be made, which works in harmony with our environment, in harmony with our community, engaging and supporting our indigenous communities, removing social disadvantage. These are the things our mining sector is doing. It doesn’t get the credit it deserves. I’ll stand up for you. I’m not sure some others will.
The reason I feel so strongly about a stronger economy is this; because if you’re doing well, Greg Hunt can list affordable medicines on the PBS. So when we list Spinraza for spinal muscular atrophy, or any of the other drugs, whether for lung cancer or as it was today, for ovarian cancer or any of these drugs, you are achieving this through what you’re doing. Your success is achieving this and when people try to shut you down, they are taking and robbing from Australians the ability for us to deliver those essential services on the ground. But we understand that and that’s why we’re so keen to see that there is a stronger economy.
The plan I announced a couple of months ago was a plan that has been built on some real success in our economy, in which you’ve played a key part. When we came to government in 2013, we said that we had a goal of 1 million jobs within 5 years. We smashed it, the economy smashed it, the businesses smashed it and we were able to achieve 1.1 million jobs within five years. That’s now over 1.2 million. Unemployment is down to five per cent, the lowest in 7 years. In that plan, I said that we would be able, through the contribution that will come from a growing economy, 1.25 million new jobs, created over the next five years if we stay on that track. But not if we don’t. You can make choices in economic policy, just like you can in any matter of policy. National security policy – take your pick – you make choices and when you make those choices, they have consequences. The consequences of the economic plan that I and my plan are taking to the next election, is 1.25 million new jobs and you’ll be playing a key role in ensuring we deliver on that.
So it’s a plan that keeps our Budget strong, delivers lower taxes and while I’m at it, it means that I can guarantee – on lower taxes – there will be no mining tax under our Government, none.
[Applause]
You might want to check that with the other bloke. And if he says that verbally, I’d get it in writing.
[Laughter]
Our plan will build the infrastructure Australia needs and we’re doing that now, a record 75 billion over the next decade. Highway upgrades, local road and rail projects, including the Inland Rail. The biggest projects, we’ve embarked on. It’s a plan to deliver even more access to overseas markets to you, for exporters.
Free and open trade has been a staple of Australia’s economic growth since forever and critical to boosting living standards. And on the global stage, our Trade Minister, our Treasurer, myself, our Foreign Minister, we have been the advocates for free and open trade, of expanding trade. The TPP, the best example most recently and as we work with EU – I was talking to the ambassador today – continuing to open up more opportunities, because we know that’s what makes us a prosperous country. So, we will always remain committed.
I remember in 2013, when we came to Government and Robbie, Andrew Robb outlined what his plan was. Greg will remember, he was there, he said; “We’re going to get a China Free Trade Agreement,&nbsp; Japan, Korea, we’re going to do it all.” And we had a discussion about how this was going to be achieved and of course there was the obvious – that no one has ever boosted their political credentials in this country by making this a big part of their economic plan. We acknowledge that. We’ve done a lot of work since then I think to communicate with the Australian people about how important this is and how their jobs are connected to it. We’ve been making that same case around the world. But we decided to do it because we knew it was the right thing to do.
Our Government is one of convictions, whether it’s on economic policy, whether it is on health policy, whether it’s on national security policy. It’s about the convictions that you have that drive your decisions. So there are many other issues, whether it’s energy, whether it’s meeting our environmental commitments, our 26 to 28 per cent reduction in emissions from 2005. I was asked the other day at the Press Club about this - and strangely, quite critically from the Press Gallery - I responded and I said simply this; “What is the measure by which you assess a government’s policies? Surely it’s, did they meet the goals they set out to achieve?” Our goal through the Emissions Reduction Fund and the suite of other policies that we have, was to make sure we met Kyoto 1. Which we did, we smashed it. Kyoto 2, which we we’ll meet comfortably and our 2030 target which we will also meet, as I constantly say, in a canter. That will be very clear as to how that will be achieved between now and the next election, 328 million tonnes we have to make up over the course of that period with measures. The Labor Party on 45 per cent emissions reduction targets – apart from wiping out a number of businesses in this room – requires more than three times that. So do the math yourself and go and see your accountant in terms of what it’s going to mean.
But let me finish on a positive note. Whether it’s ensuring that we keep the Building and Construction Commission, whether it’s keeping taxes down, building infrastructure or expanding our markets, all of this is designed to do one thing; that is to make sure you are successful. But don’t take it personally because there’s a selfish element to this. I know when you’re successful, Australia is successful and that our Government can build an even stronger society, an even stronger economy and an even stronger nation. So in that sense, I want to thank you for your service and I’m going to be calling on it in the future, because we’ve got a lot more work to do and I’m looking forward to doing it.
Thank you very much for your attention.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (10:02): by leave—I present a copy of&nbsp;Closing the gap: Prime Minister's report 2019.
Introduction
As we always do in this place, we meet on the land of the Ngunawal people. I acknowledge and pay my respects and our respects to Ngunawal elders past, present and emerging, and, indeed, to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people across this nation, whether here today or right across our land.
I also acknowledge our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders who are also democratically elected representatives of this parliament: the member for Hasluck, the member for Barton and Senators Dodson and McCarthy, and I welcome them here.
I also welcome the co-chairs of my Indigenous Advisory Council, Andrea Mason and Roy Ah-See, and all the other members of that council, and all those who have travelled so far to be here today, including Warren Mundine—it's great to have you here as a great Aboriginal leader, Warren. I also want to acknowledge the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Senator Scullion, who has joined us here in the chamber.
And I also want to acknowledge the member for Warringah, both as the special envoy and as someone who has had a profound impact on my understanding and appreciation of Indigenous Australians and the challenges that they face in our country. I want to acknowledge the member for Warringah's longstanding compassion, advocacy, commitment and dedication to the First Peoples of our nation.
Reflection
I want Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children to have the same opportunities as all other children growing up in Australia. That is a goal that I believe is shared by every single member of this parliament. But it's not true for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children growing up in Australia today. It's never been true, and I don't know when it will be true, and that is the truth we must confront today.
I remind myself of this truth each day as I walk into my office, as I've done for many years, in different offices. In my office is a photo of a plaque embedded in a rock memorial at a remote outstation in Central Australia that I visited with the member for Warringah and Senator Scullion many years ago—in fact, back in 2009. It's outside a small school that was attended by Shirley Ngalkin.
When Shirley was away from her community in that remote part of Central Australia in 1998 she was raped and drowned by teenage boys in Hermannsburg. She was six years old. She would be a young woman now, probably raising her own family—perhaps even her own daughters.
On her memorial it says, 'I am Jesus' little lamb', with a prayer that she now rests in his care. And I pray that is true, because we certainly failed to provide that care here—and we still do.
I'd like to tell you that this no longer happens, but we all know it does, even though we're often told that we shouldn't say so and shouldn't talk about these things. But we should. Young girls are taking their lives in remote communities, as we've seen just over this past summer. So are young boys. In too many communities, lives are being consumed in a hopeless dysfunction that seems to defy any sensible response.
While I'm not going to pretend today that this situation does not remain in an unforgiveable state, I am going to say that we will all never rest as a nation until we change this for all time—all of us, together.
I'm here to say today, though, that there is hope, that progress is being made and can be further made so that one day someone will be able to stand here and say that a young Indigenous boy or girl is now growing up in an Australia where they have the same chances and opportunity in life as any other Australian. That is what closing the gap is all about.
Closing the Gap accountability
In 2008 we began this process of closing the gap. Successive Prime Ministers have reported since on our progress on meeting these national goals. It was born out of the National Apology. That was one of the first acts that I was involved in, in this place, coming in as a member of parliament, and I was pleased to do so. Closing the Gap was a recognition that words without deeds are fruitless, and Prime Minister Rudd should forever be commended for that apology and the process he began. That process that began in 2008 was born of a very good heart. It recognised that accountability is vital if we are to bring about a change and meaningful process that has eluded our nation for more than two centuries.
But I must say that, while it was guided by the best of intentions, the process has reflected something of what I believe is the hubris of this place: it did not truly seek to partner with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. It believed that a top-down approach could achieve that change that was, rightly, desired—that Canberra could change it all with lofty goals and bureaucratic targets. That's not true. It was set up to fail—and has, on its own tests. And today I'm calling that out.
This was not a true partnership—not with the states and territories or, most importantly, with Indigenous peoples themselves. Yes, there was more funding, more programs, more workers—and more accountability, too.
But this was just another version of what we were already doing—tragically, so often unsuccessfully in so many different forms, for generations. So, while there has been incremental and meaningful progress on many fronts, as of 2019 only two of the seven Closing the Gap targets are on track. What we're doing has to change, and our government is leading a process to change it.
That is why, two years ago—and I acknowledge the former Prime Minister, Mr Turnbull—we embarked on a Closing the Gap refresh—because our efforts were not meeting our worthy ambitions, shared by all us.
Late last year, a coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peak bodies—and I acknowledge Pat, who is here with us today—made representations to me about closing the gap.
They came to me seeking a real partnership, one where we listen, work together and decide together how future policies are developed, especially at a regional and at a local level. This is a message I've also heard from Andrea and the Indigenous Advisory Council and Roy, and I thank them for the candidness of that message.
At COAG, together with the premiers and chief ministers, in December last year, all governments committed to share ownership of, and responsibility for, jointly agreed frameworks, targets and ongoing monitoring of a refreshed Closing the Gap agenda, with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples at its heart. I thank all the premiers and chief ministers for their spirit, enthusiasm, dedication and commitment for joining this task. COAG asked that this work be finalised by the middle of this year. This is a major step toward the genuine and mutually respectful formal partnership between governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians that will empower individuals and allow communities to thrive.
Governments fail when accountabilities are unclear, when investment is poorly targeted, when systems aren't integrated and when we don't learn from evidence. This is true not only for Indigenous policy but also for any area of policy. That is why clear accountability will be at the centre of a new approach to closing the gap, with states, territories, the Commonwealth government and Indigenous Australians having clear responsibilities for delivering on targets. This is also why the progress we jointly make will be subject to regular independent Indigenous-led reviews. This is about delivering action on the ground. It's about giving us all the best chance for success, to match the best of our motives and intentions.
Our Indigenous communities in regional, remote and urban Australia need the jobs and economic growth that make true aspiration viable, and we need a renewed focus on education so that the next generation of Indigenous men and women will have every opportunity to participate in and contribute to our economic prosperity.
As we commence this refresh of Closing the Gap, it is important to report on what has occurred over the past 10 years of reports. While it is important to acknowledge the gap that exists and the gap that must be closed, we must be careful not to take a deficit mentality to our task. This is a long journey of many steps, and we cannot allow the enormity of that task, as great as it is, to overwhelm us and to overwhelm our appreciation for what we are achieving.
If we focus only on the gap and not on what is being achieved, we are at risk of losing heart. We may fail to recognise achievements and strengths that can be built upon. Sure, those achievements are still not enough. But, in this space, every achievement is hard won in every life, in every community and in every family.
Every Indigenous child that gets into school and stays in school is a victory that should be claimed. Every Indigenous child born healthy and that remains healthy is a victory that must be claimed. Every Indigenous parent in every town, in every place, who gets a job and stays in a job is a victory and it must be claimed, because it changes generations when it happens—as Warren Mundine pointed out to me not that long ago from his own experience. Every Indigenous woman and every Indigenous child who is kept safe from abuse every hour of every day is a victory that must be claimed. And every night a family can rest their heads in a home that is clean, safe and not overcrowded is a victory that must be claimed. This process must claim it's victories, while being honest about its failures and shortcomings. Because it is the victories upon which further success is built, and our failings from which lessons will and must be learned—so let's turn to those.
Life Expectancy
Over the past 10 years the life expectancy of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians has increased. Men born between 2015 to 2017 can expect to live for an additional 4.1 years and women 2.5 years compared to those born 10 years earlier. It's an improvement that is encouraging. It points to better work being undertaken, drawing together the different threads of health: physical, social, emotional and mental. This progress is the culmination of incremental progress in communities across Australia.
Across Australia there are hundreds of services making a meaningful difference. In Queensland, the Institute for Urban Indigenous Health provides clinics, eye examinations, dental examinations and support to deal with addictions. In Central Australia, the Purple House is taking dialysis services to patients—with a mobile dialysis unit, the Purple Truck. And in communities across Australia it requires sustained effort. It's intensive, and it's absolutely vital. However, despite the progress, we are not on track to close the gap on life expectancy by 2031.
Child Mortality
Since 2008 Indigenous child mortality rates have fallen by 10 per cent. The child mortality rate is a rate per 100,000 children, and so, with a small population, the rate does move around a lot from year to year. That means we have to be very cautious about any claims that we make of improvement.
While the Indigenous child mortality rate has fallen, the non-Indigenous infant mortality rates have fallen at a greater rate. While we welcome both falls, the gap has not narrowed. But there are positive signs: the proportion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mothers attending antenatal care has risen from 41 per cent in 2010 to 60 per cent in 2016; very importantly, the maternal smoking rate has decreased from 54 per cent in 2015 to 43 per cent in 2016; and we are seeing significant increases in immunisation rates. I acknowledge the work being done on the ground that is making meaningful differences.
In Queensland, the Apunipima Cape York Health Council's Indigenous health workers, through the Baby One Program, are conducting health checks, immunisation and treatments in homes and through clinics. In the Northern Territory, a team of Aboriginal women is helping young mothers through the Nurse-Family Partnership Program and imparting an understanding of what contributes to good health and wellbeing. This is work that is extremely targeted and helping families make the best choices when it comes to the health and wellbeing of their young children.
Early Childhood Education
The target to have 95 per cent of Indigenous children in early childhood education by 2025 is on track. In 2017, 95 per cent of Indigenous children were enrolled in early childhood education. New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and the ACT now have enrolments at the 95 per cent benchmark rate or above.
We should note that attendance rates for Indigenous children were lower in remote areas—particularly very remote areas—and up to 16 percentage points lower than the rates for Indigenous children in other areas. So there is still work to do. Nevertheless, there is progress overall and this should be celebrated, as I have said, because enrolment and attendance are precursors to improving developmental outcomes ahead of attending school. Much of this work has been supported by national partnership agreements with the states and territories.
Educational Outcomes
Since 2008, there have been improvements in schooling outcomes. The Commonwealth, working with the states and territories through the National School Reform Agreement, is bolstering these improvements with $308 billion from 2018 to 2029, with a priority focus on driving improved outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students.
The biggest improvement over the past decade has been in year 12 or equivalent attainment. We have witnessed an almost 18 percentage point jump in the proportion of Indigenous Australians achieving this milestone since 2006. More Indigenous students are now graduating and moving into employment or further studies.
We can be particularly proud of our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island young people who face the additional challenge of living in very remote areas. They have achieved the largest leap in attainment, with rates rising from 23 per cent in 2006 to 43 per cent in 2016. However, the target to close the gap in school attendance is not on track. Attendance rates for Indigenous students are at around 82 per cent compared to 93 per cent for non-Indigenous students.
Literacy and numeracy
While there is a disproportionate share of Indigenous students below the minimum standards for reading and numeracy, we have made progress over the past decade. The proportion of Indigenous students at or above minimum standards is 11 to 13 percentage points higher than in 2008—for reading in years 3 and 5 and for numeracy in years 5 and 9.
Indigenous employment
This government understands that one of the keys to transforming Indigenous employment rates is to encourage Indigenous businesses to grow, and I particularly commend the minister, Senator Scullion, for his work in this area. Indigenous enterprise means Indigenous jobs. Since the commencement of the Indigenous Procurement Policy 3½ years ago, the Commonwealth has awarded almost 12,000 contracts to over 1,470 businesses. Those contracts have a total value of $1.8 billion. Last financial year, 366 Indigenous businesses won their first Australian government contract. The Commonwealth and all portfolios exceeded their three per cent Indigenous Procurement Policy contract target.
To ensure this growth continues, from 1 July this year, we'll introduce a three per cent target based on value, beginning at one per cent and phased in over eight years. We'll also expand the reach of the mandatory minimum requirements for Indigenous participation in major contracts to include additional service categories from 1 July next year. It is through the development of small, family and medium sized Indigenous businesses that we will tackle the Indigenous employment gap.
Next steps
I am aware that many have entered this place in this role with grand plans and lofty promises on these issues—all soon forgotten. As Prime Minister I am not going to add further well-intentioned promises to what is a long and disappointing list. The Closing the Gap initiative seeks to promote action across a broad range of fronts. It must and will continue to.
As Prime Minister I intend to have a more specific focus: to concentrate my efforts, to seek to make an impact in just one area that I believe can really achieve generational change. And that's education. I want to get kids into school and I want them to stay in school for longer. That is what I wish to achieve.
Education is the key to skills. It is the key to jobs. It is the key to building enterprises—and giving young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians the opportunity to create their futures. It is the key to a good life. If you can't read, if you can't write, there is no possible way you can share in the prosperity of Australia in the way you would otherwise. I am yet to meet a person who says they regret studying. Because, even if we take a different path to our studies, it becomes a foundation on which to build.
As Ian Trust, the Chair of Wunan, an Aboriginal development organisation in the East Kimberley, puts it:
If you want to have things you have never had before, you must be prepared to do things you have never done before. For us, this will mean getting more of our people educated and into a job in order to break the cycle of poverty for our people.

Education is the foundation: for skills, jobs, health, prosperity, longevity, safety, society.
As the member for Warringah has noted, when Indigenous students finish school and complete a degree, they have much the same employment outcomes as other comparable Australians. We are seeing good signs from around the country. The number of Indigenous women enrolling in university education has continued to rise, and Indigenous women are graduating in increasing numbers. For example, only last month, five Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women graduated as doctors from the University of Western Australia. This is a tremendous outcome and I congratulate these new doctors. And last week, on the other side of the continent, in Port Macquarie, the first Indigenous graduate in the University of Newcastle's Bachelor of Midwifery completed her studies.
While there has been progress, we need to accelerate our efforts, particularly in our work in remote areas. We must start with incentivising and rewarding teachers in remote communities, as the member for Warringah has proposed. If you're a teacher in a very remote area, what you are doing is more than a job; it's a calling. It's an act, an expression, of love for your fellow Australians, and we should never take advantage of that great act of love. If anything—and we should—it must be rewarded. That is why the government will provide incentives to teachers working in very remote areas to help them pay their higher education loans. For these teachers, their HECS debt will be frozen. From today, teachers working in a very remote area will not have one cent of interest added to their debt whilst they are working in a very remote area.
For teachers who, from today, work for four years in a very remote area, their HECS debt will be scrapped.
As well, the Minister for Education, the special envoy, and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs will work closely with a small number of communities to improve attendance rates—community by community, school by school, child by child. This could include improving additional school facilities such as infrastructure and learning centres to help disengaged students return to school, the goal being supporting and addressing school attendance.
We have seen the success of organisations that provide scholarships and mentoring for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander boys and girls. The Australian Indigenous Education Foundation, the Clontarf Foundation—with which I have a long association—and so many other programs are producing great outcomes, and we need to invest in that success, helping indigenous boys and girls choose the futures they aspire to.
The government will provide an additional $200 million in support over the forward estimates for scholarships, academies and mentoring support. I want children, Indigenous kids, to get into school and to stay in school longer. The Indigenous youth education package will provide further certainty for scholarships, academies and mentoring of Indigenous students. This is an area which is working, and we will invest in its success.
The journey ahead
There is a change happening in our country—a shared understanding that we have a shared future. The change is manifesting itself in thousands of small ways.
On this issue, I remember as a boy, just 12, travelling with my older brother, Alan, to a property 30 kilometres east of Cloncurry in north-west Queensland. The member for Kennedy knows that property today is under water. It was the family property of my late Uncle Bill, the grandson of Dame Mary Gilmore, who sensed and wrote of the yearning and mourning of Indigenous Australians long before most others in this country. I remember being in awe of the land and marvelling at seeing a horizon on land, because I'd grown up by sea. I'd never seen that before.
There was a large Indigenous family working on that property with Uncle Bill and Aunty Robin. They were skilled stockmen. I had almost no interaction with Aboriginal people at this time in my life, and my first reaction as a young boy was to withdraw. We too often withdraw when we don't know or don't understand. My uncle sensed my unease and he helped me to connect, to see and to appreciate and understand. During the days that followed, I came to learn about their deep connection to land and country and got to know a family that was beautiful, generous and kind.
I fast forward a generation to the evening before Australia Day this year, when I took my own girls with Jen down to the shores of Lake Burley Griffin to spend time with the Ngunawal people. My girls are just a little younger than Alan and I were back then. But my children had no such apprehension, only enthusiasm, and they already had an understanding and appreciation of Indigenous culture that I didn't have as a child at their age. Things have rightly and positively changed. And on those shores of our man-made lake, they encountered the same beauty, generosity and kindness that we had a generation before.
That afternoon, as our faces were painted by our hosts and we danced—some of us not that well—we laughed and we listened. We listened not just to the elders but to the very country that is home. That afternoon, I again saw the great grace of Indigenous Australians. Despite the dispossession, despite the loss of identity, despite the renaming of their lands and despite the ignominy of our history on these issues—including the crimes and the misguided good intentions—there was a good and open-hearted grace. There was an offered hand where you had no right to expect one.
The miracle worked in an apology is not when it is offered but when it is accepted and forgiveness takes place. That is when true reconciliation occurs.
In an age of offence and where the bonds between us are often under strain, there is much we can learn from our First Peoples. So we draw strength from their grace and we renew our efforts to address the gaps that exist. We owe it to them, to our history, to our country, that we share, work together and make the difference that is vital to so many Australian lives.
I'm pleased to present the&nbsp;Closing the gap&nbsp;report for 2019.


Prime Minister
Photo: AAP Image/Lukas Coch
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Speaker, as we always do in this place, we meet on Ngunnawal land.
We acknowledge and pay our respects to Ngunnawal Elders past, present and those emerging.
I pay my deepest respects to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here today and right across our land.
I acknowledge our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders who are also the democratically elected representatives of the people:

The Member for Hasluck and Minister for Indigenous Health and Senior Australians and Aged Care, the Honourable Ken Wyatt. The Member for Barton, the Honourable Linda Burney. And Senators Patrick Dodson and Malarndirri McCarthy.

I welcome the co-chairs of the Indigenous Advisory Council Andrea Mason and Roy Ah-See as well as all who have travelled to be here for this occasion, including Warren Mundine.
I also acknowledge the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Senator Scullion.
I also wish to acknowledge the Member for Warringah, both as Special envoy and as someone who has a profound impact on my understanding and appreciation of indigenous Australians and the challenges they face in our country.
I want to acknowledge his long standing compassion, advocacy, commitment and dedication to the first peoples of our nation.
I want Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children to have the same opportunities as all other children growing up in Australia.
But this is not true for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in Australia today. It’s never been true. And I don’t know when it will be true. And that is the truth we must confront again today.
I remind myself of this truth each day as I walk into my office, as I have done for many years.
In my office is a photo of a plaque embedded in a rock memorial at a remote outstation in Central Australia that I visited with the Member for Warringah and Senator Scullion many years ago, outside a small school that was attended by Shirley Ngalkin.
When Shirley was away from her community, she was brutally raped and drowned by teenage boys in Hermannsburg in 1998. She was six years old. She would be a young woman now, probably raising her own family, perhaps her own daughters.
On her memorial it says “I am Jesus’ little lamb”, with the prayer that she now rests in His care. I pray that is true, because we certainly failed to provide it. And we still do.
I’d like to tell you that this no longer happens. But we all know it does, even though we are often told we shouldn’t say so, but we should.
Young girls are taking their lives in remote communities, so are young boys. Lives are being consumed in a hopeless dysfunction that seems to defy any sensible response.
While I am not going to pretend today that this situation does not remain in an unforgivable state, I am going to say that we can never rest as a nation until we change this for all time.
And I am here to say that there is hope. That progress is and can further be made.
So that one day we can say that a young indigenous boy or girl growing up in Australia will have the same chances and opportunities in life as any other Australian.
That is what Closing the Gap is all about.
Mr Speaker, in 2008 we began this process of Closing the Gap.
Successive Prime Ministers have reported since on our progress on meeting these national goals.
Born out of the National Apology, Closing the Gap was recognition that words without deeds are fruitless.
The process that began in 2008 was born of good heart.
It recognised that accountability is vital if we are to bring about a change and meaningful progress that has eluded our nation for two centuries.
But I must say, that while guided by the best of intentions, the process reflected something of the hubris of this place.
It did not truly seek to partner with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
It believed a top-down approach could achieve the change that was rightly desired. That Canberra could change it all with lofty goals and bureaucratic targets.
It was set up to fail. And has, on its own tests. And today I am calling that out.
This was not a true partnership – not with the states and territories, or with Indigenous peoples themselves.
Yes, there was more funding, programs, workers, and accountability – but this was just another version of what we were already doing, so often unsuccessfully, in different forms, for generations.
So, while there has been incremental and meaningful progress on many fronts – as of 2019 only two of the seven Closing the Gap targets are on track.
What we’re doing has to change and our Government is leading a process to change it.
That is why, two years ago, we embarked on a Closing the Gap refresh – because our efforts were not meeting our worthy ambitions.
Late last year, a Coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peak Bodies made representations to me about Closing the Gap.
They came to me seeking a partnership.
One where we listen, work together and decide together how future policies are developed – especially at a regional and local level.
This is a message I’ve also heard from the Indigenous Advisory Council.
At COAG in December last year, all governments committed to share ownership of, and responsibility for, jointly agreed frameworks, targets and ongoing monitoring of a refreshed Closing the Gap Agenda, with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples at its heart.
COAG asked that this work be finalised by the middle of this year.
This is a major step toward the genuine and mutually respectful formal partnership between governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians that will empower individuals and allow communities to thrive.
Governments fail when accountabilities are unclear. When investment is poorly targeted, When systems aren’t integrated. And when we don’t learn from evidence.
This is why clear accountability will be at the centre of a new approach to Closing the Gap, with states and territories and the Commonwealth Government and Indigenous Australians having clear responsibilities for delivering on targets.
This is also why the progress we jointly make will be subject to regular independent Indigenous-led reviews.
This is about delivering action on the ground.
And this is about giving us all the best chance for success.
Our communities need the jobs and economic growth that makes true aspiration viable – and we need a renewed focus on education so that the next generation of Indigenous men and women will have every opportunity to participate in and contribute to our economic prosperity.
As we commence this refresh of Closing the Gap, it is important to report on what has occurred over the past ten years of reports.
While it is important to acknowledge the gap that exists and the gap that must be closed, we must careful not to take a deficit mentality to our task.
This is a long journey of many steps. We cannot allow the enormity of the task to overwhelm our appreciation for what we are achieving.
If we focus only on the gap and not what is being achieved, we are at risk of losing heart. We may fail to recognise achievements and strengths that can be built upon.
Sure, those achievements are still not enough.
But in this space, every achievement is hard won.
Every child that gets into school and stays in school is a a victory.
Every child born healthy is a victory.
Every parent in every town who gets a &nbsp;job and stays in a job is a victory.
Every woman or child who is kept safe from abuse is a victory.
Every night a family can rest their heads in a home that is clean, safe and not overcrowded is a victory.
This process must claim it’s victories, while being honest about it shortcomings. Because it is the victories upon which success built, and our failings from which lessons are learned.
Over the past ten years the life expectancy of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians has increased – men born between 2015 to 2017 can expect to live for an additional 4.1 years and women 2.5 years compared to those born 10 years earlier.
This improvement is encouraging. It points to better work being undertaken drawing together the different threads of health: physical, social, emotional and mental.
This progress is the culmination of incremental progress in communities across Australia.
Across Australia there are hundreds of services making a meaningful difference.
In Queensland, the Institute of Urban Indigenous Health provides clinics, eye examinations, dental examinations and support to deal with addictions. &nbsp;
In Central Australia, the Purple House is taking dialysis services to patients - with a mobile dialysis unit, the Purple Truck.
And in communities across Australia it requires sustained effort. It’s intensive and it’s absolutely vital.
However, despite the progress, we are not on track to close the gap on life expectancy by 2031.
Since 2008 Indigenous child mortality rates have fallen by 10 per cent.
The child mortality rate is a rate per 100,000 children, and so with a small population, the rate moves around a lot from year to year.
That means we have to be cautious about any claim of improvement.
While the Indigenous child mortality rate has fallen, the non-Indigenous infant mortality rates have fallen at a greater rate.
While we welcome both falls, the gap has not narrowed.
But there are positive signs – the proportion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mothers attending antenatal care has risen from 41 per cent in 2010 to 60 per cent in 2016; the maternal smoking rate has decreased from 54 per cent in 2005 to 43 per cent in 2016; and we are seeing significant increases in immunisation rates.
I acknowledge the work being done on the ground that is making meaningful differences.
In Queensland, the Apunipima Cape York Council’s Indigenous health workers, through the One Baby program, are conducting health checks, immunisation and treatments in homes and through clinics.
In the Northern Territory, a team of Aboriginal women is helping young mothers through the nurse-family partnership program - and imparting an understanding of what contributes to good health and wellbeing.
This is work that is extremely targeted and helping families make the best choices when it comes to the health and wellbeing of their young children. &nbsp;
The target to have 95 per cent of Indigenous children in early childhood education by 2025 is on track.
In 2017, 95 per cent of Indigenous children were enrolled in early childhood education.
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and the ACT now have enrolments at the 95 per cent benchmark rate or above.
We should note that attendance rates for Indigenous children were lower in remote areas – particularly Very Remote Areas – up to 16 percentage points lower than the rates for Indigenous children in other areas.
So there is still work to do.
Nevertheless, there is significant progress overall and this should be celebrated – because enrolment and attendance are precursors to improving developmental outcomes ahead of attending school.
Much of this work has been supported by National Partnership Agreements with the States and Territories - ensuring that every child has access to a quality preschool education in the year before school.
Since 2008, there have been improvements in schooling outcomes.
The Commonwealth, working with the States and Territories, through the National School Reform Agreement is bolstering these improvements with $308 billion from 2018 to 2029, with a priority focus on driving improved outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students.
The biggest improvement over the past decade has been in Year 12 or equivalent attainment.
We have witnessed an almost 18 percentage point jump in the proportion of Indigenous Australians achieving this milestone since 2006.
More Indigenous students are now graduating and moving into employment or further studies.
We can be particularly proud of our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island young people who face the additional challenge of living in Very Remote Areas – they have achieved the largest leap in attainment, with rates rising from 23 per cent in 2006 to 43 per cent in 2016.
However, the target to close the gap in school attendance is not on track.
Attendance rates for Indigenous students are at around 82 per cent compared to 93 per cent for non-Indigenous students.
While there is a disproportionate share of Indigenous students below the minimum standards for reading and numeracy, we have made progress over the past decade.
The proportion of Indigenous students at or above minimum standards are 11-13 percentage points higher than in 2008 – for reading in Years 3 and 5 and for numeracy in Years 5 and 9.
This Government understands that one of the keys to transform Indigenous employment rates is to encourage Indigenous businesses to grow.
Indigenous enterprise means Indigenous jobs.
Since the commencement of the Indigenous Procurement Policy three and a half years ago, the Commonwealth has awarded almost 12,000 contracts to over 1,470 businesses.
Those contracts have a total value of over $1.8 billion.
Last financial year, 366 Indigenous businesses won their first Australian Government contract.
The Commonwealth and all portfolios exceeded their three per cent Indigenous Procurement Policy contract target.
To ensure this growth continues, from 1 July this year, we’ll introduce a three per cent target based on value, beginning at one per cent and phased in over eight years.
We’ll also expand the reach of the mandatory minimum requirements for Indigenous participation in major contracts to include additional service categories from 1 July 2020.
It is through the development of small, family and medium sized Indigenous businesses that we will tackle the Indigenous employment gap. &nbsp;
I am aware that many have entered this place with grand plans and lofty promises. All soon forgotten.
As Prime Minister I am not going to add further well intentioned promises to what is a long and disappointing list.
The Closing the Gap initiative seeks to promote action across a broad range of fronts. It must and will continue to.
As Prime Minister I intend to have a more specific focus. To seek to make an impact in just one area that I believe can achieve generational change.
And that’s education.
I want to get kids into school and to stay in school for longer.
Education is the key to skills.
It is the key to jobs.
It is the key to building enterprises – and giving young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians the opportunity to create their futures.
It’s the key to a good life.
If you can’t read, if you can’t write, there is no possible way you can share in the prosperity of Australia.
I am yet to meet a person who says they regret studying.
Because even if we take a different path to our studies, it becomes a foundation on which to build.
As Ian Trust, the Chair of Wunan an Aboriginal Development organisation in the East Kimberley, puts it: “If you want to have things you have never had before, you must be prepared to do things you have never done before. For us, this will mean getting more of our people educated and into a job in order to break the cycle of poverty for our people”.
Education is the foundation: for skills, jobs, health, prosperity, and longevity.
As the Member for Warringah has noted: when Indigenous students finish school and complete a degree – they have much the same employment outcomes as other comparable Australians.
We are seeing good signs from around the country.
The number of Indigenous women enrolling in university education has continued to rise and Indigenous women are graduating in increasing numbers.
For example, only last month, five Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women graduated as doctors from the University of Western Australia. This is a tremendous outcome and I congratulate these new doctors.
And last week, on the other side of the continent, in Port Macquarie, the first Indigenous graduate in the University of Newcastle’s Bachelor of Midwifery completed her studies.
While there has been progress, we need to accelerate our efforts, particularly in our work in remote areas.
We must start with incentivising and rewarding teachers in remote communities.
I know you can’t be a teacher in a very remote area without having a deep commitment to teaching and making a difference.
If you are a teacher in a very remote area, what you are doing is more than a job, it’s an expression of love.
We should never take advantage of that great act of love. If anything we should reward it.
That is why the Government will provide incentives to teachers working in Very Remote Areas to help them pay their Higher Education Loans.
For these teachers, their HECS debt will be frozen. From today, teachers working in a Very Remote Area will not have one cent of interest added to their debt whilst they are working in a Very Remote Area.
For teachers, who from today, work for four years in a Very Remote Area, their HECS debt will be scrapped. &nbsp;
As well, the Minister for Education, the Special Envoy, and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs will work closely with a small number of communities to improve attendance rates.
Community by community. School by school.
This could include providing additional school facilities such as community infrastructure or learning centres helping disengaged students return to school. The goal being supporting and addressing school attendance.
We have seen the success of organisations that provide scholarships and mentoring for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander boys and girls.
The Australian Indigenous Education Foundation, the Clontarf Foundation, and so many other programs are producing great outcomes and we need to invest in that success – helping indigenous boys and girls choose the futures they aspire to.
The Government will provide an extra $200 million in support over the forward estimates for scholarships, academies and mentoring support.
The Indigenous Youth Education Package will provide further certainty for scholarships, academies and mentoring of Indigenous students.
This is an area which is working, and we are investing in success.
Mr Speaker.
There is change happening in our country: a shared understanding that we have a shared future.
The change is manifesting itself in thousands of small ways, each cascading to create change.
I remember being a boy, just 12, and travelling with my older brother Alan to a property 30 kilometres east of Cloncurry in North West Queensland, that property is under water today.
It was the family property of my late uncle Bill. The grandson of Dame Mary Gilmore who sensed and wrote of the yearning and mourning of Indigenous Australians long before most others.
I remember being in awe of the land – and marvelling at seeing a horizon on land rather than just at sea. I’d never seen that before, I grew up on the coast.
There was a large Indigenous family working on the property.
They were skilled stockmen.
I had had almost no interaction with Aboriginal people in my life – and my first reaction as a young boy – was to withdraw.
We too often withdraw what we do not know or understand.
My uncle sensed my unease. So he helped me to connect, to see, to appreciate and understand.
During the days that followed I came to learn about their deep connection to land and country, and got to know a family that was beautiful, generous and kind.
I fast forward a generation – to the evening before Australia Day this year.
And I took my family to the shores of Lake Burley Griffin to spend time with representatives of the Ngunnawal people.
My girls are just a little younger than Alan and I were when we went on our country trip.
But my children had no apprehension, only enthusiasm – and they already have an understanding and appreciation of Indigenous culture that I didn’t have as a child.
And on the shores of our man-made lake, they encountered the same beauty, generosity and kindness that we had a generation before.
That afternoon, all of our faces were painted by our hosts – and we danced – some of us not that well – and we laughed and we listened.
We listened not just to the Elders, but to the very country that is home.
That afternoon, I again saw the great grace of Indigenous Australia.
Despite the dispossession; the loss of identity; the renaming of their lands; the ignominy of our history, including the crimes and the misguided good intentions; there was a good and open-hearted grace.
There was an offered hand where you might not expect any.
The miracle worked in any Apology is not when it is offered, but when it is accepted and that forgiveness takes place. That is when true reconciliation occurs. &nbsp;
In an age of offence, and where the bonds between us are under strain, there is much we can learn from our Indigenous brothers and sisters.
So we draw strength from their grace and renew our efforts to address the gaps in health, education, safety and housing.
We owe it to history, we owe it to the country that we share, to work together and to make the difference that is vital to so many lives.
Mr Speaker, I present the 2019 Closing the Gap Report.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (15:39): I move:
That the resolution of Senate be agreed to.

I take the issue of abuse and neglect of people with disability very seriously and so does the government I lead. We take it seriously because abuse and neglect of our most vulnerable is abhorrent. As we've seen in other areas, institutions we expect to provide care and support have often failed in providing that care. In the past, all too often we thought abuse or neglect in institutions were isolated occurrences; instead, we discovered it was systemic failure, as we noted last year in relation to the National Apology.
So we must be vigilant in ensuring the standards of care for people with disabilities are at their absolute highest. That is why our government is undertaking substantial reform to improve the treatment of people with disability. We have established a royal commission into abuse and neglect in aged-care facilities, including young people with disabilities in aged-care facilities. We were able to establish this quickly as the Commonwealth has responsibility for the funding and legislation of aged care. As well, there have been a number of inquiries looking into abuse and neglect of people with disability at both federal and state levels. These inquiries have identified many issues relevant to the disability sector and have been incorporated into the NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework.
As members know, the focus of the government has been on rolling out the National Disability Insurance Scheme as well as establishing a new national quality and safeguard system to support people with disability. As part of that, the government has established new, significant and comprehensive safeguards to prevent abuse and neglect of people with disability under the NDIS. The Commonwealth provided $209 million to establish the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission to regulate the delivery of services under the NDIS and to protect the rights of people with a disability. The NDIS Commission has a number of critical functions, including registering providers, handling complaints and reportable incidents, enforcing a code of conduct for NDIS providers and workers, and national policy settings for consistent worker screening. It also has strong investigation and regulatory powers and can take tough, appropriate action including deregistration, banning orders and civil penalties. The NDIS Commission has extensive powers over both registered and unregistered providers. The NDIS and the associated quality and safeguarding arrangements are still in the process of being rolled out across Australia The NDIS Commission commenced operations in New South Wales and South Australia on 1 July 2018 and will commence in the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, Queensland, Tasmania and Victoria on 1 July 2019 and in Western Australia on 1 July 2020. This means the Commonwealth currently has very limited jurisdiction in regulation of disability services.
On Friday, I received correspondence from Senator Steele-John which contained a draft terms of reference for the proposed royal commission into disability services. I thank him for doing so and I appreciate the very concrete and very detailed suggestions that he has been able to provide to us on this issue. They, of course, will be of assistance as we consider now this motion and move forward on this matter. I note his terms of reference seek to look into the experiences—rightly, I should stress—of people directly or indirectly affected in institutional, residential and other contexts.
As the Attorney-General noted on the weekend, a royal commission looking into past issues, backwards, into disability care is essentially then a royal commission that would look into state facilities and, at the very least, require consultation and agreement with the states and likely letters patent from the states. We understand this to be true. This should not be a royal commission that only looks at the narrow area of responsibility that has only become part of the Commonwealth's responsibility in recent times. The issues that are relevant here go back over some period of time, certainly back a decade. They principally involve the conduct of state and territory governments in the delivery of disability services, and they should, obviously, be considered in any royal commission held into this area.
I do note, though, as I did in question time today, that the establishment of a royal commission was previously discussed through the Council of Australian Governments and the COAG Disability Reform Council and, at that time, states and territories did not indicate support for a royal commission. So these are hurdles that would have to be addressed. I want to keep all Australians safe and to use whatever powers we have to do so. But this work often requires us to work in partnership with the states and territories, and that's what we will have to address ourselves to going forward. Violence, abuse and neglect of people with disability outside service settings, such as at home or in the community, is mostly covered under state and territory law, so working with the states and territories in this area, looking at matters in the past as well as looking forward, will be absolutely essential. I will be seeking further advice from all states and territories to discuss this important matter of establishing a royal commission, as well as consulting directly and extensively with stakeholders about what the precise terms of reference might be and what other royal commissions, in particular the aged-care royal commission, might be able to offer as a way to address these issues.
These are the options before the government. As the House knows, calling a royal commission is a matter for the executive government. The Senate has put forward a motion and it won't be opposed by the government. It will be supported by the government. But it will be the government that then will take that matter into consideration and work through all the necessary issues to be able to do something positively in this area and to act on these issues. That's exactly what we'll do. We have no interest in making any partisanship of this issue. One of the reasons I decided to establish the royal commission into aged care is that I believed the royal commission into aged care would provide a fact base, a new platform, to support a further decade of bipartisanship on action on aged care, because I was concerned that that bipartisanship was waning. I sincerely hope that that is not the case in relation to disability care and that we are able to go forward with this issue. That is the good faith in which I will engage with the issue and seek to lead the issue forward.
I will report back to the House when we have further advice on these matters and make announcements as and when the government is in a position to do so.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (12:00): by leave—Australia's democratic process is our greatest asset, our most critical piece of national infrastructure. Public confidence in the integrity of our democratic processes is an essential element of Australian sovereignty and governance. While we will vigorously argue over many issues in this place, we are all united in our parliament in our commitment to democratic principles.
Members will be aware that the Australian Cyber Security Centre recently identified a malicious intrusion into the Australian Parliament House computer network. During the course of this work, we also became aware that the networks of some political parties—Liberal, Labor and the Nationals—have also been affected. Our security agencies have detected this activity and acted decisively to confront it. They are securing these systems and protecting users. I do not propose to go into the detail of these operational matters, but our cyberexperts believe that a sophisticated state actor is responsible for this malicious activity.
Let me be clear, though: there is no evidence of any electoral interference. We have put in place a number of measures to ensure the integrity of our electoral system. I have instructed the Australian Cyber Security Centre to be ready to provide any political party or electoral body in Australia with immediate support, including making their technical experts available. They have already briefed the electoral commissions and those responsible for cybersecurity for all states and territories. They have also worked with global antivirus companies to ensure Australia's friends and allies have the capacity to detect this malicious activity.
We have acted decisively to protect our national interests. The methods used by malicious actors are constantly evolving, and this incident just reinforces yet again the importance of cybersecurity as a fundamental part of everyone's business. The Australian government will continue to take a proactive and coordinated approach to protecting Australia's sovereignty, economy and national security. That is why the government has invested in cybersecurity, including strengthening the Australian Cyber Security Centre by bringing all of the Australian government's cybersecurity capability together in one place. Our political system and our democracy remain strong and vibrant and are protected. We stand united in the protection of our values and our sovereignty. The government has chosen to be transparent about these matters. This, in itself, is an expression of faith by our government in our democratic system and our determination to defend it.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (12:01): On indulgence, I rise to acknowledge the 70th anniversary of Australia's formal diplomatic relationship with the State of Israel and affirm our deep friendship with the people of Israel—and, in doing that, I welcome the ambassador here with us in the chamber today.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!
Mr Morrison: In any long friendship there are moments that matter and moments never forgotten. For Australia and Israel it was in 1947 and it was in the United Nations. There was at that point no nation of Israel. Instead, there were broken and scarred Jewish people scattered around the world in places like Auschwitz-Birkenau, Dachau and Buchenwald. Though they no longer existed as state-sponsored machines of death, they seemed more real than a permanent home for the Jewish people at that time. It was as if darkness and hopelessness had covered the Jewish people as the true extent of the Holocaust became known. Maybe it was for such times that the Book of Joel spoke of young men seeing visions and old men dreaming dreams—and the age-old dream, in the words of David Ben-Gurion, was 'the redemption of Israel'.
It was in this setting that Australia chaired the 1947 UN committee that voted in favour of dividing the territory of mandate Palestine. On 29 November 1947 at the United Nations General Assembly, Australia joined 32 other nations in successfully voting for the partition plan. Looking back across seven decades it might seem that that was a simple thing to do and an obvious choice to make, but it was neither of those things. Australia made, in the words of Doc Evatt, who was instrumental in this recognition, 'an inevitable and just choice to stand with the Jewish people of the world and their vision for a Jewish state and a place of sanctuary where they would never again, and should never again, face persecution'.
Australia extended official recognition to the State of Israel in January 1949. In May of that same year Australia was proud to preside over the vote which formally admitted Israel as a member of the United Nations. As that new nation formed, the Jewish people arrived, in the words of David Ben-Gurion, 'with the dew of dreams still moist in our hearts'. Our small part, Australia's part, is a legacy of which we are proud and one we hold dear today as we mark this anniversary. In the words of our then Prime Minister: 'The new nation of Israel will be a force of special value in the world community, and its recognition was fair and just'—and so it has proved to be.
Today Israel's light is now a beacon of democracy in the Middle East. Ours is a 70-year-long friendship between two peoples which share a commitment to democracy and the rule of law, have a multicultural character and are committed to science and research, to a free press, to prosperity for our people and to innovation to overcome the challenges of our often hostile natural environments.
My government has resolved to ensure our commitment to Israel remains as firm today and in the future as it indeed was 70 years ago for Australia. That is why our government has acted for Australia to now recognise West Jerusalem, the seat of the Knesset and many institutions of government, as the capital of the State of Israel. We look forward moving our embassy to West Jerusalem when practical in support of and after the final status determination of a two-state solution. And, in the spirit of a two-state solution, we acknowledge the aspirations of the Palestinian people for a future state with its capital in East Jerusalem.
My government is also currently establishing a trade and defence office in West Jerusalem to enhance and support our deepening collaboration on trade, defence industries, investment and innovation. Just as it was 70 years ago, it remains in our national interests to see Israel continue to flourish as a liberal, participatory democracy in the Middle East. And, now as then, Australia continues to strongly support Israel's right to exist within secure and internationally recognised borders.
But my government won't just proclaim these words and sentiments; we will continue to act on them and not step back from or shrink from our commitments. This includes standing by Israel in the face of biased and unfair targeting of Israel in the UN General Assembly. The UN General Assembly is now the place where Israel is bullied and where anti-Semitism is cloaked in the language of human rights. Think about it: a nation of immigrants, with a free press and parliamentary democracy, which is financially prosperous, the source of innovation in the world and a refuge from persecution and genocide, is somehow now the centre of cruelty in the world, according to some in the UN. That is intellectual fraud. Last year, there were 17 UN General Assembly resolutions critical of Israel. This compared with a total of five covering all other countries, including Myanmar, the Syrian Arab Republic, Russia's actions in Crimea and the Ukraine, Iran and North Korea. This year the Human Rights Council passed six motions condemning Israel compared to a total of 14 across the rest of the world.
Last year, at my direction, Australia opposed six resolutions that attacked Israel in the UN General Assembly. These included the Jerusalem resolution, which contains biased and one-sided language attacking Israel and denies its historical connection to the city, and the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine resolution, which confers on the Palestinian Authority a status it does not have. In the past, we'd abstained on these resolutions—not anymore and not on my watch.
My government will not turn a blind eye to an anti-Semitic agenda masquerading as defence of human rights in the UN. This is also extended to calling out those who would seek to wipe Israel from the map. Again at my direction, last year, Australia supported a UN General Assembly resolution to condemn the egregious and ongoing violent acts of the terrorist organisation Hamas. Hamas are violent extremists, terrorists who use the Israel-Palestine conflict as an excuse to inflict terror. They should have no friends at the UN. The failure of that resolution to pass with the requisite majority was an indictment, I think, of the UN. Australia condemns Hamas's activities in the strongest possible terms.
Of course, our partnership has always been underpinned by the peoples of our nations. Australia's Jewish community began with those who arrived on the First Fleet. Though they were persecuted in Europe, Africa and the Middle East, Australia has been, to quote the words of the member for Berowra, a land, 'almost uniquely in human history, good to the Jewish people'. Though numbering about one-hundredth of our population, Australians of Jewish heritage have made a remarkable contribution to our national life and our story. We are the nation of John Monash, Isaac Isaacs, Sir Zelman Cowen, Governor Linda Dessau, Frank Lowy, Harry Triguboff, Joan Rosanove and thousands more who, in their own way, have all sought to be the light unto the nations, performing the mitzvot, or good deeds, according to the law of Moses.
Australia has been a steadfast and loyal friend to Israel since its very creation, and I can assure this House, the people of Australia and our friends in Israel that the Liberal and National parties will never walk back or shrink from the recognition that Australia now affords Israel and the commitments and support for the State of Israel, whether in the General Assembly of the United Nations or elsewhere.
We know this is about Israel. They are a steadfast and loyal friend. Seventy years on, this parliament restates our commitment to Israel, to its people and to the deep friendship between our nations. We are friends who have always stood with each other, and may that always be the case.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, it’s a great pleasure to be here. Can I acknowledge the traditional owners, their elders past and present and emerging. Can I also acknowledge any ex-servicemen or women who are with us today and those who are serving still. Could I acknowledge also Simon Birmingham, the Trade Minister who’s here with us this morning, and Simon is here fresh back from signing the Free Trade Agreement up in Indonesia yesterday. It’s wonderful that you’re able to join us this morning, Simon, and of course Peter Costello, a predecessor of my own Treasury portfolio. Ten surpluses, we’re looking forward to adding to that tally in a months’ time when Josh hands down his first budget, which will be a surplus and that’ll be the first time that’s happened in 12 years. It’s a long way back when the country takes a different course and we’ll be able to say that we’ve righted that course when we set up at the budget this year. I also want to acknowledge the support of BHP for this AFR Business Summit.
This year’s Summit has, rightly, put trust at the centre of discussions. Trust is the currency of a strong and prosperous economy. We all have a stake in ensuring high public trust in our economic institutions and it’s no secret that big business, in particular, finds itself under unprecedented scrutiny. The need to restore trust with customers, employees, the suppliers, the wider community is preoccupying boardrooms all across Australia.
As former Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper has written, high trust societies are richer, they’re happier, not least because trust enables efficient trade and commerce by allowing markets to function better and I think Stephen hit that right on the head when he said that. On the other hand, low levels of trust generate pressure for more laws to regulate business activities and practices. Trust is also the currency of politics, our public discourse and our policy decision-making. The public, rightly, want to assess your record. They want to assess your plans. They want to know what you believe. They want to know about what you seek to do in the future and your basis is or your claims to what you want to achieve. And with the election approaching, Australians are beginning to focus on the choice that is in front of them. They are beginning to focus on the records, the beliefs and the plans of the alternatives and what the means, importantly, for the economy that they will live in for the next decade.
I just want to pause on this point. The next election, just like in 2007, will have a profound impact on the economy that Australians and families and small family businesses all around the country, it will impact on the economy they will live in. The economy is not a theory, it’s something that affects every day of your life. And just one term of a Labor Government can change the economic course and the economy each and every Australian will live in.
So, I welcome this scrutiny. I think it’s time for that scrutiny. Our Government, of course, has been under that scrutiny, as it should. We are the Government. But equally, as you go into an election, it’s important that the alternative plans are put under the same scrutiny and an understanding of what the impacts are for the decade ahead. Labor can do a lot of damage. They only need one term – only one term to really stuff it up. We had two terms we’ve had to fix over the last six years and will have a profound effect on the next decade. So, I welcome this scrutiny because the Coalition does have a strong record – a clear set of beliefs and I welcome it because the Coalition has a strong record, clear beliefs and a comprehensive plan to keep our economy strong, to keep Australians safe, and to continue to bring Australians together. Scrutiny will be important more than ever this year because the stakes are higher than ever, as they always are in every election. The contrast between the economic plan of the Coalition and Labor, as I said, is greater than it has been, I think, in 40 years – in a generation and more.
In the past, there was at least some degree of convergence on our economic direction as a country. There was broad recognition about the modernisation of Australia’s economy resting on some key pillars – balanced budgets, competitive tax rates, low inflation, competition reform, enterprise bargaining, trade, opening it up, playing to our economic strengths including, can I stress, our traditional sectors in agriculture, in resources, in forestry, in mining. Things that we don’t shy away from as a Government, that we understand their critical importance to the future of our economy. We don’t think it’s a good thing when any of these sectors face markets with strong headwinds. We don’t think that’s wonderful like the Labor Party does. The dividend for Australian households from this economic modernisation has been substantial over the last 30 years. Between 1960 and 1991, the Australian economy had six recessions. Since 1991, Australia has enjoyed 27 years of uninterrupted economic growth – this is an extraordinary achievement. It is arguably our most significant national achievement. Half the Australians voting at this election – half, more than half – will never have experienced a recession during their working life. They would never have had to face 18 per cent interest rates as they look for a mortgage, as they started a young family. They would have never had been in a job market where there was a recession and looking for a job or trying to keep their job or looking for their wages. It would have never happened. More than half. So, it’s important that we understand the economy is real and it has real implications for every single Australian and if you make the wrong calls, then that will punish Australians – every household, every business, each and every Australian.
Our real GDP has grown faster than any other advanced economy over that period. Real GDP per capita has risen around 60 per cent since the early 1990s. &nbsp;This compares with an average rise of 44 per cent in the US, Japan, Germany, Canada and the UK. We’ve seen strong income growth across the income distribution sector. In the context of globalisation and rapid technological change, this has been a singular achievement of what I have called ‘the modern Australian compact’. A compact where the tax-transfer system reduces income inequality in Australia by more than 40 per cent, according to the official statistics of the Australian Bureau of Statistics. A compact where the top 10 per cent of taxpayers pay almost half of personal income tax and where the bottom 10 per cent of households by income has achieved the highest income growth of any group since the Global Financial Crisis. These are facts about our economy. This is the truth about what is happening in our economy. Not the myths, not the fairy tales, not the sentimental stories, but the hard facts of what is happening in our economy. A compact where, according to Peter Whiteford from the Australian National University, social security benefits are targeted to the poor more than in any other high-income country today.
We have a good system, we do have a fair system and the facts back that up. Over the past five and a half years and in the wake of a massive fall in mining investment, our Government has worked to sustain economic growth and secure a more diversified economy. Let’s not forget that mining investment boom moved $80 billion out of the Australian economy. To fall off the edge of the mining investment boom was a far more devastating factor impacting our Australian economy than the GFC. And over that period of time, as it impacted incomes significantly, we have been able to ensure the economy has continued to grow and, importantly, we have maintained our AAA credit rating throughout that entire period at a time that it has been under greatest threat.
Speaking of trust, we pledged to create one million jobs five and a half years ago. And we met that target before time, and we exceeded it. More than 1.2 million jobs have been created since 2013 in September. Those jobs were created by businesses – by growing a stronger economy, businesses were able to grow and employ people. In 2013 under Labor, unemployment was at 5.7 per cent and going that way, north. Today, it is 5 per cent, what some call the natural rate, and Australia’s jobs growth is now faster than in all G7 countries. Our employment to population ratio for those aged 15 to 64, the working age population, is at a record 74.2 per cent. This is the best result since records began more than 40 years ago. More people of working age are in work than in any other time in our history and as you can see in the chart, it’s been a long way back.
The female participation rate is at a record high. So too is the participation rate for Australians aged over 65. Welfare dependency is at the lowest level for three decades. More people in work, less people on welfare – that’s what Coalition economic policy delivers. Armed with this record, we have now set ourselves the goal of creating another 1.25 million jobs over the next five years – that’s my jobs pledge to the Australian people. And as you’ve just heard from the record, that is a claim, a pledge that we can make with some credibility. At the same time, we have fixed the budget mess we inherited in 2013 and turned the corner on debt and maintained our AAA credit rating. When we came to office, the budget had a deficit of $47 billion, or a 3 per cent share of the size of our economy.
In 2019-20, the Budget will finally return to surplus. It hasn’t been an easy path, it has been a long road back to both fiscally consolidate while at the same time growing the economy when there had been [inaudible] of mining investment in the country. These are the three things that had to be very carefully managed. Our discipline, fiscally, will ensure these surpluses exceed 1 per cent of GDP over the medium term. Real spending growth under our Government is at the lowest level for half a century – more than 50 years of any Government. The hard work of getting the budget back into surplus though is only the start – we need to restore the balance sheet to where it was prior to the GFC so that we’re well placed to handle whatever the global economy throws at us in the future.
The buffers that were created by the Howard-Costello Government, not just the fiscal ones but the regulatory ones around our banking and financial system, were the critical factors that ensured that we were able to move through the GFC at the time. And we need to get back into that space. The Government is committed to eliminating net debt over the next decade and it will take that long and it will be quite a challenge to achieve. This should now be the focus of our government’s fiscal management and it will be, paying down the debts of the past in order to grow the economy of tomorrow. That is our intergenerational pledge – securing our future by keeping a lid on taxes and restraining expenditure to support confidence right across the economy and, in particular, amongst business.
Obviously, the finishing line of zero net debt is in the distance, but we need to stay the course. In the same way, we will steadfastly work toward getting ourselves back in the balance. We will work steadfastly to achieve this goal also. So, this is not a time to experiment with economic management. We has seen these experiments before under Labor. They don’t end well for anybody. Our proven track record on the economy is one that we’ve worked hard to achieve over the last five and a half years. It honours the legacy of that which we’ve inherited from the Howard-Costello Government. And we’ve maintained it, and we need to maintain this course. Why? Because, as we know, in recent months, the global economy has slowed, the risks have risen, at least compared with those we’ve faced in last 18 months or so.
Both the IMF and World Bank have lowered their global growth forecasts since our mid-year update. The World Bank warns of darkening skies given global financing conditions have tightened, industrial production has moderated and the threat of protectionism remains high. There are a few own goals out there in the global economy. It warns that a simultaneous sharp slowdown in both the United States and China could have severe consequences for the global outlook and these are very obvious points. Meanwhile, domestically, we have seen dwelling prices fall in our major capitals, a correction, with prices down 10.4 per cent in Sydney and 9.1 per cent in Melbourne. The Reserve Bank Governor has been able to put these into context. We have been able to achieve, I think, a soft lending to date in the housing market. It was very over-heated, particularly in the Sydney and Melbourne markets, we know that and the measures and factors that have been in play have ensured that softening. Had it been a hard landing, the implications for our economy we all understand would have been quite dire.
This only underlines why we can’t take Australia’s unbroken run of economic growth for granted. &nbsp;Why we must do more to make our economy even stronger. Why we have taken the hard work of rebuilding the Budget position. Prudent fiscal management has allowed us to turn the Budget around while also I should stress investing record levels in defence, in health, in aged care, in education, all essential services that Australians rely on. Our investments in all of these essential services – 2,000 affordable medicines on the PBS without increasing taxes. The investments that I’ll announce today on domestic violence, important, bi-partisan commitments. The only difference is, I’ll be announcing them without increased taxes.
Education funding at record levels, bulk billing for Medicare at record levels without increasing taxes. I believe the way you control expenditure is actually controlling how much you tax. We should only take from the Australian public, from their efforts, as much as we absolutely need to deliver those essential services that Australians rely on. We shouldn’t have to take more in the event that you can’t manage all your other expenditure, which is what we see the Labor Party do. Why are they going to tax you more? Because they can’t manage the budget, so we’ll just tax them to cover up for all the other wasted expenditure.
That’s why we’re not raising taxes because we’ve kept a tension on the cord across all other levels of spending. This has allowed us to unlock the largest infrastructure pipeline in terms of our economic management and what we’ve invested in. Our $75 billion infrastructure plan is delivering much needed growth and nation-building capacity to all parts of Australia. In many ways, it’s been filling the gap left by the retreat in mining investment. That means less congested roads in our urban areas, so families can spend more time with each other, rather than get stuck in traffic. The new Western Sydney International, I’m pleased to say the Nancy-Bird Walton Airport which we announced yesterday, is breaking a deadlock that has eluded governments for generations, decades upon decades upon decades.
Our $5 billion investment in Tulla Rail in Melbourne will transform and reshape that city. A new Inland rail network for Eastern Australia will enhance the national freight network – creating jobs, reducing supply chain costs and connecting cities and regional Australia to markets faster, safer and more efficiently. Snowy 2.0, MarinusLink and Tasmania’s Battery of the Nation will not only create jobs where we need them but it will firm Australia’s record investment in renewable energy for the future so there won’t be dumping and shedding of renewable energy from the grid and will put downward pressure on electricity prices.
A big part of keeping Australians together is opening up new opportunities in regional Australia – through this better infrastructure, digital connectivity and the like. &nbsp;Our Government is determined that Australia grows together, not apart, and the key to that is the strength of our economy. All these investments are being fully funded as I said without an increase in taxes. The Coalition has embedded Australia into the major economic engines of our region through transformational trade agreements with Japan, Korea, China, and 10 other nations of the Trans-Pacific Partnership and we now include Indonesia where Simon has just returned from inking that agreement.
Since the Coalition was elected, the coverage of our free trade agreements has increased from 26 per cent of our total two-way trade to 70 per cent. 26 per cent to 70 per cent – that is a massive opening up of our trade opportunities for small and family businesses in particular around Australia. New export deals have given Australian exporters duty-free or preferential access to an extra 1.8 billion customers in the world’s fastest and largest growing markets. This is the most effective hedge an open trading economy like Australia can adopt against the new protectionist sentiment prevailing around the world. And that I think is where Australia has a story, often going against the grain and ensuring that we’re opening up our opportunities where others might be seeking to close them off.
But there is more to do. As I said, an uncertain global economic outlook means Australia’s economic fortunes will depend even more on the quality of our economic management. We will continue to be an ambitious, pro-growth government, supporting individuals, families and businesses looking to get ahead and prosper. We’re all for that. We don’t think you have to pull some people down to raise other people up. That’s not our view. We believe a stronger economy can raise everybody up and I think that’s one of the key differences between our Government and the Labor Party and what they’re offering for the next election.
We will stay the course with policies that achieve this and we will ensure that those policies, our plan for a stronger economy, is in place. Strong budgets so Governments live within their means. Lower taxes, open trade, backing small businesses, promoting cooperative workplaces based on the rule of law, sensible climate policy alongside reliable, affordable energy supply. Investing in infrastructure, investing in the skills that are necessary, backing all of our industries to be world-class – not just the shiny, bright new ones – they’re fantastic, love them, they’re great, love them, fantastic, Blockchain, high tech, all of them are doing so well – but so is resources, so is agriculture, so is forestry and the jobs that they produce all around the country. It’s an incredibly important part of our economic future.
What we also won’t do is we won’t tax this economy beyond what it can bare. I put in place as Treasurer a tax cap – 23.9 per cent of the economy. This is important. That says that we believe if you go above that, you hold you economy back. It’s a sheet anchor. It holds every Australian back. I urge you to look for a number when the budget comes out and when the Labor Party puts their figures forward. What will be in the share of taxes of the economy under Labor? I can tell you what is was for the last election – it was 25.7 per cent. That meant around $50 billion a year in more tax on the Australian economy – every year, another $50 billion. And whether you’re paying that tax or not, you’re paying because of the impact it has on slowing the economy, the impact it has on slowing wage growth in a country. They have a plan to put $200 billion of extra taxes on Australians and I really don’t think they understand the impact of that on the economy. All the individual measures. It doesn’t understand the power and virtue of aspiration in our society. For our hardest aspiration is some other country, not Australia. That’s what Labor’s Deputy Leader has said as much – that’s what Tanya Plibersek has said.
Labor under Bill Shorten sneers at those who want to get ahead and only promises them a higher tax burden. If you work additional overtime to get ahead, Mr Shorten wants more from you, he wants higher taxes from you. If you buy an investment property to secure your family’s economic future, which so many small and family business owners do, which so many people who live in regional parts of the country do – you know there’s more people who negatively gear investments and have investment properties in the electorate of Capricornia based on Rockhampton than there is in my own electorate of Cook in Sydney’s Sutherland Shire and St George. More people in Rockhampton than in Cronulla. Labor doesn’t get that. They don’t understand the aspiration that would lead someone to make that decision and that sacrifice to invest in their future.
If you buy some shares for your retirement, again, Mr Shorten will have his hand in your pocket through higher capital gains taxes. If you try to build a nest egg to pass on to your kids, again, he’ll have his hand in your pocket. Mr Shorten even wants to ensure that our legislated tax cuts - $144 billion worth over the life of our tax plan will be cut in half. Stripped away. He will reverse the tax cuts that we have legislated from last year’s budget – reverse stages two and three of that plan that will stop over $70 billion worth of tax cuts. Australians being able to keep their own money.
There are many other things that I could tell you about, but I know Phil Coorey’s interested in asking me a few questions. But let me finish on two points. I’ve already made the point about trade and the fact that the Labor Party is baulking again on this Indonesian Trade Agreement I think tells you that when it comes to the economy, their instincts just aren’t there. It’s why the China Free Trade Agreement was never completed under the Labor Party. They never took it forward. They were never able to break through. It’s why we are able to make progress on all of those agreements including the Indonesian one today, there’s a simple reason for that. They’re not in control. They will answer to their masters in the union at the end of the day. That’s why we are looking at an economy under Labor which will see [inaudible] run their businesses, through to moving back to industry-wide bargaining which takes us back to the dark ages of workplace relations in this country.
As I move around the country and I walk in and out of small and family businesses and I ask myself why are they doing so well? It’s because they have such a wonderful relationship between their staff and the managers and owners. There’s a commonality of purpose that exists in these organisations. They’re all working to the same end. I don’t want to set Australians against each other. I don’t want to set workers against bosses. I don’t want to set one group of Australians who have had success in life against those who are aspiring to success in life. I don’t want to set enterprise in this country against anything. What I want to do is ensure that the economy, the economy that Australians live in, that they depend on, that their family’s services will rely on, whether it’s Medicare or hospitals or schools, I want to ensure, and will ensure, that it is the strongest it can possibly be in the circumstances that we are faced with.
So, it will be the most important election in decades. It certainly will. And there is a big choice to make and it’ll impact the next 10 years of your life. Whether you’re a business, whether you’re raising a family, whether you’re in retirement or entering into retirement, whether you’re a young person coming out of university, I was one of those who entered the economy under Labor in the 1990s that went into recession. I am one of those who does know what it’s like to live in an economy that is in recession and I did so as a young person coming out of university and others of my generation who knew what that was like. Why parents struggled with interest rates that today’s generation can only imagine. We can’t go back to that. We must go forward and we have the plan to take Australia there.
Thank you very much.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you very much for that very kind introduction. I want to come back to Josh in a sec, but first let me begin by also acknowledging our traditional owners the Boon Wurrung and Woiwurrung peoples of the Kulin Nation here in Melbourne. Can I also particularly acknowledge the servicemen and women who are here with us today and any veterans today. I simply say to you, thank you for your service. There are few things that I have greater pride in than saying to an ex serviceman or woman or veteran around the country, to simply offer them appreciation for their services wherever they happen to be and I know those in this room certainly share that view, as many do and I’d say all Australians do around the country. Can I start particularly by welcoming Michael McCormack the Deputy Prime Minister here today.
[Applause]
Is there anyone who knew better than Sir Robert Menzies the importance of a Coalition partnership to deliver good government to Australia? No one knew that better than Sir Robert Menzies and in fact when he went to Albury and to other places when he would speak, he’d say that was the key to good government in Australia and the partnership that we have with our colleagues in what was then the Country Party, today is the National Party. And can I tell you, the relationship I enjoy with Michael is a strong one, but importantly it’s one based on our shared values and our shared passion for our country and our absolute commitment to ensure that Bill Shorten never sets foot in the Prime Minister’s shoes in this country.
In the same way that Ming and Black Jack worked so well together over all of those years, I can tell you that ScoMo and Big Mac over here –
[Laughter]
We’re doing exactly the same thing today. It’s a strong bond and it’s a partnership that is important for our nation and for the things that we hold dear as Liberals. To Josh, yes, you will get to deliver that surplus Josh and you deserve to, the way you’ve applied yourself as Treasurer, the way you’ve gone about the task. I know what that task involves and I know that you’ll deliver in just under a month’s time, what will be the first time this country has seen a surplus Budget in a decade and more.
To all my other colleagues who are here, there are too many&nbsp;to mention so I won’t do that today. But I do want to acknowledge all the tremendous work that you are doing as we prepare for what will be the battle of battles, that is the next election. It will be just that, it will be just that. I know it, I’ve known it from the day I stepped into this job just over six months ago. I knew what was riding on it, I know what is at stake and I never take on a task that I don’t believe I can accomplish. I’ve had experience in politics where there have been people telling me that; “This can’t be achieved and that can’t be achieved.” I go quietly about the business and on the other side, I remind them of what they’ve said before.
To Ron Wilson and Members of the Sir Robert Menzies Lecture Trust thank you very much for what is a very humbling invitation to come and to join you all here today as Prime Minister, to deliver what is an important address in the history of our movement and in the life of our movement. Feel free to book me in for next year so I can match John’s two in a row.
[Applause]
I’m sorry John can’t be here because I suppose between Josh and I we bring together the finest of the Menzies and Howard traditions as a partnership as we look to our heroes in the Party. It’s great to have Menzies family members represented here today and one of the finest and loveliest moments I’ve had as a Prime Minister is one day when I was with my daughter Abbey at the Federal Secretariat in Canberra, Heather was there and they got to meet each other. They told wonderful stories to each other about her time when she was the Prime Minister’s daughter the first time around, because they were about the same age at that time. They talked about the room they stayed in and things like that, it was a beautiful moment for a father and daughters bring tremendous joy to fathers. My daughter’s name is Abigail which mean’s ‘father’s joy’ and that’s certainly the case, as is Lily.
To Gerard, thank you very much for hosting us here at EY today. You’re a great partner in these events and we thank you for it. To Nick Cater of course and the Menzies Research Centre, I congratulate you on your announcement today about the establishment of the Robert Menzies Institute located at Melbourne University. That’s a tremendous step forward and well done. So thank you again for the invitation to give this lecture during what is the 75th anniversary of the founding of the Liberal Party and the 70th Anniversary of Sir Robert Menzies’ historic win in 1949. I intend to repeat that in the true Liberal tradition.
In the history of nations there are always giants. They are the handful of men and women who through their courage, their perseverance, their intellect, passion and will, they change the course of their nation. In the life of Australia, Sir Robert Gordon Menzies certainly fits that bill. He is one of our greatest, if not our greatest giant when it comes to the history of modern Australia.
For those interested in records; thirty years on the front bench. Almost twenty five years as a party leader. Eighteen and a half years as Prime Minister of Australia. These are records that will never be broken.
But for others and I suspect all of us here, myself included, the significance of Sir Robert is not the records he broke – because that’s not what it was about, I believe for him – it’s the Party he built, the movement he founded and the values he championed that we have inherited and now have the privilege to steward and I do, as the party leader today and as Prime Minister.
Menzies did not name the Party after himself, that’s for populists, that’s for those who don’t look out into the future. Instead, he reached out and built a Party based on enduring truths; the truths of liberalism and liberal democracy that outlive any one individual or the fashion of any one time, truths that unite a rich breadth of thought across our community. He understood, as Margaret Thatcher said in her Menzies Lecture almost forty years ago that; “Pragmatism is not enough”. Unlike Labor, we are not the party of shallow deals, transacted by vested interests to favour some, in order to punish others. That’s not how we roll, that’s not what we are about. Our Party is based on the individual beliefs that guide the decisions that we make in our own lives, that we make in our own families and our communities. Our values and our beliefs come from the ground up, they are proven in our own individual experience, they’re not appropriated from above. They come from in here and then they come together with others.
Our foundation is the personal responsibility and unique worth of the individual, drawing meaning, purpose and strength for life, for our families and for our participation in the community.
Our families and the homes we live in are the scaffolding of our character and the values that will sustain our lives. It’s why Menzies spoke of; “Homes material, homes human and homes spiritual”.
From this sure foundation, comes civic mindedness, mutual respect, personal responsibility and a people that understand that the most satisfying thing is to contribute in life, rather than take.
As my parents taught me, they said; “Scott, life is not about what you accumulate, it’s about what you contribute.”
This is the wonderful, civilising tension that Sir Robert understood - that people need incentive, reward and opportunity to carve out their own path. But equally, that nations are not just the sum of individual efforts, they are also the result of the ties that collect us all up together. It is these ties that responsible political parties always seek to strengthen.
It’s why, Liberal and National Coalition Governments govern - in the words of John Howard - not for some of us, but for all of us. Our nation is named after that very pact, known as the ‘common wealth’ of Australia. A Commonwealth is a shared future, it’s a commitment to each other.
When individuals grow and prosper, we all benefit.
When one excels, we all cheer, because it lifts all of us.
We know that effort, work, drive, enthusiasm and risk-taking is the foundation for all human progress and when individuals face lifes’ trials, we support each other. Because lending a hand is the foundation of what it means to be genuinely human.
We understand that a strong economy is the foundation by which we can provide Australians with the essential services they rely on and they need. That the prosperity we are creating lifts all and we keep faith with each other and with future generations by focusing on this.
Under our Government, over 1.2 million new jobs have been created in the last five and a half years. These demonstrate the values that Sir Robert gifted to us. The women’s workforce participation rate is at an all time high. Women are in 712,500 jobs that they weren’t in when we came to Government, that’s how many jobs for women have been created under our Government.&nbsp;That’s over 55 per cent of all the jobs created under the term of our Government.
Participation by Australians over the age of 65 is also at a record high. Australians are living longer and healthier and this is also a positive sign reflecting a better view of ageing in our workplaces. As we remember Menzies today, it’s worth recalling that when he retired at 71, he handed the reins to a man he called “young Harold” who was 57. Seeing more older workers remain in the workforce, because they choose to, is a trend that will continue. As well, young people - a lot younger than “young Harold” and me - are benefiting absolutely from this jobs growth.&nbsp;Nothing brings me greater joy, previously as a Treasurer and now as Prime Minister, than seeing a young person get a job, because it transforms a life and indeed can transform a generation.
Last financial year, young people aged 15 to 24 filled more than 100,000 jobs in this country, which is the strongest level of youth jobs growth in Australia’s economic history. Of all the things our Government has achieved, I can’t nominate one of greater importance than that.
Because we have the right settings on taxes, trade, skills, small business and infrastructure, we can confidently set a target based on our track record of performance, of delivering 1.25 million new jobs over the next five years, by sticking to the economic plan that has delivered so handsomely for Australia over the last five and a half years.
“The strivers, the planners and the ambitious ones”; this is what Menzies described when he referred to the mums and dads, the small business people and workers that our country relies on. That’s why we are against Labor’s taxes – higher taxes on your electricity, taxes on your property, taxes on your retirement and more taxes on your income. Because it’s an attack on the true strength of Australia; ordinary Australians having a go, who should be able to keep more of what they earn.
A fair go for those who have a go, I’ve described it as. We do understand these “strivers, planners and ambitious ones,” as Sir Robert described them, that they are standing beside millions of small businesses that are propelling Australia forward and providing these jobs and they’ll continue to under the policies of our Government. But it’s at great risk under the polices of the alternative in Labor.
We are a great nation of entrepreneurs and may it always be. Under this Government, 230,000 additional small businesses have been created. In coming years, our country’s 3.3 million small and medium businesses, employing around seven million people – that’s more than half the workforce in Australia - will benefit from tax cuts that we’ve introduced and have brought forward recently by five years.
Tens of thousands of Australian businesses export overseas and they are being strengthened by export agreements with countries such as China, Japan, Korea and the 10 other nations of the Trans Pacific Partnership. As of last week, you can add Indonesia to that, with an export agreement signed by the Minsters for Trade both in Australia and Indonesia just last week. A deal that Labor are threatening even as we speak, on their hit list for their abuse of power should they ever be elected to government.&nbsp;Under this Government, the coverage of our trade agreements has increased from 26 per cent of our two-way trade, to nearly 70 per cent. That is transformational. That has taken place in only five and a half years.
With more jobs, more businesses and more trade, we are bringing the Budget back into balance. We have maintained our AAA credit rating under extreme international pressure and we are providing much needed tax relief to Australian households - legislated - and Australian small businesses. In addition to tax cuts for Australia’s small businesses, our Personal Tax Plan will see 94 per cent of taxpayers pay no more tax than 32.5 cents in the dollar, by 2024/25. We are abolishing an entire schedule in the tax system. There are Australians who will enter a decade under this plan, who will never face bracket creep throughout their entire working life, because of our reform to the tax system.
Now, this is not a goal that Labor shares. They have actually rejected it. They have taken a $144 billion plan and they say they will reverse, that they will abolish, they will rescind this plan if they are elected to Government. They’ll strip out $70 billion in tax relief to hard-working Australians. They don’t share our views and that’s what they will do.&nbsp;
Unlike the false promises of higher taxes, the prosperity of a stronger economy is what guarantees the essential services that Australians rely on. That’s what enabling us to keep our Commonwealth compact to look after each other. Labor thinks higher taxes deliver hospitals. No, it just slows your economy down so you can’t afford hospitals. Under our plan for a stronger economy, we have the highest level of hospital funding in Australia’s history.
Under our Government, our pharmaceutical benefits scheme has listed 2,000 new life-changing medicines worth over $10 billion, helping countless Australians who are facing illnesses and sicknesses of almost every kind. And it was under Labor that they didn’t list medicines, because their Budget couldn’t support it. That is the cost of the alternative set of values which drives our opponents.
Bulk billing rates are at record levels and we’ve committed to a new hospitals agreement, providing around $30 billion in additional funding over five years. Medicare has never been stronger than under this Government, quite contrary to the lies Labor told at the last election.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
We’ve fully funded the National Disability Insurance Scheme, without an increase in the Medicare levy. We’ve backed in the system because we know the NDIS is all about enabling people living with disabilities, for them to realise their potential.
We are keeping our compact with future generations of Australians with $37.6 billion in additional funding for schools.
And we are supporting Australians suffering from drought and flood all around the country - I’ve met with them, I’ve walked with them and I’ve held them - with record funding and urgent action, most recently up in far north Queensland where the livestock industry has been almost literally washed away.
We are providing over $5.7 billion – and I acknowledge Michael McCormack – from day 1, as a team, $5.7 billion to help combat the unrelenting pressures of drought. That includes the $5 billion drought future fund, which we passed through the House of Representatives - and the Labor Party, amazingly, voted against - for the formation of a future drought fund.
We have kept faith with what it means to be a Commonwealth, by reforming the GST distribution system that was corroding our federation, to ensure a fair go for all States and Territories. We did what other governments hadn’t dared to do. We got in there and we fixed it.
I have said many times in recent months that this Government will keep our economy strong, keep Australians safe and keep Australians together.
The strength of Australia is in our economy, it’s in our security and it’s in our cohesion as a society well. Sir Robert understood this; the social fabric of a country matters. It’s a foundation as much as our economy and our security. It is real and we understand the role that schools, sporting clubs, environmental groups, service clubs and suburban churches play in strengthening the bonds between us all. Keeping Australians together is about the values and beliefs we hold, together as a community.
Ensuring older Australians are treated with dignity and respect and can maintain their independence and choices in retirement, including accessing the care they need – which is why I initiated the Royal Commission into Aged Care soon after becoming Prime Minister.
Raiding their savings, the savings of retirees and pensioners, through Labor’s retirees tax, defiles these principles.
Keeping Australians together is also about listening to and encouraging young Australians. Now, having a Budget under control and that won’t rack up debt in into the future, that means future generations are not saddled with maintaining our way of life, maintaining our services and dealing with our cost of living. Keeping our intergenerational compact with a cleaner environment, meeting our responsible commitments – not the reckless targets of others - but the responsible commitments to reduce our carbon emissions by 2030, without denying future generations the economic opportunities we have enjoyed. That’s really what Labor’s 45 per cent emissions target does; it steals the opportunities of future generations that we ourselves have enjoyed. How is that fair? That we have been able to enjoy our prosperity and opportunity in life, but they want to deny to future generations? This is why we have responsible targets and we’re not drawn to extremes.
Our liberalism is about strengthening the bonds between all of us and in lifting all Australians, no matter their age, their gender, their religion, class or sexuality. Our approach is not to pitch one Australian against another, to punish one in order to reward another. We do not believe one Australian has to fail for another Australian to succeed.
This is a fundamental difference between the movement that Sir Robert Menzies started in the Liberal Party and our opponents in the Labor Party - that is the politics of envy, to see one Australian fail, so another can succeed.
Our Party, the Party that Sir Robert started, is the Party of aspiration, not the Party of envy.
Our Party understands that mums and dads who are investing in property are not rorting the system, but providing for their future out of their own hard work and effort.
Labor will deny them this opportunity at the next election if given the chance. It’s another one of their envy taxes. They aren’t wealthy these Australians who are doing this, they’ve paid their own way and their investments support the supply of much-needed rental accommodation without which rents – as the Treasurer, as Josh will tell you – will only rise.
As Liberals we see a champion in every Australian, regardless of their abilities and regardless of their life’s circumstances.
By contrast, Labor sees only victims and oppressors, ensnaring Australians in a prison of want and envy, unable to see their true potential and worth.
That’s why I say under our movement, which I know is shared in the National Party, we see a champion in very single Australian regardless of what age they are, whatever level of ability they are, whatever challenges they face. There is a champion in every single Australian and it’s our job as custodians of the movement which Sir Robert started, to ensure those champions are realised.
Labor thrives on conflict, with policies designed to turn Australian against Australian. Menzies called this the class war, a false war. It’s why he warned us against those who focus on sectional interests, rather than national interests. So we aren’t about turning retirees against pensioners; or setting parents of students at state schools against those at independent schools; or Catholic schools against other schools; or small businesses against large businesses, or people from one suburb against someone from another. Unless it’s about AFL, same as the NRL I assume.
[Laughter]
Or the city against the bush, which our great partnership with the Nationals demonstrates, that this is a common project.
The class war has no place in Australia Bill Shorten, no place whatsoever and we stand here to defy that thinking, as Menzies did. It was not right in Menzies time and it is not right today. To extend, as Labor seek to do – Margaret Thatcher had that great saying about socialists; eventually, their problem is they run out of other people’s money. I’ll extend that; under this politics of envy, you run out of other people to blame. That’s&nbsp; what it means; Labor will run down this hole, they’ll want to blame anyone for people’s life circumstances. Our tradition is different. Our tradition begins with the personal responsibility of every single Australian. That’s where you start and when you set Australian against Australian, as Labor propose, all you do is make our country weaker.
I’d like to finish today and I appreciate your patience, by sharing my experience during my most recent annual summer break which is a wonderful time I get to spend with Jenny and the girls. We’ve been going down the south coast of New South Wales for many, many years to different places. There we were, locals, holiday-makers staying at local caravan parks, small business people from western Sydney – we were staying at a house just outside of town - members of the local surf and fishing clubs were there, as well as the rural fire service. There were professionals, kids, mums, retirees, pensioners. You find yourself at these little village communities on the coast of New South Wales, as I know you do across Victoria. There we all were, enjoying the flathead and chips at the Heads Hotel overlooking the wonderful Shoalhaven River, raising money for a whole bunch of charities and organisations. All of those people, Sir Robert called the forgotten people, I call them quiet Australians.
You won’t find them among the angry, shouty voices on the fringes, pretending to speak for all Australians. You won’t find them there, those shouty voices telling us all what we’re supposed to be angry and outraged about every single day. They haven’t got time for that. They’re too busy paying taxes, raising kids, helping with homework, running their businesses, going to work, paying power bills, caring for their parents, looking after their grandkids, putting out the soccer nets on a Saturday morning, doing their patrols for the local surf club or working at the roster at the RSF, or working at the school canteen, the list goes on. That’s what they’re busy doing. They haven’t got time for armbands and all the rest of it, trolling people on Twitter and all of that nonsense. They’re too busy creating a very strong Australia.
And you know, while confronting their own challenges in life, those I met, that wonderful group of people, they all had their challenges, but they maintain a refreshing and positive outlook on life, thankful that whatever they’re facing, they know they are ahead because they’re facing it as an Australian in Australia, which is what gives them the advantage. As I have travelled this country, not just in my role as Prime Minister but as I have in other roles, I have listened to and I’ve heard the stories of quiet Australians all around this country.&nbsp;
Here’s what they’ve been telling me.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
They say; “We want secure jobs and to be treated fairly and with respect at work.
We want our economy to be strong.
We want our incomes to keep up with the cost of living and even better, allow us to get ahead. But we know that money doesn’t just fall from the sky and governments can’t just produce money from nowhere for people’s wages.”
They understand that the company they work for has to actually do well in order for them to do well. That’s why they work so hard, they know someone has to pay for it.”
“We get,” they say to me, “that we have to pay taxes, but you know, politicians should be keeping their spending under control and not waste money, so those taxes can be as low as possible.”
They say; “We want the services we rely on like Medicare and affordable medicines through the PBS taken care of, no excuses, full stop. That’s your job.”&nbsp;
They’re more than happy to pay for a welfare system. Australians are generous, but they’re not mugs. They know they need a system that looks after those who are less fortunate and they’re always quick to recognise those who are doing it tough. But welfare should never be a free ride, there’s a mutual obligation. There should rules and obligations at the end of the day, because they know the best form of welfare is a job.
They say; “We reckon small and family businesses and farmers deserve a fair go,” because they know how hard they work, the risk they take and the sacrifices they make.
“We want to take care of our environment” they say, “especially locally.” That’s where they play and live with their families. “So we’re sympathetic to the big global environmental challenges, because we owe that to our kids. But we also know the need to get the balance right.” So let’s just have a sensible plan and get on with it. “But please, can we do it without being asked to pay higher and higher and higher taxes, or shell out unaffordable taxpayer funded subsidies for the privilege?”
“Of course we want our schools and hospitals to be well-funded. That’s what the Government is supposed to do”, they say, and fair enough. But they also say; “Surely we can do this without having to raise taxes all the time to do it, that just makes it harder on all of us. Get the spending under control and make sure the economy is running well and we can have the schools we need.”
“And we’ve been around long enough,” they say, “to know that it’s not only about the money in education. Give me a good teacher for my kids over a new school hall any day of the week. We want our kids to be safe and not get bullied at school and to spend time with them as a family as often as possible. We just want to see a smile on their face.” Gold.
That said, I’m a parent, Josh is a parent, we talk about this a fair bit – we really worry about the world our kids are going to live in. It’s all much more complicated now. Of course we worry about their education, the skills they need and jobs that will be there for them, but we have all know kids and families who haven’t been able to cope - eating disorders, depression and the tragic and devastating impact this has on families - it scares the hell out of us.
“And we have nothing at all,” they say, “against migrants. We understand that migrants helped build this country. Seriously, just because we are frustrated with traffic jams or crowded trains, does not mean we want to shut the place down or insult our neighbours. Just get the migration settings right,” they say, “make sure we build the houses and roads we need and get migrants into jobs and not onto welfare.”
Sounds like a plan. That done, how good is it in Australia, that we all get along as well as we do? With so many people from so many different backgrounds, starting with our Indigenous Australians who were here first and we deeply respect.
“And we want to be kept safe. Whether it’s our kids at school or predators online, women and older Australians from the cowards who abuse them, or when we’re out and about at the beach, the local park or mall with our families, to be kept safe from terrorists.”
This is the Government’s most important job.
“We expect all those we ask to do the job of protecting us, our police and our defence forces, to get the resources they need and the respect they deserve.” That includes our veterans. Thank you for your service.
“We know,” they say, “that Australia is not perfect. But we’d rather be here than anywhere else in&nbsp; the world. Sure, there are things we could have done better,” we are an honest people, “but we’d rather be here than anywhere else in the world. There are things we must do better in the future, but there is no place like Australia and we want to keep it that way.”
That’s what they’ve told me. That’s what I believe, that’s what my team believes. I said it in my maiden speech to Parliament eleven years ago:
“My vision for Australia is for a nation that is strong, prosperous and generous. Strong in our values and our freedoms, strong in our family and community life, strong in our sense of nationhood and in the institutions that protect and preserve our democracy. Prosperous in our enterprise and the careful stewardship of our opportunities, our natural environment and our resources. And above all, generous in spirit, to share our good fortune with others, both at home and overseas, out of a compassionate heart and a desire for justice.” I think Sir Robert would have approved of those words.
There will be a clear choice at this election, between aspiration and envy.
Between a stronger economy with lower taxes under our Government, or a weaker one with higher taxes under Bill Shorten and Labor.
A safer Australia under the Coalition, or a nation with weak borders under Bill Shorten and Labor.
A Party that understands that the strength of our country is best found in a united people, or a Labor Party under Bill Shorten that thrives on conflict and division, setting Australians against each other.
It’s a choice between a stronger Australia and a weaker Australia.
Our Government has the record and the plans to keep our economy growing, to keep Australians secure, to keep Australians together.
To keep Australia strong, staying true to our Menzian tradition.
Thank you so much.
[Applause]


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Wurundjeri Peoples of the Kulin Nation.
It’s an honour to be here again at the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce.
Last August as Treasurer I spoke about our ‘fair go economy’. I had planned to build on that theme today.
But the acts of terrorism last Friday have caused me to pause, to reflect, and to take the opportunity today to have a different conversation.
The Jewish people know what it’s like to be the victim of hate-speech, to be politically objectified.
They know the evil of race based ideology – the banality of terrorism and that the real enemy is always hatred and intolerance.
It is every citizens responsibility to break cycles of hate whenever and wherever we may see them.
I know the people in this room, and across Australia, have been horrified, devastated and ashamed about what happened in Christchurch, the attack on innocence in a place of worship - a terrorist atrocity committed by an Australian.
New Zealand is family, or whanau as Maori say.
Like family, we occasionally squabble, often tease, but always when threatened or attacked, we’ve got each other’s back.
And like family, the Kiwis are the people most like us in the world.
Even our flags speak of two nations similar but different, with intertwined histories, and futures that will always be shared.
We don’t say it enough: We are proud of our New Zealand cousins. We love them.
Many years ago, our Queen, Her Majesty, said this about the Kiwi character.
New Zealand is characterised by “a sense of fairness and justice; a willingness to be outward-looking; and a natural compassion for others”.
So true.
A country of good people with a good heart.
Here, at home, we express our solidarity.
The Silver Fern shone on our Opera House.
The New Zealand flag flew above our Government House.
Across our country, our own Southern Cross dipped in respect, above our Parliament, atop our harbour bridge.
The Australian Muslim community has offered counsellors and is providing support to the New Zealand Muslim community – along with, I’m sure support from Muslims from countries around the world.
In Christian churches and Jewish synagogues there have been prayers for our Muslim brothers and sisters, bound by our Abrahamic faiths.
And thousands of Australians, of other faiths or no faith have reached across ‘the ditch’ with love, support and prayers.
Naturally, at a government level we are providing New Zealand with every assistance they require and standing up every necessary capability here in Australia to keep our own people safe.
New Zealand has world class police, medical and forensic staff and any assistance we are providing reflects simply the scale of these atrocities.
Rightly, this is a time for grief and it is a time for reflection.
In time, we will have a better idea of how this all happened.
How did this terrorist stay in the shadows, hiding among us in plain sight?
Where and how did his vile radicalisation take place? During the last three years the terrorist spent just 45 days in Australia, travelling extensively overseas.
What laws need to change, what additional actions and precautions need to be taken?
Answers to those questions will come with time, and must.
Such questions are practical and necessary and can be posed and considered without the need for defensiveness or blame.
About a month ago, I spoke at the National Press Club about keeping Australians safe. I spoke about what we are doing in terms of keeping Australians secure: more resources for police and intelligence services; more powers; the 12 tranches of anti-terrorism legislation; our strong border protection policies and our efforts tackling illegal narcotics like ICE; and funding extensive anti-domestic violence programs.
As part of our efforts keeping Australian safe, we have &nbsp;a Safer Communities fund that has provided since 2016 $70 million in local community safety grants for schools, pre-schools, community organisations and local councils.
For some months now we have been working to expand this programme.
Today, I am announcing an acceleration and extension of that program, to provide $55 million in community safety grants - and for priority to be given to religious schools, places of religious worship and religious assembly.
The grants from $50,000 to $1.5 million will provide for safety enhancements such as CCTV cameras, lighting, fencing, bollards, alarms, security systems and public address systems.
When I say I believe in religious freedom - and I am one of its staunchest defenders in Parliament - I know it starts with the right to worship and meet safely without fear. This must be the first freedom we secure, to practice their faith in safety, others should follow.
Religious freedom is not just an inalienable right as free citizens. It is important to the very cohesion of our society. It is for many Australians impossible to separate their faith from their culture.
Now this announcement, along with everything else we have announced over recent years is ‘the how’ of keeping people safe – and we’ll keep investing and working on ‘the how’, because the greatest responsibility of any government is to keep Australians safe.
But today, I want to engage in a broader reflection – about how we see difference in our world, and how we manage it.
I said here in Melbourne last Tuesday, you can’t have a strong economy unless you are secure – and you can’t be truly secure if your social fabric is not strong.
The bonds between us all matter.
The rainforests in North Queensland are older than the Amazon.
Every part of this ecosystem reinforces itself.
It doesn’t grow apart, it grows together.
And so it is with countries and their peoples.
But these ties that bind us are under new pressures and are at risk of breaking.
This is not just happening in Australia – it’s happening in many countries around the world.
If we allow a culture of ‘us and them’, of tribalism, to take hold; if we surrender an individual to be defined not by their own unique worth and contribution but by the tribe they are assigned to, if we yield to the compulsion to pick sides rather than happy coexistence, we will lose what makes diversity work in Australia.
As debate becomes more fierce, the retreat to tribalism is increasingly taking over, and for some, extremism takes hold.
Reading only news that we agree with, interacting with people only we agree with, and having less understanding and grace towards others that we do not even know, making the worst possible assumptions about them and their motives, simply because we disagree with them.
This is true of the left and the right. And even more so from those shouting from the fringes to a mainstream of quiet Australians that just want to get on with their lives.
Hate, blame and contempt are the staples of tribalism, it is consuming modern debate, egged on by an appetite for conflict as entertainment, not so different from the primitive appetites of the colosseum days, with a similar corrosive impact on the fabric of our society.
Contempt, is defined by the philosophers as “the unsullied conviction of the worthlessness of another”.
The worthlessness of another!
That is where mindless tribalism takes us.
It ends in the worst of places. Last week it ended the lives of 50 fellow human beings, including children praying in Christchurch.
I agree with the American author, Arthur Brooks who has recently said, “What we need is not to disagree less, but to disagree better.”
Not disagreeing less, but disagreeing better.
When we disagree better: we engage with respect, rather than questioning each other’s integrity and morality.
Tribalists constantly seek to appropriate legitimate policy issues and public concerns as a tool to promote their separatist and exclusive agendas. To contort and misrepresent disagreement in the worst possible terms.
Immigration is a classic example.
A discussion about the level of annual migrant intake is not a debate about the value or otherwise of multiculturalism or the economic contribution of migration. It must not be appropriated as a proxy debate for racial, religious or ethnic sectarianism.
Just because Australians are frustrated about traffic jams and population pressures encroaching on their quality of life, especially in this city, does not mean they are anti-migrant or racist. To the contrary. Australians respect the positive contribution that migration has made to our country.
For the overwhelming majority of Australians concerned about this issue, this is not and never would be their &nbsp;motivation.
But that is how the tribalists seek to confect it, from both sides.
The worst example being the despicable appropriation of concerns about immigration as a justification for a terrorist atrocity. Such views have rightly been denounced. But equally, so to must the imputation that the motivation for supporting moderated immigration levels is racial hatred.
We cannot allow such legitimate policy debates to be hijacked like this.
Managing our population growth is a practical policy challenge that needs answers. Answers I will continue to &nbsp;outline as we approach the next election, from our congestion busting road and rail investments to ensuring we frame our migration programme to meet the needs of our economy, the capacity of our cities and the opportunities and needs in our regions.
We see a similar trend in relation to the debate on border protection policies.
For me this has always been about ensuring the integrity of our borders because I believe this is essential to a successful immigration programme, a view shared by many migrant communities in Australia, and preventing the horrific impact of the people smugglers trade.
I have never sought to question the compassionate motives of those who hold different views about the best way to manage Australia’s borders. I have rarely had this courtesy extended by those who who hold contrary views to my own.
As Australians we need to stand against the militant and lazy group think that distorts our public debate, stand up for our individualism and seek to think better of each other.
Part of disagreeing better, is to appreciate our differences - or to understand, in the words of Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, “the dignity of difference”.
Extremism, or in a different form fundamentalism, is simply an inability to tolerate difference.
It is to feel threatened by others who do not conform to your world view.
And it takes many forms: religious extremism, secular extremism, and political extremism.
Every terrorist attack has at its core a hatred of difference and a hatred about the choices and lives of others.
Prime Minister Ardern grasped the essence of this on Friday – when she said of the New Zealand Muslim community, “they are us”.
This was reflected in my own remarks, an attack one faith is an attack on all. &nbsp;An attack on innocence and peace is an attack on us all who love peace and innocence.
This is a powerful idea. No them but us.
Tribalists always want to separate us, divide us, set one Australian against another.
As Prime Minister I want to continue to bring Australians together, not set them against one another.
I want us to reject the thinking that one person’s gain is another’s loss. This is a doctrine of scarcity that betrays our social and economic prosperity and creates an environment for conflict and division.
I want to remove the demarcation lines between Australians.
I see every Australian as an individual, not part of some tribal group to be traded off against another.
And I believe, not in a tribalism that divides, but in an us that unites.
So let me affirm today what us means:
Indigenous Australians are us.
Immigrant Australians from all nationalities and backgrounds, including Chinese, Lebanese, Greek, Indian, Turkish, Vietnamese, just to name a few, &nbsp;are us.
Muslim Australians are us.
Christian&nbsp;Australians are us.
Jewish Australians are us.
Hindu Australians are us.
Atheist Australians are us.
LGBTIQ Australians are us.
Whoever you vote for - us.
Older Australians are us.
Young Australians are us.
Female Australians are us.
Male Australians are us.
Regional Australians are us.
From the bottom of Tasmania to the tip of Cape York, from Byron to Broome, all 25 million Australians are us.
We belong to each other. We stand with each other. We must love and respect each other more. That’s what we must affirm today to fight the forces that will otherwise weaken our nation.
My friends, in a few weeks time, I will visit the Governor-General and ask for an election to be held.
That election will be hard fought.
In this election I see my challenge as not to convince anyone Australian to join my side, but to convince them that as a result of what we are putting forward, we are on theirs, as individuals, whoever they may be and whatever life’s circumstances they may face.
My case is for an even stronger Australia - prosperous, safe and united.
A strong economy that can deliver the guaranteed funding for the services that Australians rely on, without increasing taxes, that would harm our economy.
We face increased uncertainty in the global economy in the year ahead. This has been true for many years now, and our Government has continued to protect and steward our economy, with records jobs growth, lower taxes, support for small and family businesses, building the infrastructure Australia needs to bust congestion and manage population growth, returning the budget to surplus and maintaining our AAA credit rating.
This strong economic management has enabled us to make more than 2000 life changing medicines affordable by listing on the PBS, deliver record levels of hospitals and schools funding and to achieve the highest level of bulk billing for Medicare in Australia’s history.
Now is not the time for economic experiments, or handing the economic wheel over to those who have been unable to demonstrate an ability to drive. &nbsp;This will make Australia weaker in the decade ahead, and all Australians will pay for it.
As we saw following John Howard, vote Labor once and you pay for it for a decade.
Continued responsible management of our economy will enable us to continue on with our plans to keep Australians safe, with record investments to combat domestic violence, counter terrorism in all its forms, rebuild our defence forces and respond speedily to the natural disasters of flood, drought and fire.
And our fundamental belief that one Australian does not have to fail for another to succeed, of rejecting the politics of conflict and division, we can best continue to bring Australians together, to reinforce the social fabric so important to our economic success and security as a nation.
We will continue to engage in strengthening this social fabric – in finding a bigger place for ‘us’ and a smaller place for the idea of ‘them’.
I will finish with a Maori exhortation to us all in this difficult time, Kia Kaha - stay strong. That is my plan for Australia.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:35): Mr Speaker, I rise on indulgence—indeed, in response to your own suggestion—to acknowledge the passing of&nbsp;Les Carlyon. Les Carlyon was a master of words. He helped Australians understand ourselves and our national story. On Gallipoli, the Great War, on the track and on the events of the day, he knew what to say. There seemed to be nothing—no person, no street scene, no world event, no horror, no&nbsp;joy—that he couldn't capture. Of the great horse trainer Bart Cummings, Les wrote that his eyebrows 'were&nbsp;a creeper in search of a trellis'. Perhaps he could have said that about one other holder of the office I now hold—and I am sure he wouldn't mind the reference! On political correctness, he said that it was 'to look at the world through a keyhole not a big bay window'.
He had words when words would fail most of us. This was never truer than when he turned his mind to chronicling some of the most turbulent and tragic events in Australia's history—the story of our First World War experiences at Gallipoli and on the Western Front. These were indeed epic works. Without them, today's Australians could never fully understand the horrors and lessons of the Great War and the sacrifice of 60,000 Australians made real for a whole new generation of Australians and generations to come. In those tomes, he never lost sight of the people who were at the centre of them. In&nbsp;The Great War&nbsp;he contemplated those hundreds of thousands of young men and said, 'We never really saw them.' So Les helped us to see them—and to know them as well.
Les died last month after a long illness, which apparently wasn't his preferred way to go. He used to say that he'd like to go by falling off a horse. He didn't get that wish. But he may have gotten the next best thing: he had his send-off at Flemington, a place that Les loved.
On behalf of this parliament, I offer our sympathy to Denise, Les's beloved wife as well as editor and researcher of his great works—a wonderful partnership in Australia's interest. And our sympathies go to his children, Richard, Patrick and Kate, and the wider Carlyon family. His pen may be down, his voice may now be silenced in this world, but his words will always stay with us. Australia has lost a fine son.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:01): I move:
That this House:
(1) expresses its condemnation of the terrorist attack on the Al Noor and Linwood Mosques by an Australian citizen in Christchurch on 15 March 2019 that claimed 50 innocent lives as they came to prayer, and our grief for and solidarity with the people of New Zealand who have suffered this terrible and appalling assault on the quiet peace of their nation;
(2) expresses our solidarity with the Muslim community of Christchurch, New Zealand and our own nation at this time of affliction;
(3) honours the courage and presence of first responders, and all who came to help in whatever way they could;
(4) abhors racism and religious intolerance, acknowledges and celebrates the diversity and harmony of our Australian people and our respect for people from all faiths, cultures, ethnicities and nationalities that has made Australia one of the world's most successful immigration nations and multicultural societies; and
(5) reaffirms our commitment as Australians to peace over violence, innocence over evil, understanding over extremism, liberty over fear and love over hate.

New Zealand is family and I welcome the deputy high commissioner, who is here with us today. They are 'fanau', as the Maori say. New Zealanders are more like us than anywhere else in the world. The atrocity in Christchurch was an attack on our family. Unimaginably, it was an attack undertaken by an Australian. We feel shock, we feel grief, we are stunned and shamed that he came from among us and grew up among us. He may be an Australian by birth and by law but his actions and beliefs betray all that is and forever will be Australian, and we denounce it absolutely. Our thoughts and our prayers, our love and support are only with those he attacked. Our Queen, who we share with our Kiwi cousins, once said this of New Zealanders: it is a country characterised by 'a sense of fairness and justice, a willingness to be outward looking and a natural compassion for others'—so true.
Australia has responded in kind. In recent weeks we have seen tens of thousands of acts of kindness. There have been prayers not just in mosques but in churches, synagogues and temples all around our country and in the quiet homes, I'm sure, of Australians. The silver fern shone on our opera house, expressing our solidarity across the ditch. Our flags were lowered, including above us here in this very chamber. Schoolchildren did drawings and wrote letters sharing their sadness. Our Muslim community here reached out, many travelling to New Zealand to assist their brethren and their sisters. At a government-to-government level we have provided every assistance you would expect us to and beyond.
New Zealand, of course, has first-class police, medical staff and first responders, but the scale of what they faced was unimaginable. It would have overwhelmed any city, particularly a city the size of Christchurch, in Australia. Australia has provided that support, and I want to thank all of those agencies at state and federal levels who were so quick to respond—our police, forensic specialists, victim support officers and intelligence analysts—where it was needed. Even now I understand counsellors from the New South Wales ambulance service are there to help the first responders.
Throughout all of this we have stood together. Last Friday, led by the Governor-General, the Leader of the Opposition and I attended the memorial service in Christchurch, joined by Lady Cosgrove, Chloe and Jenny. We were all touched by the service, by the people we met and their resolute determination to answer hate with love. One survivor who I met, Mr Farid Ahmed, who spoke at the service, said probably one of the most beautiful things I've ever heard someone say under such horrendous circumstances. He didn't speak of revenge, hurt or loss, even though it was his own wife who had been killed by the terrorist whilst she sought to assist him. Instead, he spoke in the great tradition of the Abrahamic faiths of forgiveness and he said he forgives—very powerful words. That's what conquers evil. That's what conquers hate. That beautiful service affirmed what we knew: that understanding will conquer division, that tolerance will always conquer fear and that love will always triumph overall. That powerful ethos reflected what I had seen in Australia when I met with Muslim leaders, including the mufti, the day after the Christchurch atrocity. Naturally there is deep and profound grief, but with grief there must also come reflection and answers. We owe that to all of those afflicted. The terrorist did live amongst us for just 45 days over the past three years. It is quite apparent that he acquired this vile radicalisation as he toured the world on a pilgrimage of hate and intolerance that met in the most tragic events for those victims.
What else must be done to keep people safe? Of course we have asked those questions and have been answering them. How do we stop social media being weaponised by terrorists? We have been responding to that question as well. We must again, as we do right now, reaffirm what we as Australians believe and the society we stand for.
This House knows, and I believe would share—I would hope—our commitment to religious freedom. It starts with the right to worship and to meet safely without fear. It means not looking over your shoulder or hiding who you are as you sit down to pray. It means to live without ridicule, to live without mocking for your beliefs and to live without violence or discrimination. Each day this House meets, it opens with a prayer. Long may that continue. Let our prayers now be for understanding, for restoration and for resolve to defy the hate and to focus on what we share, to understand, appreciate and respect the difference between us all and to perhaps agree more but to always disagree better.
At the heart of all extremism—religious, secular or political—is the inability to tolerate difference, a hatred of difference, and a hatred about the choices of others. We must strive to see the 'us' in our national life and to celebrate it, an Australian 'us' of different faiths, of different ethnicities, of different ages, genders and sexualities, an Australian 'us' that rejects the hate, the blame and contempt that grip too much of modern debate. So we pause today, and we remember and we reflect, and we resolve to renew the bonds between us. Eight centuries ago, the Muslim poet and scholar Rumi said:
We may know who we are or we may not. We may be Muslims, Jews or Christians but until our hearts become the mould for every heart we … see only our differences.

May this be a time when our hearts do mould together and where we remind ourselves of our similarities, for this is the best way we honour the 50 souls no longer with us.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister) (14:25): I move:
That the House record its deep regret at the death, on 25 February 2019, of the Honourable Dr John Joseph Herron AO, a former Minister and Senator for the State of Queensland from 1990 to 2002, place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service, and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.

Dr John Herron was a surgeon, a parliamentarian and a true humanitarian. John Herron was a man of faith and a man of great compassion. The Bible speaks of those who repair the ruins, and those restorers are called 'the repairers of the breach'. Repairing the breaches—that's what he did in this place, that's what he did throughout his life, and that's what he especially did in Rwanda.
John Herron's kindness was legendary around this place. It was to John Herron, the doctor-turned-senator, that so many MPs and senators turned in the most difficult moments of their lives. He supported Labor MP Con Sciacca through the devastating loss of his 19-year-old son to cancer, and they went on to work together to support other families facing similar tragedies. When Cheryl Kernot lost her house in an arson attack in 1991, it was John Herron who reached out. Of course, John had understood what to say and do because he had watched his own house burn to the ground in 1967, leaving his family with literally just the clothes on their backs. He didn't let this place change his very essence. He was always a doctor, a father, a Catholic, a Queenslander—always trying to be authentic all the time in his life. It's why he was trusted by all in this place.
John Herron's greatest achievements, though, I don't believe were in this building, though those achievements are many and deserving of honour; they were on another continent, in Africa, in Rwanda. It was during 1994, while driving, that Senator Herron heard on the radio that Care Australia was looking for doctors to volunteer in Rwanda, a nation ravaged by one of the worst genocides in modern history—a million dead in a genocide against the Tutsi people. Rather than, as he put it, sitting around in opposition in the Senate doing nothing, he made the life-changing decision to spend the next two months in Rwanda. He saw the unimaginable, the unspeakable. He saw man's inhumanity to others. He saw murder. He saw genocide. He saw hell itself as best it can be replicated in this world. He spoke of seeing the bodies of thousands of people machine-gunned in a sports field and trucks gathering the bodies. There was cholera and dysentery. There were thousands of orphans, children as young as three, numbed by what they had seen. He experienced abject terror when child soldiers aimed their AK-47s at him.
John Herron came back to Australia a changed man, traumatised indeed by what he had witnessed. He would go on to become a fierce advocate for the establishment of the International Criminal Court. But he also suffered what he then called a nervous breakdown, crying at night and weeping for no reason. Indeed, it was PTSD. The doctor who had given so much to others paid a high price himself for his compassion.
John Herron was in many ways an accidental politician. He considered himself apolitical. As he put it: 'I never took any interest in anything outside. I didn't read the newspaper—no politics, nothing.' But, after asking a question of a Labor politician at a meeting and feeling like he got fobbed off, John Herron joined the Liberal Party. He served the party and, in time, the nation with great distinction. He was President of the Liberal Party in Queensland twice. He was a senator for Queensland for 12 years. As Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs in the Howard government, he focused on and championed improving the health outcomes for Indigenous Australians.
John's service to Australia did not end when he retired from the Senate in 2002. He served as Australia's Ambassador to Ireland and the Holy See and continued to champion medical causes throughout Australia. One cause he was particularly passionate about was Down syndrome. He was instrumental in establishing Down Syndrome Queensland after his first child, Maryann, was born with that condition. John Herron touched the lives of people across at least two continents. His dedication to serving others, his love for his family and his country, and his enduring compassion for people everywhere serve as an inspiration to us all.
I extend my deepest sympathy to his wife, Jan, and their nine surviving children, as well as their extended family. To John Herron, we simply say: thank you for your service.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER. Well thank you very much Tim and thank you all for coming here today. Can I start by acknowledging the traditional owners and elders past, present and emerging. Can I also take the opportunity to acknowledge any servicemen and women who are here in the room today and any veterans - Gavin is here - I want to thank you for your service. What you do for our nation is something that we’ll be forever in your debt for. Can I acknowledge my very good friend who is here with us today Greg Hunt, our Health Minister, an absolutely fine Health Minister and Greg and I have been working together for many, many years. It’s a partnership I enjoy thoroughly, because we both share a passion for the topic I'm going to be talking about today; that is if you produce a strong economy, you manage your Budget well, then you can invest in changing the lives of Australians by guaranteeing funding for the essential services they rely on. We've been in that partnership for years now, formerly as a Treasurer and as Health Minister and now as Prime Minister, ensuring that we're driving the economy forward to enable Greg to be doing the extraordinary job he's been doing, guaranteeing these vital health services all around the country. To our new parliamentary colleagues, Senator Wendy Askew it's great to be here with you today and last night as well and to Bridget Archer our Liberal candidate right here in Bass, we were together yesterday and last night down at Sporties. Johnsy if you’re watching mate, you smashed me in pool last night, I had no chance against you. It was wonderful to be sharing a bit of the time up last night at the Launceston Aquatic Center where I saw the South Esk swimming club and all of the young kids, members in squad training - they were awarded the Best National Swimming Club in the country in 2015, right here at Launie. That's tremendous.
So it's been good to spend a bit of time here Bridget, in this wonderful electorate of Bass and to Gavin Pearce who is here, our candidate for Braddon and Jess Whelan who was also here today, our candidate for Lyons and Tanya Denison and Clare Chandler our Senate candidates here in Tasmania. Part of a great Senate team which is being led here in Tasmania. To Albert Van Zetten, the Mayor of Launceston and of course Tim Holder thank you for having us here today and for your comments about the positivity that is here in the north of Tasmania, the positivity that is here in Launceston.
I've been coming here for a long time and I can't recall a time frankly, when there has been such an air of expectation about what's happening here in Launceston. It's a credit to the local business community with whom I'm pleased to be sharing the morning today. The air of expectation, the investment, seeing the vision - and I agree Tim, the regional deal here in Launceston and in northern Tasmania has provided I think, a real catalyst, it has actually demonstrated that when we all work together local, state, federal government, the business community, well, stuff happens. And stuff is happening here in Launceston, stuff is happening here in northern Tasmania.
The partnership between the Hodgman Government and my Government is actually forging the way ahead and businesses can see that. They're backing it in through their own investments.
Unemployment has fallen from 8.2 to 6.5 per cent here in Tasmania. In the last year of the Labor government, 1,000 people left Tasmania. In the most recent figures 6,000 people came here. That's why I call Tasmania the turnaround state. What the Hodgman Government has done, working together with our Government federally has been to chart out, I think, the right path, which everyone is getting on and they all know is heading in the right direction, to where we all want to go.
Jobs for our kids. Education and health services for our families and our communities. Support for those with disabilities. Support for those who are in aged care facilities. Taking the dividend of a strong economy and investing it back into stronger communities. A visitation record of 1.3 million visitors here to Tasmania, an all-time record.
You know many years ago when I was involved in the tourism industry, that was the total number of international visitors that came to Australia, to Australia. Now that's how many we have come to Tasmania. It’s a credit to Tasmania, but I think it's a recognition of the strong growth that we've seen in our tourist industries. Here in northern Tasmania, whether it's the tourist industry or whether it's the forestry industry, whether it's the civil construction industry, whether it's the medical instruments or medical technology industries, whether it's the new, bright, shiny industries or it's the traditional ones which we know carry the load in terms of keeping people in work and supporting people's incomes, we are supporting all industries across Australia to go forward.
The NBN is now 99 percent complete here in Tasmania. When we came to government it was barely off the drawing board, now it’s&nbsp; 99 percent complete.
Forty seven mobile blackspot stations, $2.7 billion invested already in roads across Tasmania. Of course the Midland Highway $400 million, the Tasmanian Roads Package again another $400 million. The Bridgewater Bridge replacement, all big projects for Tasmania that benefit the entire Tasmanian economy, as the tentacles of these big civil construction investments reach out into the supply chain across Tasmania and create that activity that generates jobs.
On our Defence industry plan, I can never go past Penguin Composites which I've visited and which Gavin will know all about there - up in Penguin, one of my favourite places - a business that started out making kayaks, out of just the sheer passion of the owner and there's some pretty good kayaking around that way – and is now making the bonnets of armored vehicles for our Defence forces. That's been done in Penguin here in northern Tasmania. So at the cutting-edge of chemical technologies, through to the traditional industries that have always been the mainstay of northern Tasmania, it's an exciting story. There's $313 million for roads over the next decade in Tasmania that we've announced in the Budget. $130 million to the Hobart to Sorrell Corridor, $80 million for the Birralee Main Road, Murchison Highway, Old Surrey Road and Massey green Drive and Strahan Road. This is right across Tasmania, as I say, reaching out and supporting the economy all around the state.
And of course Battery the Nation. Now pardon the pun, but this does light me up, 100 per cent. I know it lights Will up as well, every time Will and I get together and we talk about Battery the Nation, we can just see its potential and we're just so anxious to get to the next stage. So the Tassie Government is investing in the Battery of the Nation side of the project, we're working on the Marinus Link side of the project with $56 million already committed to get through the planning stages and hook the Australian mainland up to the great opportunities that are here through the hydro vision that was born here in Tasmania, so many decades ago.
It's a tremendous Tasmanian story, the hydro projects here in Tasmania and to know now, that the foresight of those who were there generations ago, will now be able to be solving significantly the energy challenges of the Australian nation going forward. All born out of their vision and Battery of the Nation is a project with similar vision that Will has been leading and we are absolute joined-at-the hip partners to. 3,800 direct and indirect jobs alone, in terms of how we're proceeding with the Marinus Link project and yesterday I announced with Gavin, the $17 million Tasmanian Skills package, which is ensuring that Tasmania can be upgrading the skills of those who are already working in the sector or others coming in, to be able to fulfil this vision. As you say we've got the challenges of getting the workers into these big projects. I mean as we've been rolling out our infrastructure program now over many years, we are now - it's a good problem to have I suppose - that such is the level of investment that we're making in public infrastructure all around the country, that we're beginning to hit our head on the ceiling in terms of the capacity and the time that we have to actually get these projects done.
But I can tell you, when $80 billion dollars was taken out of the Australian economy on the other side of the mining investment boom, well, we stepped right up. We stepped right in and that is why we're now in our 28th year of consecutive economic growth. Because we had a plan. We had a plan to deal with it, a plan to deal with it nationally and also a plan to deal with it locally.
The City Deal in Launceston $260 million to UTAS to relocate its main campus. $19.4 million to rejuvenate the historic CBD here and $95 million for the health of the Tamar Estuary. Investing in services that Tasmanians can rely on, $6.5 billion more for Tasmanian schools over the next decade, a per-student funding increase of 60.6 per cent to 2029.
Let no one tell you, let no one to lie to you, that our Government has not been investing in the essential services that Tasmanians rely on. We have, they’re the facts, they are the figures.
A strong economy, we believe, is built on the efforts and hard work of Australians. It is built on the hard work and investment and entrepreneurship of small and family businesses. Which is by and large the Tasmanian economy, overwhelming so, more so than probably any part of the country when you think about it, as a state. That's why we've done what we have, on reducing taxes, extending the instant asset write-off. Investing in things like the Defence industry and other major programmes and infrastructure and so on, to continue to drive the economy forward.
But you know, the economy is not a certificate you put on your wall and say; “Oh, how clever are we as a nation, we're in 28 years of growth”. That's wonderful, but what does it mean? Why do we do it?&nbsp; And why do I talk about the economy so often as I move around the country?
Because this is the best country in the world to live, but our future depends on ensuring that we keep our economy strong. Why? That’s what pays for hospitals, that’s what pays for Medicare. That's what pays for affordable medicines. That's what pays for the City Deal. That's what pays the way and guarantees the funding, not higher taxes.
Higher taxes just slow the economy down.
Over the last six months or so I've taken up, to keep myself somewhat fit, swimming laps. Now if anyone said to me; “You know, you’d go a lot faster if you put a weight belt on,” what do you think I’d say to them? It's hard enough. But that's what $200 billion of higher taxes will do to our economy. It will slow us down. It'll slow you down.
Whether it's the policies which say, to pay someone else more, you've got to sack someone else to do it - which is the policy of the Labor Party. I don't think any Australian wants to get paid more in this country, as a result of their workmate having to get sacked. I don't think that's a fair policy. I don't think that's an Australian policy. I think that is a scorched earth policy, not seeing the vision of the growth of the Australian economy. That we can run one as has been run here in northern Tasmania, which lifts everybody up. Where everybody can do better and that's why our tax policies are designed to ensure everybody can keep more of what they earn. That we don't try and penalize some, push some down, in order to pretend to be raising others up.
Our values, our beliefs are all about seeing the entire economy go forward. That's why it's great to be here. It's great to be here and seeing the optimism and the positivity here in northern Tasmania. It's exciting, it's energizing and that's what we want to see continue.
We can't turn back now. It has taken us 12 years to get the economy back to where it was when John Howard and Peter Costello left office and Labor took over. It has taken us 12 years.
You vote Labor once, you pay for it for a decade.
It's taken us more than 10 years to get employment as a share of the working age population in this country back and above the levels that were achieved back in 2007. It's taken us over 10 years to achieve that.
We are on the right track and I can tell you, here in northern Tasmania you’re on the right track. So we want to keep that going. Why? Because I want to invest in health services around this country. I want to improve the lives of Tasmanians, Australians all, as they seek and get access to the services that a modern, sophisticated, generous society can provide. Already, funding for Tasmanian public hospitals is up from $425 million a year, to $525 million. There are record bulk-billing rates in Tasmania and here in Bass alone, since we came to office, bulk-billing rates are up here, the number of people receiving bulk-billing services has increased by 4.8 per cent, almost 5 per cent. 73 per cent bulk-billed services here in the electorate of Bass. 404,654 bulk-billed services here in Bass. That 76,748 more than when we came to office. Not surprising, we’ve increased the funding for Medicare by 27 per cent since we came to Government. I remember at the last election - particularly here in Tasmania - the Labor Party lied to the people of Tasmania. They said we're going to sell Medicare. It was a preposterous lie.
We strengthened it.&nbsp; Under our Government, because of a strong economy and strong Budget management, with a Budget that goes back into surplus next year for the first time in 12 years - that's how you strengthen Medicare.
You don't raise taxes. You invest in it and you run a strong economy.
Today, I'm pleased to announce that we're investing $91.9 million to strengthen the health system here in Tasmania. That includes $20 million for hospital services and infrastructure, cutting the elective surgery waiting lists. An extra 6,000 surgeries and endoscopies to be provided here in Tasmania. $34.7 million for elective surgery and TazReach primary care support to reduce the time Tasmanian patients wait for elective surgery and support Tasmanians in rural and regional locations, particularly with outreach specialist services, through the TazReach program. Upgrades to the birthing suite at Launceston Hospital – yes, population growth by more homegrown Tasmanians and more Tasmanians coming home - and more Australians from the mainland deciding to make Tasmania their home.
I met a young couple last night over at Sporties and they were telling me they’re working in the civil construction industry here in Launceston. They moved here from Melbourne. So Tasmanians are coming home. Tasmanians are staying and more Australians are choosing to become Tasmanians. I think that's exciting.
A second linear accelerator machine at Burnie for breast cancer patients which will save them $1500 for MRIs and PET scans. $4.4 million for cancer infrastructure, more MRI units with Medicare-subsidized scans for cancer, stroke and heart conditions. Greg and I will talk more about this today when we make these announcements again. Two extra diagnostic mammography units, one in Hobart and one here in Launceston. No more waiting to know whether it's benign, or cancerous.
We've all sat through I suspect, either with a friend or a family member or God forbid even yourself and you've been waiting, and you've been waiting, and it's soul destroying. This investment will remove that wait, that's the practical side of this. Yes it's money and yes it's machines, but what are we investing in? Removing that anxiety and heartache that comes from not getting access to those services as quickly as you need. $24 million dollars for mental health here in Tasmania and that includes an adult mental health center here in Launceston. A centre to treat eating disorders - I know of no parent for whom eating disorders is not one of their worst nightmares, it scares the hell out of me as a parent, scares the absolute hell out of me. We all have to keep investing in the health of our children and the mental health and well-being of our children from the earliest of ages and that's why as proud that in this Budget $461 million - Greg and I are on our mission an absolute mission to tackle youth suicide and youth mental health challenges in this country - $461 million, the biggest package we've ever seen to combat youth suicide. There's no community in this country that is not affected by this. Whether it's up in Grafton with Dr Pat McGorry when not long after Greg became Health Minister there had been a youth suicide cluster. Just that phrase. Everyone in the community was at a loss and Greg and Dr McGorry - who I know well and Greg knows well - went up there and we put a Headspace in. And there has not been, to our knowledge, a further case since that occurred.
So - 30 new Headspace centres are going in around the country, as a result of $461 million we're investing in youth mental health. It’s going to make a big difference. This is going to save young people's lives, young people's lives.
$7 million for drug and alcohol support, funding for a 10 bed facility in Burnie and an eight bed residential accommodation service in Circular Head. $12.4 million for Preventative Health Research at the University of Tasmania. $92 million investing in the health care - and you know who made it happen? You did, you did.
This is why I love small and family businesses; you love what you do. You wouldn't do it if you didn't want to. You'd go work for someone else. You know, you take a wage but when you run a small business you know, you don't take a wage. You get paid last and you pay your employees first and what's left over, is what's there for you and your family. So you do it because you love it. There are so many small family businesses that are tremendously successful and we celebrate them, as we should. But when I talk to small family businesses and I ask them about their businesses and what they love about it, they often talk to me about the weddings that being to for their staff. Or the christenings, or the way they talk about that young apprentice they took on and what they're doing now, running their own show as a carpenter or something like that.
It's the role that the business, particularly in regional communities, has in enriching the life of their fellow Australians.
Your success is the country's success.
The Government is a shareholder in your business, I don’t know if you think about it like that. The better you do, the better we do. That's why we want you to succeed. That's why we've cut small and family business taxes. That's why we're cutting taxes for all Australians, because we want Australians to keep more of what they earn. Because the better they do, the better we all do. And when that happens I can come here and say; “$92 million dollars for health services here in Tasmania”. You've made this happen, we are the Government, we're channeling it we're setting the right priorities. We're getting the direction right and creating the atmosphere for you succeed and the environment for you to succeed. But the reason we can do this, is because of the strong economy you’re building and that we are building together.
That's what is at stake at this next election.
You will not build a stronger economy with higher taxes.
You will not build a stronger economy, where the harder you work, the more you get punished with tax.
You will not build a stronger economy if you try to tie up businesses with reckless emissions targets, things that drive up the price of everything.
You won't get a stronger economy from that and that means you won't get stronger health services.
Our health plan works across four key areas; access to these medical services - and I've talked about bulk-billing and regional access in the plan today - medicines and treatments, our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, the physical and mental health of our country. Affordable medicines is one of our greatest achievements I think, as a Government, with over 2,000 affordable medicines listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which take courses of treatment – so $9 billion for example, on 130 specific cancer drugs - courses that cost hundreds of thousands and I have met the sufferers who have paid that to get access to these medicines - who now can access it for $40.50 or $6.50 for a concession holder. I think there's no greater statement of the strength of our community, our society, our nation and our economy, when we can say we can do that.
Our Government has continued to invest and list all of the medicines recommended and that didn't happen under the previous government. Why? Because they ran out of money.
If you can't manage your Budget you can't manage the health system, as Greg so often says. You can have all the virtue and good intentions you like, but if the wallet is empty you can't pay for anything.
That's why economic management and budget management is so critical. You get that. You’re business people and that's how we run the Budget; like you would. Making sure you get your costs under control. Making sure your revenue streams are sustainable. You can't have sustainable revenue streams as a Government, if you're taxing the economy out of existence. That's why we’ve kept taxes under control as much as we’ve kept expenditure under control.
In hospitals will increase the investment, in research and capability the work of the Medical Research Future Fund is changing the landscape for health care and treatment in this country. It’s something that has been another great achievement $20 billion dollars in that fund $500 million over 10 years for the Australian Genomic mission. $164 million in the Budget for clinical trials for rare cancers, rare disease and unmet needs. $80 million where I was with Greg at the Peter MacCallum Centre of Excellence on cellular immunotherapy. When I was there with Greg, I met a couple from Tassie, getting treatment right there in that facility. It's a facility for all Australians. $100 million dollars for the comprehensive Children's Cancer Centre in Sydney and a ten year medical research plan which backs Australia's 23,000 medical researchers, creating jobs and ensuring we can quickly take life-saving discoveries from the laboratory to the hospital,, to your family to save their lives, to improve the quality of their lives, to change their lives.
It is all about a strong economy at the end of the day.
That’s not a message from an economist, it's a message from patients who need health care. The best script I can write as Prime Minister to secure the health care of Australians, is a budget surplus. The best script that I can write as Prime Minister to guarantee life-saving medicines are available and affordable, is to continue to back you and small and family businesses all around the country, so our economy continues to support these incredibly important services that all Australians rely on.
So when the Labor Party or commentators say; “this election is about health”, sure, sure, yeah it is, but only a stronger economy is going to deliver that.
That's really what is at the heart of what I'm trying to say today. We have the plans to continue to invest in the health care of Tasmanians, in the north of Tasmania and right across the country, in remote Indigenous communities, to our biggest cities. The way we will do that is not through higher taxes as Josh said in the Budget fairly regularly. Yeah he did, because our plan is to grow the economy without increasing taxes, because we know by increasing taxes you slow the economy down and that puts everything else at risk.
So here in northern Tasmania we're positive, we're excited. It's not just of the Battery of the Nation that will charge up the rest of the country coming out of Tasmania, it's the entrepreneurial spirit and go-getting nature of Tasmanians, which they're really starting to see. The rest of Australia is starting to notice it, whether it's in the performance of the housing market or performance of the economy, the great leadership that Will has been providing right here in Tasmania and we're a great partnership.
We've come so far. You've come so far. Now is not the time to turn back. Now is the time to keep on with that plan that will continue to deliver the economy that you rely on, your community relies on, the country relies on.
I want to thank all of you for your hard work, investment and effort that is driving our country forward.
Thank you very much.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, friends! Thank you, friends! Can I just start by saying that as you know, a little while ago, Mr Shorten contacted me and I thank him, I thank him very much for the spirit in which he made that call and I thank him very much for his kind remarks to me and to Jenny and to our family. I would like to wish him and Chloe and his family all the best and God's blessing.
I have always believed in miracles! I'm standing with the three biggest miracles in my life here tonight&nbsp; - and tonight we've been delivered another one.
How good is Australia? And how good are Australians?
This is, this is the best country in the world in which to live. It is those Australians that we have been working for, for the last five and a half years since we came to Government, under Tony Abbott's leadership back in 2013. It has been those Australians who have worked hard every day, they have their dreams, they have their aspirations; to get a job, to get an apprenticeship, to start a business, to meet someone amazing. To start a family, to buy a home, to work hard and provide the best you can for your kids. To save your retirement and to ensure that when you're in your retirement, that you can enjoy it because you've worked hard for it.
These are the quiet Australians who have won a great victory tonight.
Thank you. Because it's always been about them. It's always been for those of you watching this at home tonight, for me and for my Government, for all of my team; it's all about you.
Tonight is not about me and it's not about even the Liberal Party. Tonight is about every single Australian who depends on their Government to put them first.
So friends, that is exactly what we’re going to do. Our Government will come together after this night and we will get back to work, just as Gladys Berejiklian got back to work here in New South Wales, just a few months ago. That is our task and that my undertaking to Australians from one end of the country to the other; I said that I was going to burn for you - and I am, every single day.
So let me talk about some of our other miracles tonight. Melissa McIntosh out there in Lindsay. Phil Thompson up there in Townsville, in Herbert. Bridget Archer down there in Bass. The big unit Gav Pearce, down there in Braddon. Terry Young up there in Longman in Brisbane, Sarah Richards, we're bringing back Macquarie!
But in saying that, can I also say thank you to some great service and I hope will continue to be service, at least in a number of these cases. Can I start off by saying thank you to Tony Abbott for your service to this country. To Sarah Henderson and Chris Crewther and Warren Mundine who are still in there and we've still got votes to count - and they're not stepping back - can I thank them very much for the hard campaign that they have fought.
To all of those in the seats that we held going into this campaign, who had to work hard to ensure that as a result of their incredible efforts, they were able to be returned tonight, can I particularly thank Jason Wood, Michael Sukkar, David Coleman down in Banks, Lucy Wicks up there in Robertson.
Pretty much, the whole state of Queensland! How good is Queensland? I never thought I'd hear that in this room in New South Wales, this close to Origin I can tell you. Particularly to Bert Van Manen, Peter Dutton, to Trevor Evans, Luke Howard, Michelle Landry, good old Ken O'Dowd, Warren Entsch up there, right up the top. All of our Queensland members, I want to thank you.
We have some great new members coming in as well, Dr Katie Allen she’s down there in Higgins, Dr Fiona Martin is here with us in Reid, Professor Celia Hammond over there in the west coming in Curtin, Pat Conaghan up there in Cowper and Angie Bell up there on the Gold Coast.
I want to thank all of my candidates, all of my members, all of you who have worked so hard to get them where we’ve been able to come to tonight on behalf of all of those Australians that we work for and we serve, and we do it humbly and we do it in great appreciation.
I particularly want to thank a number of people who have been instrumental in tonight's result. I want to start, I want to start by thanking Gladys Berejiklian, Steven Marshall, the Premier of South South Australia and Will Hodgman, the Premier of Tasmania. They have led by example in their great victories and they've shown us the way at the federal level. They have worked so hard for us all around the country and to Gladys, particularly here in my home state - thank you so much.
And campaigning without drawing a breath, the great John Howard and Jeanette Howard.
I of course want to thank all of my leadership team who have served so well and so loyally. To Michael McCormack and all of our team at the Nationals - to the Big Mac as I like to call him - Michael McCormack and to Bridget McKenzie, thank you all of those in Nationals, thank so much for the great job you’ve done in supporting us. We’re a tremendous Coalition and we will be as we reform our Government after tonight.
I also want to thank Josh Frydenberg, my Deputy and to Amy and the kids. Josh is a great mate and he has been a tremendous Treasurer, a great Deputy Leader as well down there in Melbourne, Josh, we've held the whole team together. We thank you and I thank you very much. It was a pretty good Budget too, back in surplus, next year!
Of course to Mathias Cormann, who has been our Minister-in-residence up in Queensland and to Simon Birmingham, who has been our campaign spokesperson. But another person I particularly want to thank tonight is Greg Hunt. Greg Hunt is an outstanding Health Minister and he stood up there in Flinders and it's great to have you back mate. There's a lot of people to thank, but Andrew Hirst, our Federal Director, Hirsty and of course to Nick Greiner who is a great son of New South Wales, our Federal President, together with Andrew Burnes our Federal Treasurer. I thank him very much and all the state directors around the country, they have run an outstanding campaign. They have set a new mark, a new model, a new way for us to campaign as a Liberal and National team and this has really set an entirely new benchmark. Hirsty, I want to thank you for your leadership at our CHQ.
To my own team, my own staff, can I thank ‘the Kunk’, John Kunkel, my Chief of Staff. Can I thank Yaron Finkelstein, my PPS. Andrew Carswell leading the media team and can I also send a long thank you over the Nullarbor over to Benny Morton, who has been with me every step of the way and to all of my colleagues.
It remains only to thank those who have been so, so close to me all of my life, Marion and John Morrison are here tonight, my parents and my brother, Alan and his wife Susie. My mother-in-law Beth is here. They're just over here on my left. Garry and Michele, you all got to know Garry, amazing fellow. It’s great to have you all here and Jenny’s family, especially Rob. And my brother Alan, who I mentioned, I mentioned Alan. We shared a room together in university, you've probably heard me tell that story about 20 times.
But to the dearest of my family who are with me here tonight, to my beautiful miracle girls, Abbey and Lily, thank you. To the woman I fell in love with in my teens - and it's never let up - now Australia has fallen in love with her; Jenny Morrison!
So friends, we've got a lot of work to do. We've got a lot of work to do and we're going to get back to work. We're going to get back to work for the Australians that we know go to work every day, who face those struggles and trials, every day.
They're looking for a fair go and they're having a go and they're going to get a go from our Government.
Every single day, they are who we'll have right in front of us as we put in place and continue the policies which we know will keep our economy strong, to guarantee the essentials that Australians rely on. That will keep Australians safe and secure and most importantly, most importantly, that will keep Australians together.
We are an amazing country of amazing people. God bless Australia!


Prime Minister
Thank you for your warm welcome.
Free peoples, quietly going about their lives, going to work, running their businesses, raising their children, saving for their future, seeking to realise their aspirations, while always respecting the peace and freedom of others. That’s what our nations are about. At our recent election, I called them the quiet Australians.
But even more, we are free peoples in two nations bound together by special bonds of history.
Australia’s political inheritance – parliamentary democracy, the rule of law, the separation of powers, the equality of all citizens, the freedom to believe, to speak and to worship as we see fit – these precious gifts all have their roots in this green and pleasant land.
The bonds of history also help explain why I am here this week – as I prepare to join other world leaders tomorrow to mark the 75th anniversary of D-Day – the Allied operation that began the liberation of Western Europe from Nazi tyranny.
At those beaches now etched in time – Utah, Omaha, Juno, Gold and Sword – tens of thousands of young men faced enemy fire and their own fear for the higher cause of freedom.
Allied casualties on 6 June alone are estimated at 10,000 killed, wounded or missing in action. This includes 6,603 Americans, 2,700 British and 943 Canadian cousins.
Terrible as that day was, it was just the beginning. Between D-Day and 21 August, the Allies landed more than two million men in Northern France and suffered 226,386 casualties, with nearly 73,000 killed or missing in action.
It is an honour to represent Australia as we honour all those who stormed the beaches and landed in Normandy on the 6th of June 1944.
At that time, our country’s major military focus was on fighting for freedom in the Pacific.
Yet Aussies were here too – some 3,000 Australians were part of the D-Day invasion force.
Around 500 were serving on Royal Navy warships and about a dozen were attached to the British Army.
More than 2,000 airmen served in the Royal Air Force and the Royal Australian Air Force during the campaign.
We lost 14 brave men, 12 airmen, and 2 sailors on D-Day.
Men who had wives, children, mothers, fathers and siblings.
Hundreds more Australians lost their lives in operations directly related to the invasion of France in the period leading up to D-Day and in the days that followed.
I’ll be remembering their sacrifice tomorrow at Portsmouth, one of the major embarkation points for the assault.
Just as we have an obligation to remember the past, we have a duty to build a better future for our peoples.
That’s also why I’m here this week.
To discuss with leaders the many challenges we face in a new age of anxiety and uncertainty.
Shared challenges such as counter-terrorism, cyber security and nuclear non-proliferation.
Challenges in an interconnected world such as preventing violent extremist exploitation of the internet.
Challenges to the world trading system and the liberal order that has underpinned global commerce – and your businesses – over many decades.
SUPPORTING THE GLOBAL TRADING SYSTEM
We must do everything we can to avoid a zero-sum mindset developing, especially when it comes to global trade and commerce. And we must guard against the lurch towards a narrow, transactional approach to international relations – where our relationships and the ambitions for the world we share, become nothing more than the sum of our deals.
Our international relations are also the product of context, our shared experiences, our people to people connections, and above all, the lessons of history, something we have all gathered together to commemorate this week, and are reminded that these lessons come at a great price.
Nowhere is this more important than in supporting the key multilateral institutions that have underpinned global growth and development for the better part of 70 years.
Just as we remember D-Day 75 years ago, we should also recall the burst of institution building that began the following month with the Bretton Woods conference in New Hampshire in July 1944.
There Britain played a critical role – albeit not always in agreement with the United States – in helping forge the nascent architecture of the post-war liberal economic order.
These institutions - the World Bank, the IMF and the original General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) - combined together to build a post-war prosperity unprecedented in human history.
They culminated in many ways with the birth of the World Trade Organisation almost 25 years ago, at the end of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations.
Yet today, the global trading system is under real and sustained pressure. Trade conflict between the US and China is testing the system as never before, and is putting the prosperity and living standards of billions of people at risk.
No-one suggests the framework of rules in the WTO is perfect – far from it.
As Singapore’s Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said last Friday at the Shangri-la Dialogue, the WTO was designed for an agricultural and manufacturing-based world economy, but the world has moved on to services and now increasingly digital and intellectual property, which need much more complicated rules.
Yet as Prime Minister Lee also said – and I fully concur – ‘We need to reform and strengthen multilateral institutions, not cripple or block them’.
Reform efforts are gathering momentum, particularly after G20 Leaders sent a strong message of support for WTO reform in Buenos Aires last year.
WTO members now need to agree on concrete reforms to demonstrate progress.
Australia is at the forefront of reform efforts. Updating the WTO rulebook is a priority. We are developing new rules on e-commerce to cut red tape on services, and pushing for an outcome on fisheries subsidies.
Our key concern is saving the dispute settlement system that provides the accountability the system needs to function.
The WTO remains the best foundation we have for securing continued prosperity in a fast-changing world; as the Brexit debate in this country demonstrates only too well.
So we must remain committed to this task – to allow commercial society to flourish – to allow the people in this room; the entrepreneurs, the employers, the risk takers; to make the investment decisions so vital to future prosperity.
It is critical, therefore, that like-minded countries, including Australia and the United Kingdom, lend their support to WTO reform – to mend, not end, the rules-based trading system.
International rules are also important to ensure the digital economy and the IT platforms we have established remain our servant and not our master, nor become weaponised in the hands of terrorists and criminals.
This is another key area where countries can work together – in fact, need to work together – to ensure we modernise and harmonise our laws and regulations so that the online and digital world, the new economy, meets the same standards that we expect of the behaviour in the physical world.
An urgent focus here is keeping violent extremist and terrorist content off the internet, following the horrific terrorist attacks in Christchurch, and those it inspired.
There are things countries can do. Australia has already passed legislation to deal with abhorrent online material. But there is more that can only be done through international cooperation, including with industry. The Christchurch Call set the standard, but we need more countries to participate and more action by industry.
The global community needs to make it clear to business that it is their responsibility to take down the content, and preferably, prevent it going up in the first place. The platforms are not just ‘posties’ - they are responsible for what they deliver. There are practical reforms industry can do and standards by which the global community can hold them to account.
This is why I am pushing this at the G20 and appreciate the support we have been receiving on this initiative, especially from Prime Minister Abe in his role as G20 President.
The G20 proved its effectiveness on cracking down on multinational tax avoidance through base erosion and profit shifting. The G20 has the right make-up, including the countries that host the platforms and those that consume its content and now has the opportunity to respond at Osaka.
THE CASE FOR AUSTRALIA
Australia’s economic interest has always been tied to continuing our success as a modern trading nation.
As a country, we have never got rich selling things to ourselves. Our external focus has been key to Australia now being in our 28th year of uninterrupted economic growth.
Australia’s real GDP has grown faster than any G7 economy over that period.
Real GDP per capita has risen around 60 per cent since the early 1990s. This compares with an average rise of 44 per cent in the United States, Japan, Germany, Canada and the UK.
And we’ve seen strong income growth across the income distribution.
Half the Australians voting at our recent election had never experienced a recession during their working life.
Trade has always been central to our plan.
One in five Australian jobs relies on trade.
The average Australian family now earns $8,500 more a year than they would have, if we had not lowered barriers to our trade for the last three decades.
Our Government adopted trade as a core component of our economic plan from the day we were first elected back in September 2013.
Over the past five and a half years we have worked hard to further embed Australia into the major economic engines of our region through transformational trade agreements with Japan, Korea, China, and the 10 other nations of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Since the Coalition was first elected, the coverage of our free trade agreements has increased from around 26 per cent of our total two-way trade to over 70 per cent.
New export deals have given Australian exporters improved access to an extra 1.75 billion consumers in the world’s largest, fastest growing economies.
Our most recent major agreement was signed with Indonesia earlier this year.
But there is more to do.
An uncertain global economic outlook means Australia’s economic fortunes will depend even more on the quality of our economic management.
This was a key issue at our recent election.
The result of that election means our government will now continue with our ambitious, pro-growth approach, supporting individuals, families and businesses looking to get ahead and prosper.
Our plan is simple and straightforward.
Keep our budget strong Lower taxes Back small and family businesses
Ensure reliable, sustainable and affordable energy
Build the infrastructure Australia needs
Drive all our industries forward, not just the new ones
Ensure all generations have the work skills they need
Encourage and protect workplaces so employers and employees can work and earn more together
Keep big business accountable, and
Secure even more overseas markets for our exporters.
And we implement that plan working from a strong base of achievement.
In Australia, we have just handed down the first Budget surplus in 12 years. We have also retained and affirmed our AAA credit rating from all major agencies, one of only 10 countries in the world to do so.
Having stabilised our net debt, peaking at just 19 per cent of GDP in 2018-19, we will eliminate our net debt within the decade.
More than 1.3 million new jobs have been created since September 2013, especially for younger Australians and women.
Female workforce participation is at record levels. The gender pay gap is at record lows as is working age welfare dependence.
There are more Australians in work than ever before – with jobs growth outstripping all of the G7.
230,000 new small and family businesses have been created.
We are making record investments in health, education, infrastructure, renewable energy, airports, airport rail links, fast rail, to name a few areas. So Australians have the essential services they rely on.
And we’re doing all this without raising taxes.
Indeed, when parliament returns in July our first item of business is to legislate the full tax plan we took to the last election, a plan that cuts taxes for all working Australians and backs in their aspiration.
Our economic plan will see 1.25 million more Australians get a job over the next five years. One in five of these jobs will be for young Australians.
It will see another 250,000 small and family businesses open their doors during the next five years.
It will give an additional 80,000 Australians a career by gaining an apprenticeship.
It will see 10,000 more Australian companies export beyond our shores by 2022 supported by export deals, that by then will cover around 90 per cent of our trade.
AUSTRALIA-UK ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP
Finally, let me say a few words about our bilateral economic relationship.
The UK is our 8th largest bilateral trading partner with two-way trade approaching $30 billion. And our third largest services trading partner.
The UK is also our second largest source of overall foreign investment – estimated at $575 billion at the end of 2018.
British businesses invest in Australia because they know it’s a stable, growing, well-regulated economy with plenty of opportunity still to come.
Australia is a great place to do business.
The Scottish craft beer company ‘Brewdog’ knows this.
Opening a brewery in Queensland sounds a bit like taking coal to Newcastle.
But Brewdog is doing just that – translating the success it’s had with breweries and bars here in the UK, across Europe, and in the US, by having a go in Australia.
They’re almost ready to open a new 50 hectolitre – that’s 5,000 litres – brewery, canning facility, taproom and restaurant on a greenfields site on the Brisbane river.
It’s a $30 million investment that will create more than 150 jobs in the first few years and around 100 more in the long term.
It’s a big vote of confidence in doing business in Australia. And perhaps a fair exchange for the amount of wine Australia exports to the UK every year – as our biggest international wine market.
Our defence industry relationship is another area of growing opportunity for both countries.
We’re investing in shared platforms and capabilities, which means we can work together seamlessly on global security challenges.
We decided a year ago to partner with BAE Systems to build nine Hunter-class frigates for our Navy.
They’ll be built in South Australia using great British design and know how – with Australian skills and Australian steel.
Let me also stress that the approach of Brexit hasn’t taken the shine off Australia’s confidence in the UK.
The UK remains our second largest foreign investment destination.
And we believe starting FTA negotiations post-Brexit would be an important next step in the relationship. We already have a working group in place looking at the parameters of a free trade negotiation once Brexit happens.
We want to launch negotiations on an FTA with the UK as soon as possible post-Brexit, recognising that the shape and nature of Brexit will affect the timing and nature of future negotiations.
But whatever transpires, Australia will be an active partner, loyal friend and determined advocate of a post-Brexit Britain.
We share the ambition of the UK Government to build a stronger global partnership – in trade and investment, in protecting our security interests, and in supporting global rules and institutions that create the foundations for stability and, thus, for your businesses to thrive.
Our remembrance for those who sacrificed all for the cause of our peace and freedom seventy five years ago is best cherished by ensuring we continue to enable the honest aspirations of our peoples to be realised today - their prosperity, their safety, their happy and quiet enjoyment of life.


Prime Minister
It’s fantastic to be here in Singapore, along with Marise Payne and Simon Birmingham.
I want to acknowledge our High Commissioner Bruce Gosper and his team.
And a big thank you to AustCham - firstly to Amber Williams for that warm introduction and to Adam&nbsp; and your team.
Not only for hosting us today, but for everything you do to advance the warm and enduring relationship between Australia and Singapore.
Singapore is a place where hard work, enterprise, and entrepreneurial risk-taking are encouraged.
Singapore - the world’s second biggest port - is the ultimate Smart City.
I am here today to underline that my Government’s agenda, both here and across Asia, is about expanding opportunity through connectedness.
And nowhere better exemplifies this commitment than our close partner Singapore.
Singapore is perhaps the best example on the planet of the success and prosperity that flow when a country connects with the rest of the world, opens its markets and embraces free trade.
That’s also been Australia’s path for many years.
So it’s good to be back.
We have close and common interests. And a long history together.
In 1965, when Singapore emerged as an independent nation, Australia was the first country to establish diplomatic ties.
Our then Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, and Singapore’s great statesman, Lee Kwan Yew, forged a friendship and foretold a vision of growth that has been amply fulfilled.
In 2015, on the 50th anniversary of that pact of friendship, our nations committed to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership: a framework for cooperating across the breadth of our relationship.
Australia values deeply this connection with Singapore.
Our &nbsp;relationship is longstanding and multifaceted.
Our agenda spans trade and investment, regional infrastructure and smart cities, the digital economy, education, arts, and defence and security.
Our cooperation on science and innovation is strong.
We work together on Fintech. We work on economic improvement for women in the region. We work on counter-terrorism and defence strategy.
And we are always working on improving the way Australian businesses find their way into the promise of this thriving marketplace.
I know the strength of today’s turnout is a testament to what you’re already achieving here.
Many of you are already flying Australia’s flag here and elsewhere in Southeast Asia – from Hanoi to Manila to Kuala Lumpur to Jakarta – and we want to support you to do even more.
Companies like Bluescope, a global manufacturer, are thriving here.
Lendlease, a global leader in construction, is redeveloping the Paya Lebar Quarter into a world-class city precinct and business hub.
And it’s not only businesses. James Cook University continues to invest significantly in Singapore, our biggest offshore education hub. CSIRO and the Australian National University recently opened regional offices here.
Austrade’s Landing Pad is also very successful, with many graduate start-ups attracting capital and choosing to base themselves here in Singapore.
On infrastructure, the opportunity for Australia and Singapore to support Southeast Asia’s unfolding urbanisation is growing day by day.
We’re already investing in a number of ways: through our aid program; in partnership with the US and Japan; through a new Infrastructure Governance Facility for the region; and through the ASEAN-Australia Smart and Sustainable Cities initiative.
When we met this morning, Prime Minister Lee and I talked about one thing that will be absolutely pivotal to any country’s success in the years ahead: the digital economy.
While we have ambitious digital trade commitments with Singapore under TPP-11 and the Singapore-Australia FTA, we want to do more together in this area.
Australia seeks digital trade rules and standards that build trust and confidence, and by deepening cooperation with Singapore we can set a benchmark for others in the region to adopt.
So we will deepen our work together to help our businesses and consumers capitalise on the manifold opportunities in the digital economy.
Today we also discussed the practical ways we collaborate, for example working with Singapore and Japan on e-commerce rules in the World Trade Organization.
We also looked at how we can cooperate more on the jobs and businesses of the future, and both countries are enthusiastic about this work.
Australia and Singapore cosponsored the East Asia Summit Leaders’ Statement on Deepening Cooperation in the Security of ICT and the Digital Economy.
Later this year, the High Commission here will host a Digital Economy Forum to better explore that opportunity.
According to this year’s IMD World Competitiveness ranking, Singapore is the world’s most competitive economy.
Ever since the early 80s we have proved again and again that we’re better off open to the world than closed to its possibilities.
Better off engaged in the world than in retreat from its challenges.
These beliefs are not only our outlook on the world, but our plan for success at home.
Australia’s economy is growing, now approaching an unprecedented 28 years of economic growth. But it is growth we never take for granted.
It requires continual effort.
Having successfully secured re-election last month my government is back at work, getting on with the job of implementing our national economic plan.
We have just handed down the first Budget surplus in 12 years.
Our AAA credit rating has been strengthened and we will eliminate net debt within the decade.
More Australians are in work than ever before.
Over 1.3 million new jobs have been created since the September 2013. Our economic plan will see 1.25 million more jobs over the next five years, with one in five of these jobs will be for young Australians.
With jobs growth outstripping all of the G7.
Our plan is for less tax and not more.
We are providing tax relief to Australia’s 3.4 million small, family and medium sized businesses that employ over 7 million Australians.
Ten million Australians are receiving personal income tax relief.
Legislating our personal tax relief plan in full will be the first substantive business of the new Parliament, keeping faith with the will of the Australian people expressed at the election.
Under our we are making record investments in health, education and infrastructure - and in the essential services that Australians rely on.
We are proceeding with the big projects governments have talked about for fifty years and have not done.
Faster rail, inland rail and airport rail links are being funded.
By 2026, when you are deciding to travel or send freight to
Sydney – you will have the choice of not one airport but two.
We are investing in our productive capability – in the transport infrastructure that will lower freight costs, bust congestion, and help Australia grow.
Trade is foundational to this government’s agenda.
Around 1 in 5 Australian jobs are trade-related, and Australian households are $8,500 a year better off because of opening up our trade over the last thirty years.
When our Government was first elected, free trade agreements covered around 26 per cent of our two way trade.
It’s now over 70 per cent.
Agreements with Japan, China, South Korea and the 10 other nations of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Of course, we have a long-standing FTA with Singapore which was amended and strengthened in 2017 - providing greater access for education, legal, financial and other professional service providers.
Our export agreements, have provided improved access to markets with 1.75 billion consumers.
Our monthly trade balance is running at record levels, just under $5 billion in surplus in April, with the longest consecutive run of monthly surpluses since 1973 – over 45 years ago.
Our continued success depends on being open to trade and investment. We don’t get rich selling things to ourselves.
Our plan to further expand our trade opportunities will see 10,000 more Australian companies export beyond our shores by 2022, with around 90 per cent of our trade covered by trade deals.
We have skills and resources in abundance that the rest of the world wants. And we are a reliable partner.
The dividend for us of a strong, stable region is more jobs, more opportunities, more years of uninterrupted growth to add to the 27 already on the board.
So as this region transforms and evolves, it makes sense for Australia to deepen our engagement, and not just economically.
Australia is strongly committed to deepening ties with Southeast Asia, exemplified by our convening of the ASEAN-Australia Special Summit last year.
Australia and Singapore are not only natural friends, but strategic partners with shared interests in the stability and prosperity of our Indo-Pacific neighbourhood.
We have a vision of an open, inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific.
This includes wanting to see an inclusive architecture for regional trade as Singapore, Australia and other partners work to finalise RCEP and that our existing trade agreements keep pace with technological change, especially the digital economy.
My visit today aims to expand our growing cooperation on shared regional objectives, including by defending the proposition that international rules and norms help trade, underpin our common prosperity and help keep the peace.
The global trading system is under real and sustained pressure. Trade conflict between the US and China is testing the system as never before.
No-one suggests the framework of rules in the WTO is perfect – far from it.
Each year Singapore hosts the Shangri-La Dialogue, which exemplifies what Singapore is about.
Opennness, connections, a regional focus with a global perspective. It shows that in Southeast Asia we need security and peace to maintain our prosperity. At this year’s Shangri-La Dialogue, held last week, there was a remarkable convergence of themes raised by colleagues from the region.
In his insightful speech, Prime Minister Lee said – and I fully concur – ‘We need to reform and strengthen multilateral institutions, not cripple or block them’.
He also said: “The bottom line is that the US and China need to work together, and with other countries too, to bring the global system up to date, and to not upend the system.”
In her first major speech as my new Defence Minister, Senator Linda Reynolds, said here at Shangri-La: “Australia’s Indo–Pacific vision reflects our national character and also our very unique sensibilities. We want a region that is open and inclusive; respectful of sovereignty; where disputes are resolved peacefully; and without force or coercion.”
Minister Reynolds was joined by others from the region who also adopted a counter perspective to the contemporary analysis that interprets decision making in our region though a narrow binary prism.
As independent sovereign nations in the Indo-Pacifc we don’t see our options as binary, and nor do we wish them to become so.
Philippine Defense Secretary Lorenzana said “‘Let us be clear: each and every nation has a shared and unquestionable responsibility in preserving peace and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region.’
General Ngo Xuan Lich, Vietnam’s Minister of National Defence, said “What matters the most is finding ways to handle competition...to cooperate, close the gulf of differences and settle disputes.”
And Indonesia’s Minister of Defence General (Rtd) Ryamizard Ryacudu, said: “In ASEAN, we continue to seek to enlarge our similarities and commonalities and to decrease and minimise the differences.”
Singapore and Australia understand that if we are to make the most of our region’s dynamism, we must do so together and in concert with other independent sovereign nations of the Indo-Pacific.
We must commit to remain open to each other, with inclusive fora that protect, respect and reinforce our sovereignty and independence.
Now is not the time to be complacent.
I said in Jakarta in my first overseas trip as Prime Minister that, set against rapid social and economic changes, our region is experiencing sharpening strategic competition.
In an era of rapid change and uncertainty, we must know who we are, what we offer and what we’re about.
Retreating into protectionism is – to borrow Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s famous analogy – like throwing away your umbrella in a storm because you’re not getting wet.
I’ve said before that our foreign policy must not be simply transactional. It’s about our character and values. Who we are in the world, and what we believe in.
We believe in the rule of law; in equality of choice and opportunity.
We believe in peace and liberty through the prosperity of private capital, property rights, free and open markets.
We believe in being good neighbours and we are a partner that pulls its weight.
We want to see an open, rules-based Indo-Pacific where the rights of all states are respected.
Our vision of a dynamic Indo-Pacific has ASEAN at its core.
Because a strong, united and resilient ASEAN can play a critical role in fostering peace, security and economic growth.
In the last 20 years, the ASEAN region’s combined GDP has more than doubled and the region is on track to become the equivalent of the fourth largest economy by 2030.
Australia’s two-way trade with ASEAN is worth over $120 billion a year – bigger than our trade with the US or Japan.
We want to see strong and resilient regional architecture, with ASEAN at its heart. We want architecture that’s capable of supporting deeper engagement, more cooperation, more productive relationships between nations.
Cooperation and collaboration are vital in this effort.
As Australia and the members of ASEAN said in the Sydney Declaration a year ago, we are partners with a vital stake in a dynamic region undergoing major changes.
We commit to intensify our shared work to shape a secure and prosperous region for our people.
We live in a region with tremendous promise.
There are 1 million Australians living overseas – many of them young, building relationships, broadening their horizons, developing their skills.
Each in their own way a representative of our country.
You are part of a deep and flourishing business community here in Singapore, absolutely critical to Australia’s strong and expanding presence in the most promising part of the world.
I commend your entrepreneurial spirit, and your very Australian willingness to ‘have a go.’
And again I say thank you to AustCham for your role in bringing this community together, today and every day.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: How good is Gladys? Isn’t she great?
[Applause]
It's wonderful to be with you all today, and it's wonderful to see many of you. Are there any guys from the Shire here today?
[Applause]
Is there anyone from the Hills district, anyone from the Hills?
[Applause]
How about out in south western Sydney, down near Campbelltown way?
[Applause]
Are there any Sharks fans in the house?
[Applause]
I thought that’d get a mixed reaction, the Endeavour High School kids down here in Kirrawee I think there has been plenty.
The reason I wanted to come here today, and the reason I know Gladys wanted to come here today, and the reason Stand Tall - a bit croaky - and the reason Stand Tall is so important and the reason everyone else has come here today, to have a chat to you - and people get to chat to you today as adults - because they're going to talk about serious stuff. But the reason all of us have come here today is because you matter.
I want you to tap the person on either side of you and say, ‘You matter’. It’s really important because everyone believes you do matter. Ad you know sometimes, sometimes guys, sometimes you can feel that’s not true. Sometimes you can think, ‘I don’t matter, and the problems that I have are just too big, and no one cares, and no one thinks I matter’. And you can feel really small, and your problems can feel really big.
But what Stand Tall is all about is making sure that you know you matter. And in life, lots of things can be taken away from you. Lots of things. You can lose things, you can lose friends, you can lose money, you can... all sorts of things can happen. Sometimes you can lose your health.
But the one thing that can never be taken away from you - and this is really important to understand this - is your value. Your value as an individual human being, as a man, as a woman, as a son, a daughter, a brother, a sister. You matter very, very much.
Now, in coming here today, I thought I would ask a few organisations about some important lessons they would want me to share. And I must admit they’re the same things that I've also reflected on.
You know, in life you never come up against things where you where you don’t succeed. When you’re going to fail. It happens. In fact, if you don't have a go at something where you might fail, you'll never achieve anything at all.
You can play it safe always, but unless you’re prepared to have a go at the things where you might fail, and risk failing, then you'll never really fully understand how amazing you are - you wouldn't have any idea about how amazing you are.
I remember many years ago, I took a group of young people together with a good mate of mine from the other side of politics, Jason Clare, and we took some young people from the Shire and from Lakemba. And it was after the terrible riots that we'd seen down in our part of Sydney down in Cronulla, many years ago. And we thought the best thing to do was to get all of our young people together and try and help them understand how amazing they were and how wonderful Australia was and how that connected them together, despite their very different big differences. Whether it was their religion, or their background, or where they lived or how they grew up.
And so we went and walked the Kokoda Track together. And it took us six and a half days. And I can tell you, it was really, really hard. But over the course of that Track, what everyone understood was just how much more they could do. And how much more helpful they could be to each other. And the funny thing was that at the start of the Track, people were saying, ‘Well, how fit I am, how much can walk harder than the others’, and all the rest of it.
But by the end of the track, people weren't thinking about themselves. They were thinking about how much they can help their fellow walkers and their trekkers. And I remember one night in particular, we were coming down to a little village hall called Efogi, where they had seen terrible battles during the war. And it was pouring with rain, it was late at night, it was very dangerous trying to get down this… the side of this mountain, getting down to this little village.
And some of the trekkers were really, really struggling, and some of the stronger walkers had got down in earlier. And rather than just put their packs down and get in their tent and get a good rest for the next day, they dropped their pack. They walked back across the river, and they went back up the mountain, and they helped everyone else down.
And so when I saw this in these young people, helping each other, what I understood was, they were working out just how much was inside them. And all they had to do was focus less on themselves and more on others, and they really were able to work it out.
So a couple of things, a couple of pointers I give you, which has been given to me by some amazing organisations - which include organisations like Stand Tall - but also organisations like Kids Help Line and headspace, and a whole range of these organisations.
The first thing to do is don't be afraid to fail, and change the way you think about failure. If you haven't failed, you’ve learnt nothing. And when things failed, it's a matter of just looking at it as an opportunity to learn from that experience.
You know the first time I ever ran for politics, you had to do a thing called preselection. And that's where I got a whole bunch of party members together and they’ve got to decide who their candidate is going to be in the election. There was about 150 of them. I got eight votes. Eight votes, the first time I ran.
And what we did when that happened, I had to go home and tell Jen, ‘It didn't go terribly well.’ And I had to share with them that we'd put our lives on hold for a long period of time, to try and seek this opportunity, and it just didn’t come. But we learned from that and we didn't give up and we kept going forward.
So the first thing to do is if you encounter failure in your lives - because you will, and if you don’t, it means you're not trying things - then it's important not to see that as the end of the road, but importantly as the start of another road, and one you can walk tall on.
The second point I'd make to you is that what's good for your body, is good for your mind. Who likes to stay healthy? I'll tell you what, if you keep your body healthy, you can keep your mind healthy as well. And it's important that when you keep your mind healthy, you can stay positive on the things that when you're facing challenges in life.
So when it comes to keeping your body healthy, whether it's making sure you get enough sleep, whether you get your physical activity and your exercise, or you ensure that you eat well and you know... it's all right and have fun every now and then. That's all good. But at the same time, if you can keep your body healthy, it means you can keep your mind healthy. Because you’re confronting lots of things.
Now Gladys and I have really stressful jobs. And you guys all face your own stresses and challenges. So one of the things I do is I try and swim most days. You'll find me down at the Caringbah pool, or the North Sydney pool, or anywhere I can find a pool - and yep, I do wear the Speedos, so I don’t let the cameras in. Ever. That's never happened guys, it's never going to happen.
[Laughter]
But it's important that you take the opportunity to get your regular exercise, and look after what you're doing with your body each and every day. If you keep a healthy mind and a healthy body, you will be able to confront the challenges that you face.
And the last point I wanted to make to you is this - you're never on your own. Who's ever felt like they've been on their own before? Just you? I have, heaps of times. If you haven't got your hand up, I think you’re telling the truth.
At all stages, we're going to feel like we're on our own in the middle of facing something at some time. You know, 52 per cent of young people - this is an important statistic - 52 percent of young people who say they have a mental health problem are embarrassed to discuss the problem with anyone, and 49 per cent are afraid of what others would think.
Half the people in this room, if you're suffering from a mental illness, or mental anxiety, or something like that, don't believe you can get help. And you also believe that others will think differently of you if you do.
Of every 30 young people - I heard from batyr yesterday - about seven of them will be dealing with issues of mental health. Only two of them will seek help. And that's a great shame, because there's heaps of help out there if you're having difficulties, and you're really struggling to come to terms with the challenges that you're facing in your own life.
And you might think, ‘Well, those challenges are small compared to what everyone else is dealing with.’ But they're not. Why? Because you matter, and the things that are affecting you matter. And if you're dealing with those anxieties and those challenges, or you don't understand why you feel the way you feel, when you can't get up out of bed, when you can't motivate yourself to do the things that you see like all the other kids can do, or you're having difficulties at home and you can't understand why and you're really frustrated about it. These are all things that you can get help with and you can call Kids Helpline.
And who's got their phones with them at the moment? Anyone got their phones with them at the moment? I want you to jot some numbers down in your notes on your phone. OK? Because I’m going to tell you why in a sec. I got this tip from batyr yesterday. Here it is - Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800. Who’s heard of Kids Helpline? Put your hands up. Kids Helpline - 1800 55 1800. Headspace, who’s heard of headspace? We’ve all heard of headspace? Good - 1800 650 890. Then there’s reachout.com, beyondblue.org.au, and of course there’s the 000 number.
Now, I want you to make me a promise. All of those numbers, if you didn’t hear them now, go and look them up later. Just check it out on your phone while you’re checking Facebook, and Instagram, and all the other things. And make sure if you’re talking to a friend, and that friend is telling you the things that I've just been talking to you about - that they don’t feel right, or they don’t know how to cope in a situation, or they’re finding it really hard to deal with things, whether at homes or other circumstances.
You may not have those answers to them at that point. You may be the best friend - and I'm sure you are - but you won’t always be equipped to deal with those questions that are posed by friends. And batyr - this wonderful organisation Greg Hunt had the opportunity to go and meet with yesterday - that is the time that you put your phone on speaker and you dial one of those numbers. And you and your friends, standing with your friend, standing tall with your friend, can go and have a chat with a trained counsellor to make sure you can deal with the things you need to deal with.
So look, it’s been great to have the opportunity to come and speak to you this morning. Just remember what we just talked about - you matter. Who matters in this room? You matter. And because you matter, tell your friends, because you matter, what’s happening to you matters. And as a result, you need to make sure you deal with failure in a positive way. Because if you don't fail at something, it means you've never tried something. And you need to keep your mind and body well, and you need to know you're never alone, because there is always help there for you - whether it’s through one of the professional services or through each other.
So I hope you have a great day. I want to thank all the other speakers who have come together to be with you today. I want to wish all the guys from Endeavour and Kirrawee all the best, they’ve put on an amazing performance up here a little earlier today, that’s going to rock the place amazingly. So how good will they be? I hope you have a great day. Have a good one. Cheers.
[Applause]


Prime Minister
Prime Minister:&nbsp;Thank you.
I value my engagement with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry WA.
In the big debates – particularly on the GST, but others as well – the Chamber always comes to the table with well researched views and a case worth hearing.
On election night I said the result was a victory not for the Liberal Party, but for the quiet Australians. Australians who quietly go about their lives, working hard each day, running their businesses, caring for their families, volunteering in their local communities.
There is a champion in every Australian. It is our job to support them to realise that champion within.
The election was a message that Australians wanted their Government to respect their aspirations and back them in as they did everything they could to get ahead and make a better life.
Australians rightly see themselves as being in charge of their own lives and their own destinies.
That is why I have now exhorted my team to respect the outcome of the election by governing humbly, understanding that the election result was not about us, but it was about those quiet Australians and their honest and decent aspirations.
Our job is to ensure that our decisions can simply make the lives of Australians that little bit easier.
Australians also said they were are no longer prepared to accept any claim that Governments can solve all your problems just by giving them more of your money or saddling future generations with a mountain of debt. &nbsp;
Australians live within their means and simply expect Governments to do the same and get the job done. The election also confirmed our view that Australians appreciate that the services they rely on depend fundamentally on ensuring we have a strong economy, not higher taxes.
Without a strong economy, all else is in vain. Jobs, funding for schools and hospitals, combatting youth suicide and the NDIS.
And so today, at the start of this new term, I want to speak to you about getting on with the job of building our economy to secure your future.
The Australian economy has shown remarkable resilience over a long period of time.
We are on track to achieve 28 years of uninterrupted economic growth and Australia’s real GDP has grown faster than any G7 economy over that period.
The median age of Australians is around 38 years. These Australians have not known a recession over their entire adult lives.
At 2.9 per cent, jobs growth has been stronger than any of the G7 countries over the past year. The vast majority of the nearly 1,000 jobs a day created over that time have been full-time positions.
Almost three quarters of Australians aged 15 to 64 have a job – a record high. &nbsp;Female workforce participation is also at a record high.&nbsp; So is the workforce participation of those aged 65 and over.
So the great Australian jobs machine continues to whir away. A great strength. But there’s more to do, which is why our pledge to create 1.25 million new jobs over the next five years is central to our economic plan.
The 2019-20 Budget, only days away, will be in surplus. It’s been a long road back, 12 long years, but we’re almost there. &nbsp;Another great foundational strength for our economy. And our AAA credit rating remains in place, one of only ten nations in the world to achieve this outcome from all key agencies.
That said, we do face some challenges and headwinds.
That’s not news. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg and I have been talking about this for some time.
The Treasurer’s reports from his recent trip to the G20 Finance Ministers’ meeting in Japan as well as to London, Berlin and Washington, confirm that international risks have increased over the first half of the year.
Protectionist sentiment and trade conflict, especially between China and the US, is weighing heavily on global confidence and here in Australia as well. The uncertainty regarding Brexit is also not helping, although the impact of this on Australia is quite muted.
The unfolding of all of these events are own goals for the global economy given the broader consensus points that the fundamentals of the global economy are relatively sound.
As a trading nation, this week’s G20 Summit will be an important opportunity for the world’s leading economies to map out the way forward from here.
We are also close to the peak of the global cycle on interest rates ‑ with pressure on European Central Bank and the United States Federal Reserve to lower rates to support their economies.
In the domestic economy, there are challenges too.
We’ve seen the effects of prolonged drought and floods on regional communities – with farm GDP declining by 6.8 per cent over the past year.
A necessary moderation in the housing market has also contributed to softer consumer spending.
Removing Labor’s threat of massive changes to the housing taxation system has erased some of the gloominess from the sector, which combined with interest rate cuts, prudential changes and our forthcoming First Home Loan Deposit Scheme are providing some support to the market.
Credit tightening, post the Banking Royal Commission, has also dimmed economic activity, especially for small business and housing development.
The latest national accounts showed quarterly growth of 0.4 per cent and, while this was a modest increase in growth compared with the previous quarter, it also indicates subdued activity in some parts of the economy – the housing sector, business investment and household consumption.
It’s fair to say that politics has also played a role, with the election weighing on confidence. The bounce back in the business confidence as measured by the NAB Monthly Business Survey following the election, showed the largest monthly increase since the change of government at the 2013 election.
Our job post-election is now very clear – to get Australians off the economic sidelines and on the field again.
The Reserve Bank’s recent cut in the cash rate will put more money in the hands of Australians.
But as Governor Philip Lowe has stated, we must also drive economic growth in the longer term. &nbsp;
The key goal of these policies is job creation. For our Government, it’s always been about jobs.
Our economy has displayed an enormous capacity to absorb record levels of employment growth. The more jobs that are created, the more Australians keep entering the workforce, increasing participation rates also to record levels, forcing economists to now postulate that full employment is now an unemployment rate closer to 4.5% than 5%.
This means that to see larger increases in incomes from wages growth we need to see even more jobs created to reduce unemployment to these levels.
The only way to create more jobs is to increase the levels of investment in our economy. Job creating investments that unlock productivity gains and enable Australians to earn more.
This relies on businesses having the confidence, capability and incentives to back themselves.
Today I want to focus on three elements of our plan to achieve this.
First, how we will get things moving by lowering taxes, sharpening the incentives to work and invest and get infrastructure projects underway.
Secondly, provoking the ‘animal spirits’ in our economy by removing regulatory and bureaucratic barriers to businesses investing and creating more jobs.
And thirdly, boosting the economy’s long-term growth potential by unlocking greater economic dynamism and productivity by lifting our skills capabilities and driving uptake of new digital technologies to promote innovation and competition in our financial system.
Firstly, tax relief.
Australians must keep more of what they earn. In fact at the last election, they demanded it. Next week in parliament we will submit our tax plan to the parliament, just as we presented it to the people.
Labor’s high taxing agenda has now been rejected at two successive elections. Labor’s primary vote at the election last month was their lowest in a hundred years, even lower than when they lost Government in 2013, 1996 and 1975.
Labor’s internal conniptions about supporting the Government’s plan to simply let Australians keep more of what they earn exposes Labor’s deep mistrust of Australians to do what’s best for them with their own money. Labor always think they know best. Australians disagree.
The fact Labor are having to be dragged kicking and screaming, putting up one excuse and ruse after another, shows they simply don’t understand that when you find yourself in a hole, you should stop digging
Our proposed tax relief doesn’t just have a strong political mandate. It has a compelling policy rationale. The first stage of our tax changes will support economic growth by putting money in people’s pockets that they can use to boost consumption. Worth at least two 25 basis point rate cuts.
This will include immediate tax relief to low- and middle-income earners after they lodge their 2018‑19 tax returns.
For middle-income earners, this works out to be over $1,000 dollars for singles, and it’s double that for dual income families.
More than 10 million taxpayers will benefit. Right here in WA, around 1.25 million taxpayers will benefit from our plan.
This first stage is part of our longer-term plan to simplify our tax system and sharpen the incentives to work and invest for the future.
While stage 1 of our tax plan will fast-track and boost tax relief for low and middle income families and support the economy, stages 2 and 3 are more fundamental long term changes to our personal tax system.
We are simplifying the system, more closely aligning the middle tax bracket with corporate tax rates and improving work incentives by tackling the ‘silent thief’ of bracket creep.
As the PEFO statement confirmed prior to the election, the measures are fully incorporated into the medium term projections, which also maintain all spending projections on current profiles.
It still baffles me why Labor can readily sign up to spending schemes that run for decades but cannot do the same to let Australians keep more of their own money.
Under our changes, from 2024-25, 94 per cent of Australians will pay a maximum marginal tax rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar, compared to only 16 per cent if stages 2 and 3 are not delivered.
Or to put it another way, almost 80 per cent of hard working Australians will keep more of what they earn following stages 2 and 3 of our tax plan.
They will receive greater reward for their efforts, providing an incentive to put in the effort to get a raise or secure a promotion.
Getting these incentives right in the workplace is vital to raising our productivity.
We are also backing small business by reducing their taxes so that they have more money to invest back into their business to support their growth aspirations.
In our April Budget, we increased the instant-asset write-off threshold to $30,000 until 30 June 2020 and expanded access to medium-sized businesses so that around 22,000 additional businesses employing around 1.7 million workers will now be eligible.
This is in addition to fast-tracking the company tax cut for small and medium-sized companies with an annual turnover of less than $50 million.
While lower tax is a centre-piece of our plan for a stronger economy, contrary to most commentary, it is by no means the whole story.
To get things moving, the Deputy PM, Michael McCormack will be ensuring the Government leads by example with a single minded focus on implementing our $100 billion infrastructure investment programme.
This programme increases Commonwealth support for transport infrastructure by about a third by funding nationally significant transport projects across all states and territories, unlocking productivity by decongesting our cities, creating jobs and supporting future population growth to make our cities more liveable.
The immediate focus is for Minister Tudge to work with the St. e congestion busting urban infrastructure projects that can be readily actioned to spur growth, support local jobs and get things moving.
The same will be done by the Deputy PM for regional communities through our building better regions and water infrastructure schemes..
Here in WA we’ve committed more than $13.6 billion since we came to office and we’re getting on with new projects – including further upgrades to the Tonkin Highway, and improvements for the Oats Street, Welshpool Road and Mint Street Level Crossing Removals as part of METRONET.
Since our re-election, I have already met with Premiers in NSW and Victoria to take stock, get a common view on project timetables, priorities and to do lists. While here in WA, I will be meeting with Premier McGowan to do the same.
The last thing we want is project delays leading to more congestion and greater costs.
That’s why infrastructure delivery will be an important item on the COAG agenda for August. &nbsp;
The same process is being followed for our historical investments in defence capability. With more than $200 billion being invested, with generational job creating projects here in WA, as well as South Australia and Queensland.
Ensuring these investments remain on schedule and that we realise the uplift in skills and technological capabilities for our defence industries, will be the strong focus of our new WA Defence Industry Minister, Melissa Price.
To provoke the much needed &nbsp;‘animal spirits’ in our economy we must also remove regulatory and bureaucratic barriers to businesses investing and creating more jobs.
Congestion is not just on our roads and in our cities.
We also need to bust regulatory congestion, removing obstacles to business investment.
When we came to power in 2013, our Government launched its ‘Cutting Red Tape’ Initiative.
Working across every government department in Canberra, we set ourselves the goal of reducing the burden of regulation on the economy by $1 billion each and every year.
And we succeeded. &nbsp;Between September 2013 and December 2016, this initiative yielded red tape savings of $5.8 billion.
Removing what governments identify as excessive or outdated regulation is one thing. Whether we are really focusing on the barriers that matter to business in getting investments and projects off the ground is another.
Take the WA mining industry for example. In 1966, the late Sir Arvi Parbo took the Kambalda nickel mine near Kalgoorlie from discovery to operation in 18 months.
By contrast, the Roy Hill iron ore mine took around 10 years to complete around 4,000 approvals. Delays to the project meant delays to over 5,000 construction jobs and 2,000 ongoing jobs.
This in a region where iron ore mining has been taking place for decades and is relatively low risk.
There is a clear need to improve approvals timeframes and reduce regulatory costs, but in many cases regulators are making things worse.
Look at the WA Environment Protection Authority and the uncertainty it has created over new emissions requirements for the resources sector. Business will also make valid criticisms of many Commonwealth agencies and departments.
That’s why I’ve asked my colleague Ben Morton – as Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister – to work with me, the Treasurer and other Ministers, to tackle the full suite of barriers to investment in key industries and activities.
This will be a renewed focus on regulatory reform but from a different angle.
Rather than setting targets for departments or government agencies, we’ll be asking the wider question from the perspective of a business looking, say, to open a mine, commercialise a new biomedical innovation, or even start a home-based, family business.
By focusing on regulation from the viewpoint of business, we will identify the regulations and bureaucratic processes that impose the largest costs on key sectors of the economy and the biggest hurdles to letting those investments flow.
What are the barriers, blockages and bottlenecks? &nbsp;How do we get things moving?
I urge the business people in this room and around Australia to engage with this process.
Step one is to get a picture of the regulatory anatomies that apply to key sectoral investments. Step two is to identify the blockages. Step three is to remove them, like cholesterol in the arteries.
While reducing taxes has had a major impact in the United States, it was actually the Trump Administration’s commitment to cutting red tape and transforming the regulatory mind set of the bureaucracy that delivered their first wave of improvement in their economy. &nbsp;You can be assured I have begun this term by making it clear to our public service chiefs that I am expecting a new mindset when it comes to getting investments off the drawing board.
One particular area where it’s essential to get regulation right is to protect investment from the impact of militant unions, that would have been given free reign under a Labor Government if elected six weeks ago.
Events since then with the CFMMEU in full R18 rated technicolour have only underlined the wisdom of the Australian people in rejecting going down that path.
Labor does not run the unions in Australia, the unions - through their money from member’s indentured fees and union super funds, their numbers in their factions and their armies on the ground at elections, run modern Labor.
It is a very far cry from the balanced relationship of the Hawke-Crean-Kelty alliance of the past.
Our Government is committed to enforcing the rule of law on Australian work sites. &nbsp;All Australian businesses have the right to expect that they can go about their work without being subject to bullying and disruption.
When we’re back in Parliament next week, another of our priorities is to introduce laws to give greater powers to deal with registered organisations and officials who regularly break the law, prohibit officials who are not fit and proper persons from holding office, and stop the rorting of worker entitlement funds. All measures Labor resisted during our last parliamentary term.
Like you, our Government believes in cooperative workplaces.
In his new capacity as Minister for Industrial Relations, I am asking Christian Porter to take a fresh look at how the system is operating and where there may be impediments to shared gains for employers and employees. &nbsp;
Any changes in this area must be evidence-based, protect the rights and entitlements of workers and have clear gains for the economy and for working Australians.
We would expect business organisations such as yours to build the evidence for change and help bring the community along with you too.
Just as our economy is growing and changing, our skills system needs to grow and change with it.
Demand for skills is shifting from manufacturing to the services sector and emerging industries like advanced manufacturing, ICT and cyber-security.
Our vocational education system needs an upgrade to ensure it remains world-class, modern and flexible.
That’s what business has told us – you’re not getting enough people walking through your doors with the skills you need.
The Joyce Review we commissioned prior to the election confirms this and will now guide the changes we will seek to make during this term of parliament as a key component of our economic plan.
The Review acknowledges the good work undertaken in the sector so far, but says VET needs to adapt so it can support important and emerging industries and become a first choice for students who want to pursue technical careers.
We believe that learning through a vocational education is just as valuable as a university degree, so we want to transform the way we deliver skills, support employers and fund training
We’re addressing the findings of the Joyce Review by setting up a National Skills Commission and a new National Careers Institute to give people the information they need to decide their future careers and the best pathways to get them into a job. &nbsp;
We’re simplifying and targeting increases in apprenticeship incentives.
And we’re creating up to 80,000 additional apprentices over five years in priority skill shortage areas through a new apprenticeship incentive.
The Review’s recommendations are wide ranging and responsibilities for the sector are shared.
Vocational education sector is one of my key priorities and I intend to make it a primary focus of discussion with states and territories at COAG.
This work will also be led two Western Australians, Michaelia Cash in Cabinet and Steve Irons as Assistant Minister, a trade qualified electrician and small businessman.
Digital disruption, especially in financial services is changing the way people, businesses and governments interact.
Consultancy firm McKinsey argues that “digitisation could contribute between $140 billion and $250 billion to Australia’s GDP by 2025, based on currently available technology alone.”
I have appointed Senator Jane Hume as Assistant Minister to support the Treasurer to drive the changes we are making in this area.
Our upcoming legislation to introduce Open Banking, through a new Consumer Data Right, will give customers more control over their own data and empower them to compare and switch between products and services, and encourage competition between service providers.
The Consumer Data Right will enable customers to get assistance and tailored support by empowering them to own and share their information as they choose, driving further innovation and competition.
While we are starting with banks, we intend to expand this choice to multiple sectors, for things like phone and internet providers or your energy bill. It will lead to better prices and more innovative products and services.
The New Payments Platform (NPP) makes payments faster and simpler for consumers and businesses and will pave the way for further innovation in the payments system. &nbsp;The challenge is now to encourage economy wide uptake.
The potential gains that are available to businesses, particularly small and family businesses, through the NPP and its ability to reduce payment times are immense.
We will also continue with the establishment of a mandatory comprehensive credit reporting system that will increase competition.
With greater information, new entrants and small lenders, including innovative FinTech firms, will be encouraged to compete for small business and retail customers. The mutuals sector, including customer owned banks and cooperatives, will also be able to compete better with our legislation lifting restrictions on their ability to raise capital being passed just before parliament rose.
More broadly, our Government will continue to advocate strongly for a rules-based and open global trading environment that supports digital trade, builds trust and confidence in the online environment, and reduces barriers. Right now we are seeking to conclude a new benchmark agreement on digital trade with Singapore by the end of the year that I discussed with Prime Minister Lee just a few weeks ago.
We also kick-started negotiations on e-commerce rules in the WTO. &nbsp;
At the upcoming G20 Summit, I’ll continue to advocate for initiatives like these which clear the way for us to do business with the world, while ensuring trust in the online environment, including consumer privacy.
There are of course many other components to our plan to build our economy into the future that we don’t have time to delve into this morning.
Expanding our export markets and lifting the share of our two way trade covered by trade agreements to more than 90% by 2022.
Keeping Government spending and taxes under control, keeping the budget in surplus and eliminating net debt within the decade
Keep supporting greater investment in innovation and new technology.
Reducing energy costs through market reforms and in continuing to foster increased investment in both renewable and reliable energy infrastructure.
Supporting our drought and flood impacted agricultural sectors and deliver on the national water grid.
We will return to these on other occasions. For now, we will just keep getting on with the job that millions of Australians have entrusted us with to support them to realise their goals and aspirations.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you to Asialink and Bloomberg for the opportunity to address you here today prior to my attending the G20 Leaders’ Summit in Osaka this weekend.
Today I want to talk about our plan to foster an open, inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific, consistent with our national interests.
I would like to set out the principles, consistent with our national values, that will guide my Government’s engagement with the Indo-Pacific region.
The Indo-Pacific is where we live.
It is where we have our greatest influence and can make the most meaningful impact and contribution.
It is the region that will continue to shape our prosperity, security and destiny.
It is the region where, together with our allies, and especially the United States, our people made great sacrifices when our peace was threatened.
It is the region that has accounted for two-thirds of global growth over the last decade.
It is home to more than half the world’s population.
It is the destination for more than three-quarters of our two-way trade.
It embraces our Pacific family with whom we have special relationships and duties, our close neighbours, our major trading partners, our alliance partners and the world’s fastest growing economies.
Where else would Australia want to be?
During the early years of European settlement, our geography seemed a burden. Today, I think we now appreciate that it has proved to be a great blessing.
While comfortably understated in our approach, we do not underestimate our influence, especially if we choose to focus and target our contributions where we can have the greatest impact.
Our economy has grown faster than any other advanced economy over the last 28 years.&nbsp;
Australia is alone among advanced economies in enjoying uninterrupted growth over this period.
We are one of only ten countries globally with a AAA credit rating from all key agencies.
We host 10,000 foreign-owned businesses, and $3.7 trillion in foreign investment.
We rank third as a destination for foreign students, and seventh as a tourist destination.
We play a critical role in underpinning the resource, energy and food security of East Asia.
We are the fourth largest pension market. Our funds management sector is the sixth largest in the world.&nbsp;
We are a standard bearer for democracy and the rule of law.
We are a staunch and active ally of the United States, deepening our security cooperation to help secure our region.
Our post war trading relationship with Japan, marked by our&nbsp;&nbsp; Commerce agreement secured in 1957, saw Japan become our largest trading partner until just under over a decade ago. The relationship is now broader and deeper than ever before, This weekend Prime Minister Abe will preside over the G20 as a great friend of Australia and one of the region’s most highly respected statesmen.
We share a comprehensive strategic partnership and free trade agreement with the People’s Republic of China, with a broad and deep relationship underpinned by people-to-people ties; evidenced by the fact we are home to 1.2 million ethnic Chinese and are host to 1.4 million Chinese visitors and 205,000 Chinese students each year.
The growth in India’s economic and strategic heft is increasingly felt beyond the Indian Ocean, creating new opportunities for Australia based on our shared values and outlook. India is also now the single largest source of permanent migrants to Australia.
Our special relationship with ASEAN since its inception has plugged us into a critical network of independent and dynamic&nbsp; developing economies working together to create their own norms and rules for intra-regional growth, critical to the interests of all Indo-Pacific members.
And we are the single largest development partner with the island nations of the Pacific.
So together in our region we share a future. We have much to contribute and much to gain.
The Indo-Pacific is a region which has undergone and is undergoing profound change. We have helped shape that change.
Post war social development and economic prosperity led initially by Japan.
Global engagement with the People’s Republic of China and the resultant economic miracle of China’s economic advancement.
The emergence of ASEAN, which has supported the regional stability that allowed its members to prosper.
The burgeoning of intra-regional trade. The build-up of regional security capabilities, with inevitable tensions in some areas.
The economic liberation that has flowed from free trade, new technologies and innovation.
New environmental pressures and threats to our climate, oceans, species and forests that don’t recognise national boundaries.
The confluence, agglomeration and dynamism of these forces now shaping our region has brought us to a new threshold.
Undoubtedly, the most significant change in most recent times has been the shift in the relationship between the United States and China, who exert the greatest influence on our region.
The world’s most important bilateral relationship – the US-China relationship - is strained.
Trade tensions have escalated.
The collateral damage is spreading.
The global trading system is under real pressure.&nbsp;
Global growth projections are being wound back.
The impact of any further deterioration of the relationship will not be limited to these two major powers.&nbsp;
The balance between strategic engagement and strategic competition in the US-China relationship has shifted.
This was inevitable.
China’s conscious decision to pursue prosperity as a strategy for national unity and stability launched one of the world’s greatest economic miracles.
Now China is a significant power, with vast military, global interests and the biggest economy in the world in terms of purchasing power parity.
It is important to acknowledge that this success was made possible by the active and strategic engagement of the United States and the wider global community.
Firstly, through enthusiastic bilateral exchange and then by supporting access to the global rules-based trading system through China’s accession to the WTO in 2001, gave it much better access to the markets of 154 member economies.
This also required reforms from China that supported its rapid economic expansion.
China is now the major trading partner of more than 50 countries.
In 1980, China’s trade with the outside world amounted to less than $40 billion. By 2015, it had increased one hundredfold, to $4 trillion
China is the largest holder of foreign US currency reserves.
China’s economic rise has not been a zero sum game. This has been especially true in Australia’s case, but also for the United States.
This is why Australia has always, and will continue to, welcome China’s economic growth.
However, the ground has now shifted. It is now evident that the US believes that the rule-based trading system - in its current form - is not capable of dealing with China’s economic structure and policy practices.
Many of these concerns are legitimate.
Forced technology transfer is unfair.
Intellectual property theft cannot be justified.
Industrial subsidies are promoting over-production.
China’s rise has now reached a threshold level of economic maturity.
While we acknowledge that large parts of China are still to realise the prosperity of its major economic centres, it is also true that its most economically successful provinces, some of which are larger than many developed nations, including Australia, has reached and sometimes exceeds the economic sophistication of its global competitors. Yet, at the same time, these economies get to compete with concessions, whether they be on trade, environmental obligations or other terms, not available to other developed economies.
Our current trading system seems incapable of acknowledging, let alone resolving, these issues.
The rules-based system is in need of urgent repair if it is to adequately respond to these new challenges, including the rise of large emerging economies, changing patterns of trade and new technologies.
Our prosperity, and that of our Indo-Pacific partners, depends strongly on the maintenance of an open global economy and a rules-based trading system.
It will also depend on a positive, productive and cooperative bilateral relationship between China and the US.
This will require the exercise of special responsibilities by these “Great Powers” to resist a narrow view of their interests.
But this won’t be the first time such leadership has been required or demonstrated.
In 1951 George Kennan wrote, in American Diplomacy:
“If our purposes and undertakings here at home are decent ones, unsullied by arrogance or hostility towards other people or delusions of superiority, then the pursuit of our national interest can never fail to be conducive to a better world.”
The statement was made at a time when the United States was in the process of building a new world order, with institutions and common rules unashamedly seeking to secure prosperity as a bulwark against the madness that saw 60 million people killed and slaughtered, including 45 million civilians, during the Second World War.
According to some, estimates this included up to 20 million Chinese as well as 419,000 Americans and almost 40,000 Australians.
This new world order was the dividend of the peace bravely won, none more so than by the United States, who understood that with its great power came great responsibility.
The principles of this new order reflected the values and aspirations of its architects.
It was also informed by the failures of pre-war institutions and mindsets that saw emerging and recovering economies become frustrated, giving rise to the most evil of nationalist ideologies to take hold.
As I joined other leaders in Portsmouth recently to commemorate D-Day, I was somewhat overwhelmed by the history of the moment.
Sitting beside Chancellor Merkel, I was inspired by just how far we had come. No different to when I joined Prime Minister Abe in Darwin to commemorate the bombing of our northern capital. The post-war world order has achieved something truly extraordinary. The United States deserves great credit for this achievement.
Central to these institutions has been a respect for the individual sovereign state, no matter how large or small, and the ambition that each may be able to engage and participate with the security afforded by a common set of rules that means they can get a fair go, free of coercion.
Like any nation the US is not perfect, but it has form in being able to look beyond its own horizon to see a bigger picture.
The United States has demonstrated an understanding that the responsibilities of great power are exercised in their restraint, freely subjecting itself to higher order rules, their accommodation of other interests and their benevolence.
Such power supports the independence and sovereignty of other nation states and affords protection beyond its own interests, in the knowledge that this is necessary to maintain the peace and stability that ultimately underpins their own prosperity.
The level of global interconnectedness means this has never been more true than today.
As a rising global power, China also now has additional responsibilities.&nbsp;
It is therefore important that US-China trade tensions are resolved in the broader context of their special power responsibilities, in a way that is WTO-consistent and does not undermine the interests of other parties, including Australia.
The accumulation of issues that have led to these tensions must be acknowledged, addressed and resolved at the negotiating table in a way that reinforces our open and inclusive global trading system.
Like all of us, China and the US have a strong interest, and a special responsibility, to modernise and support the system that has delivered unprecedented growth in national wealth and living standards over the last two decades.
We can support these efforts and outcomes by rejecting the fatalism of increased polarisation and resisting the analysis that only sees these issues through a binary prism.
It is in no-one’s interest in the Indo-Pacific to see an inevitably more competitive US-China relationship become adversarial in character.
All nations in our region, not just Australia, are having to adjust to this period of great power competition.
Japan, India, New Zealand, Vietnam, Singapore, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea. All of us are similarly seeking to balance our interests, our history, our geography, our alliances, our partnerships and aspirations in the context of this new dynamic.
Like others who live here, Australia simply seeks the freedom to be ourselves, peacefully pursue our national interests, consistent with our values, appreciating our history and being transparent and honest about our aspirations for the future.
These shared challenges create important common ground, which is where I see Australia continuing to play an important role.
So we won’t be fazed, intimidated or fatalistic.
Of course the international environment is difficult.
Of course there are risks of further deterioration in key relationships and consequent collateral impacts on the global economy and regional stability.
There are also pressures to decouple the Chinese and American economic systems, whether this be in technology, payments systems, financial services or other areas.
But these are not insurmountable obstacles. To think they are not does not amount to some modern form of appeasement. This is a straw man argument.
And what’s the alternative?
These risks not only can but must be mitigated, and this comes more possible when we work together.
We should not just sit back and passively await our fate in the wake of a major power contest.
This underestimates and gives up on the power of human, state and multilateral agency.
There are practical steps that we can pursue.
So we will play our part. We will not be passive bystanders.
Our approach will be based on key principles.
A commitment to open markets with trade relationships based on rules, not coercion.
An approach which builds resilience and sovereignty.
Respect for international law and the resolution of disputes peacefully, without the threat or use of coercive power.
And a commitment to cooperation and burden-sharing within strong and resilient regional architecture.
None of those principles is inconsistent with the natural instinct of sovereign nations to compete.
And It is not inevitable that competition leads to conflict.
We have already demonstrated that like-minded nations can take measures to help shape their own destiny.
We will continue to lead by example, developing our close web of relationships across and within the Indo-Pacific.
In recent years, we have been investing heavily in our major bilateral relationships, to advance our security and prosperity and build regional influence; encouraging regional economic integration and cooperation; and promoting rules and norms to guide peaceful cooperation.
We are stepping up our economic engagement.
Our defence cooperation is stronger than it has ever been.
We are leading collaboration on issues at the frontier of a changing world, like e-commerce, cyber security, infrastructure development, innovation and technology and maritime security.&nbsp;
We are working more closely than ever before with close partners like Japan, India, Indonesia and Vietnam.
Our special, strategic relationship with Japan is based on deep shared values, interests and beliefs. Prime Minister Abe has a vision to strengthen the international order as his leadership of the G20 this week, at the dawn of a new Reiwa era, will demonstrate.
My Government is enhancing our partnership with India, one underpinned by shared values, a plan to bring our economic relationship to a new level, and a common strategic outlook.
We are committed to being a leading security, economic and development partner for Southeast Asia.
Our vision of the Indo-Pacific has ASEAN at its core.
We have continued to push ahead with an ambitious trade agenda that has rallied the region and sustained momentum for trade liberalisation.
Under Tony Abbott’s Prime Ministership we concluded major trade deals with China, Japan and South Korea.
When the United States walked away from the Trans Pacific Partnership, we rightly pressed ahead to success under Malcolm Turnbull’s Prime Ministership. It was the biggest trade deal since the birth of the WTO and a positive affirmation of middle power diplomacy.
There is now strong interest in TPP-11 from nations both inside and outside the Asia Pacific.
This year we hope to conclude the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, an agreement that includes 16 economies and accounts for about one-third of global GDP.
It would be the first regional free trade agreement to include India and has the 10 nations of ASEAN at its core.
RCEP’s membership includes 10 out of Australia’s top 15 trading partners, account for over 60 per cent of Australia’s two-way trade, and over 70 per cent of Australia’s goods and services exports.
To conclude the agreement when leaders meet in Bangkok in November this year, I would urge leaders to send their Trade Ministers to the meeting next month in Beijing with a clear mandate to deal.
There are other priority initiatives that will add ballast to regional relationships.
Australia strongly supports Indonesian President Widodo’s vision and leadership in developing ASEAN’s ‘Outlook on the Indo-Pacific’.
Our recently-concluded Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement with Indonesia is another major step to secure Australia’s economic future and to strengthen out critical relationship with our largest neighbour.
While continuing to work with other partners in the region we will also deal directly with our great and powerful friends.
Our relationship with the US has never been stronger.&nbsp;
Ours is a resolute and mutually beneficial alliance partnership where neither party has the need to prove anything to each other.
Our alliance with the US is the bedrock of Australia’s security, providing us with irreplaceable hard power capabilities and intelligence.
Australia is a stronger regional power because of the US alliance.
We are committed to working with the US internationally because we agree it has borne too many burdens on its own.
Australia will continue to pull its weight.
And we will work with the US, as well as Japan, Indonesia, China, the EU and others, to reform international institutions, including the WTO, to ensure they’re fit for purpose and serve their members’ interests.
Because we will be more secure and prosperous in a global order based on agreed rules, not one based on the exercise of power alone.
My Government is also committed to further enhancing our relationship with China.
Our relationship with China has many strengths.&nbsp;
Our trading relationship is flourishing, with two-way trade reaching a remarkable $215 billion in 2018, which benefits both countries.&nbsp;
Our cooperation with China through our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership goes well beyond economic issues.
We are working together across fields including health, education, and taxation, where Australia offers world-class expertise.
We’ve also been cooperating successfully to counter drug trafficking through Taskforce Blaze.
There is more we can do. That’s why we established the National Foundation for Australia-China Relations earlier this year.
The Foundation will strengthen areas where we already cooperate, deepen the already rich links across our communities, and help identify new areas for practical cooperation.
I want to acknowledge the presence of the inaugural Chair of the Foundation, Warwick Smith, and thank him for his leadership. While we will be clear-eyed that our political differences will affect aspects of our engagement, we are determined that our relationship not be dominated by areas of disagreement.
The decisions we make in relation to China are based solely on our national interests, just as theirs are towards Australia, and these are sometimes hard calls to make.
But they are designed always to leave large scope for cooperation on common interests and recognise the importance of China’s economic success.
This success is good for China, it is good for Australia.
McKinsey estimates that 2.6 per cent of consumption in the rest of the world is imported from China, compared with 0.8 per cent in 2000.
Chinese imports now account for 2.0 per cent of the gross output of the rest of the world, compared with 0.4 per cent in 2000.
We welcome Chinese investment.
We have welcomed it for decades.&nbsp;
The stock of Chinese investment in Australia in 2018 was more than 8 times larger than a decade ago, and China is our ninth largest investor &nbsp;behind&nbsp; the USA, Japan, UK and the Netherlands.
Australia has the most liberal foreign investment regime in our region. It is not possible for Australians to invest in China in the way Chinese investments are made here. Perhaps this will change, but our policy is not framed in the context of reciprocity, but national interest.
We retain our sovereignty over these investments, especially in relation to strategic and national security considerations, but where such issues are satisfied, we would be only harming our own economic interests if we were to deny our economy access to this capital.
That is why we operate a non-discriminatory approach to investment screening.
And I note that all nations, including China, screen foreign investment.&nbsp;
The infrastructure needs of the region are enormous and Australia welcomes the contribution that the Belt and Road Initiative can make to regional infrastructure investment and to regional development.
We support regional investments with commercial merit that meet genuine market need and international standards, including on transparency and debt sustainability.
Finally, a key pillar of our Indo-Pacific engagement is our Pacific step up.
We have returned the Pacific to where it should be – front and centre of Australia’s strategic outlook, our foreign policy and our personal connections.
This is where we have special responsibilities as part of a Pacific family - our Vuvale, our wantok, our Whanau.
It is a fundamental building block of our engagement with the Indo-Pacific. A South Pacific that is secure strategically, stable economically and sovereign politically.
It’s where Australia can make the biggest difference&nbsp; through our initiatives including the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific, our labour market programs and undersea cable projects, for example.
A strong, stable region keeps us more secure and enables our economies to grow and our peoples to prosper.
Today I have focused principally on the economic dimensions of our regional relationships and engagement strategy. On another occasion I will address these issues from the perspective of our strategic, security and defence interests, and in turn from the perspective of our environmental and development cooperation.
I have done so, consistent with the priority I have assigned on building our economy to secure the future of Australians at our recent election.
But for today let me close by making the following observations.
There are gathering clouds in the global economy.
The trading relationship between the world’s two most important economies is under serious strain.
But an ever-worsening trajectory in this relationship is not inevitable.
We all have responsibilities to deepen patterns of co-operation, especially in the Indo-Pacific.
Australia is ready to play its part.
We embrace free trade, global engagement and an international system where we agree rules, stick to them and honour our commitments.
That is the surest path to an open, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (11:25): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and can I be the first to congratulate you on your election, again, as Speaker. In doing so, I'm sure you would agree to pass on my congratulations to all members of this House, particularly those first elected to this chamber, which is a great privilege and an enormous responsibility. I know for all of you, all of your family and friends and those who have supported you this is a very special moment. And for those who have been given the great honour and opportunity to be re-elected to this place as members of this great House, I equally congratulate you and your family and friends and others who have gathered here today to share this very important day with you.
But to you, Mr Speaker: you have many great loves and passions in this life, none greater than Pam and the boys, who I know once again will be deeply proud of their dad today. You have great passions, as we've heard, for the Carlton Football Club, your Holden panel van and many other things which we have discussed on so many occasions as great friends. But one of your great passions is this House—this chamber—and the role that it plays in our great country. You bring a real honour to this institution.
This is the second time that you have been elected unchallenged to this position following an election. I think that says much about the respect with which you are held by all members of this House. You understand its responsibility, you understand that we all come here, particularly on a day like today, expressing great hopes and noble intentions, but these are things that you have always lived—as a man, as a member of your community, in your family, as a friend and as a member of this House—and that is what best commends you to this role, more than any of each of us here.
You have a wise and calming presence in this place. The normal passions and the heat of the debate that occurs in this place you accept and you celebrate, but at the same time you temper us in those times when, of course, there is overreach.
In this role, Mr Speaker, you also do something which I think is truly great, and that is you honour and work so well with those who serve us in this chamber, and you lead them incredibly well. In congratulating you again on your elevation to Speaker today, I think you'd join me in also thanking all those who serve us in this House: the Serjeant-at-Arms, the clerks—and you'll forgive me by paying a particular thank you to the Clerk, David Elder, given what the Speaker advised us before the election; he wouldn't want us to indulge that moment too much, I know, but he enjoys the deep respect and gratitude of this House for his service—the attendants, the librarians, the cleaners, the drivers and all the support staff that make up the team that serve us here in this place. You lead that team, Mr Speaker, in your own inimitable way. Those who work for the parliament watch over this institution. They don't just serve us, the members, but more importantly they serve the Australian people. As we come together here for this first time in this place, we all know that our focus should be not on the people who are inside this building but, indeed, to serve those who are outside this building who will always remain our focus.
We thank you again, in advance, for your work in shepherding this 46th Parliament as its Speaker. Mr Speaker, I look forward, and the government looks forward, to working with you as we have always done in the past. God bless, and I wish you all the best in your endeavours and responsibilities.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (09:31): I move:
That the House record its deep regret at the death, on 16 May 2019, of the Honourable Robert James Lee (Bob) Hawke AC, a Member of this House for the Division of Wills from 1980 to 1992 and Prime Minister from 1983 to 1991, place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service, and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.

The first Prime Minister to speak at this dispatch box in this chamber in this magnificent parliament building was Robert James Lee Hawke. But that meant he was also the last Prime Minister to do so at the despatch box in the House of Representatives chamber in the old Parliament House down the hill. In so many ways, not just in that physical way, he took our country from the old to the new. He was personal enough that every Australian felt connected to him, regardless of their politics, and big enough that we actually entitled an era after him—the Hawke era.
As I said at his memorial, which I was very grateful to the Hawke family and to Blanche for being invited to participate in, Australians loved him just as he loved them. There was a great romance that played itself out in every part of this land with Bob Hawke. They knew each other, he and the Australian people. They forgave each other. They understood each other's virtues and they identified with each other's weaknesses. In Bob Hawke's own words, it was a 'love affair'—and, indeed, it was.
In 1983, Bob Hawke campaigned on the slogan 'Bringing Australia Together', and so he did. From 1983 to 1991, Bob Hawke led a government that redefined our nation for a modern age—floating the dollar, regulating the financial system, admitting foreign banks, dismantling tariffs and starting the privatisation of government owned businesses, microeconomic reform in partnership with the states and territories and retirement incomes for all workers. With sights firmly fixed on the long term with his team, Bob Hawke opened up the Australian economy to the world, increasing competition and laying the foundation for a quarter of a century and more of economic growth that continues to this day.
Now, of course it might not have seemed that way during the dislocation of the 1980s and the recession of the early 1990s, but our country had certainly, at that point, turned outward under his leadership. And I also wish to acknowledge that this work was done in a partnership, most significantly with his Treasurer Paul Keating. But it was also a work that was largely, almost completely, supported by those who sat in opposition. Now this was achieved by Bob Hawke's leadership, and that's what I acknowledge; his leadership to embrace common sense, common good, economic reforms, to make Australia stronger and to bring Australians together for that purpose. He had many fights whether in this place, within his own ranks of his own party, or outside this place, but such was his passion, such was his commitment, such was his determination to see the future of Australia going down a common path that it will be forever to his credit and we will be forever in his debt. And as a result of his vision and commitment, the tempo and direction of this economic reform agenda that indeed started under the Hawke government has continued long after that, to this day under my government and beyond.
The achievements of government under Bob Hawke were not just economic, they were social as well. After all, economies are meant to serve people. He understood that. They make those great social reforms possible. They were landmark social reforms made possible by that economic success, social reforms that became embedded in our national life, and now, in so many cases, enjoy bipartisan support that was not present when they were initiated. The Medicare card we all carry in our pockets is a reminder of his great contribution, and its promise of universal access is an achievement that has stood, and will always stand, the test of time, as does the outlawing of gender discrimination in the workplace. There was the listing of the Central Eastern Rainforest Reserves—what we know as the Gondwana Rainforests—the Wet Tropics of Queensland and the Uluru national park on the World Heritage List, and the handback of Uluru to the traditional owners, the Pitjantjatjara people. His work, along with health minister Neal Blewett, ensured Australia's response to the AIDS epidemic was the best in the world. Tens of thousands of people are alive today because of those efforts. And abroad he stood against apartheid, committed Australian forces to the liberation of Kuwait and was pivotal to the establishment of APEC, which endures to this day.
Bob Hawke was the most electorally successful federal Labor leader in our history, the winner of four successive elections, and is our third-longest-serving Prime Minister. But like John Howard, I agree that he was Labor's greatest Prime Minister. Now Bob Hawke would never accept that. He would say that that honour belongs to his hero, and the hero of so many in this place, John Curtin. And there is no doubt that war takes a great toll on prime ministers—and with that sacrifice with John Curtin there will always be great, great honour—but what Bob Hawke did with peace and in peacetime I think was the greatest tribute you could pay to those who fought for it, including John Curtin.
Some say that the path of Bob Hawke was a destiny prewritten. That was certainly what his mother believed, and his father too. When pregnant with Bob, his mother repeatedly found herself drawn to the words of Isaiah:
For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government will be upon His shoulders.
It was a legend he felt entirely comfortable with. But destiny was not an easy partner for Bob Hawke. We know that through the well-told story of his life.
Of course, Bob Hawke always revelled in his belief about the purpose of his life. It's a good thing. When he was asked to conduct Handel's 'Messiah' for his 80th birthday, which those of us who were there were able to relive, Bob felt he had to remind people that the music was actually not about him—not terribly convincing, though! When we look at the extraordinary events of 3 February 1983, one might just have to wonder. A day like none other in Australian politics in many respects: a Prime Minister seeks an early election, a Governor-General makes him wait and wait, and a Leader of the Opposition resigns. He was Leader of the Opposition for just 36 days—no doubt a great mercy! In a coincidence, the current Leader of the Opposition equals that record tomorrow.
It was to our country's fortune that Bob Hawke seemed to have more than his share of luck. When he took office, the drought broke and, of course, Australia emerged from recession—welcome developments. We only pray that that will happen now in terms of the drought. On 26 September 1983, little more than six months into the Hawke government, the nation was galvanised by an unlikely triumph in sport that we all remember. I was a young teenager at the time and I can still remember that morning. It seems like yesterday. In my mind's eye, I can still see him at the Royal Perth Yacht Club—the joy, the exhilaration, the chaos—a reformed teetotaller drenched in champagne. That gaudy red, white and blue jacket emblazoned with the word 'Australia'—how good was that! Sadly, they don't make prime ministerial jackets like that anymore. We can hear his laughter, see the way his body wrenched around, and hear a bold declaration that reminded us that this Prime Minister was very much one of all of us. Whoever we were, whatever background we had, wherever we sat within the great spectrum of Australia, he was always one of us. He was pitch perfect for the times, fearless, brash and Australian. As Australia beat the world, he was so comfortable about who we were—signature notes for the advancing tide of 1980s optimism.
If destiny was Bob Hawke's friend, he understood, as I said, it was not a passive relationship. The call to do great deeds is itself a burden, a silent contract involving an obligatory call to discipline, sacrifice and restraint, which he exercised. Bob Hawke, for all of his powers of reasoning, could also be pretty acutely visceral. A few journalists understood that from time to time, as I'm sure people on both sides of this chamber did. He had a capacity to feel, to not disguise or hide his emotions. He shed tears at times. He rose to anger. He expressed joy. He was emphatic as well, but maybe that's because he had his own share of pain. As a boy, he watched his only brother die of meningitis. As a young father, he carried an infant son, his namesake, to his grave—a pain so dreadful he could not visit his own son's grave for almost 20 years. Of course, he was fiery too. There were tears he shed over his daughter's struggle with substance abuse and the tears he shed for the victims of Tiananmen Square as well.
Through it all, we saw the totality of the man, his authenticity and imperfection. He never hid it. I'm told of a story—it may be apocryphal; I'm not sure, but I'm pretty convinced it's true—that on one occasion at Kirribilli House the AFP officer on duty on the day, who was tasked to bring forward the papers and put them in the vestibule at the entry to Kirribilli House, one morning got to see all of Bob Hawke as he opened the door in all his glory. The AFP adopted a different protocol for launching the submission of those documents each morning with greater care so as not to be exposed to the full glory of the great Robert James Lee Hawke. He did never hide himself, physically or otherwise, and Australians loved him for it.
In honour of the life and service of Bob Hawke I am pleased to announce today that the government will provide $5 million to the existing endowment fund of the General Sir John Monash Foundation to create an annual scholarship known as the Bob Hawke John Monash Scholar. The scholars chosen by the foundation will study in any field deemed in the interest of the nation. The aim will be to support, for up to three years, talented young Australians with ability and leadership potential to develop their skills at leading overseas universities. We believe that this is an appropriate way to recognise the memory of such a great Australian—to see it lived in the lives of many great Australians who will follow in his footsteps in this regard in the future.
On behalf of the government and indeed this parliament and the nation I sincerely want to extend to Mr Hawke's widow, Blanche, and to his family the deepest sympathies of our country. We share and thank you for caring for Bob through the long sunset of his life.
Again today, as I did on the day that he passed, Jenny and I particularly want to acknowledge the support and contribution of the late and wonderful Hazel Hawke, who was a tremendous support and inspiration to Bob and his family, and who is also deeply and sorely missed by a nation who loved her. Australia is grateful for the leadership and service of Robert James Lee Hawke. Australians can all rejoice for his life. Having served his country tirelessly, diligently, selflessly and passionately, may he now rest in peace.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:00): I start by welcoming to the chamber today Ambassador Culvahouse and the many others who have joined us today representing the United States. Today I rise to recognise the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11's historic trip to the moon and to honour all who made it possible, including the many Australians who were part of that amazing achievement. Fifty years ago it was said that the heavens became part of man's world, and for one priceless moment all the people of this world were truly one. The achievement of that day lives through the ages. We should never cease to marvel at that achievement nor take it for granted, nor the nation that enabled us to achieve it. The Apollo missions were missions of unparalleled risk and opportunity. As President Kennedy said at Rice University in 1962—and we could almost all say it together—'We choose to go to the moon not because it is easy but because it is hard. That goal will serve to organise and measure the best of our energies and skills.' And that's indeed what it did, inspiring generations to follow.
The decision to send a person to the moon ultimately involved the efforts and toil of 400,000 men and women for almost a decade. I'm sure many members and many outside of this place have taken the opportunity to watch many of the documentaries that have been airing and to marvel again at the tremendous stories. I took that opportunity with my kids over the weekend. These 400,000 men and women included 700 Australians. Every part of their effort was vital. Every challenge was interconnected with every other part of their mission. Nothing could be left undone, because the consequences of failure were too great. All who worked on the Apollo program carried the burden of Apollo 1, when astronauts Virgil Grissom, Ed White and Roger Chaffee were incinerated in the command module.
Australia's involvement in the Apollo missions was through our tracking facilities. NASA located these stations around the world at equidistant points in California, Spain and Australia. Communications to the Apollo missions depended on these tracking stations. As&nbsp;The Canberra Times&nbsp;wrote of the stations at Honeysuckle and Tidbinbilla, 'the road to the moon leads through Tharwa', and it did. The tracking stations formed part of the electromagnetic umbilical cord through which information travelled 186,000 miles per second. In the words of historian and author Andrew Tink, who I understand is in the building today, 'Without the tracking stations, mission control would have been deaf, dumb and blind to astronauts on the moon, and vice versa.'
Under the leadership of Tom Reid, who as many Canberrans would know is the late husband of former senator Margaret Reid, Honeysuckle, Tidbinbilla and Parkes all played their part in a remarkable moment for humanity. It is a remarkable thing that we rarely say that Americans went to the moon, though that is a statement of obvious fact. Rather, to us it wasn't just Americans who went to the moon; it was humankind that went to the moon. That's because the United States, through its actions, embodied the best of us and all of us. Buzz Aldrin said, 'The Apollo missions stand as a symbol of the insatiable curiosity of all mankind to explore the unknown.' They remind us that through united, concerted and unrelenting effort we can meet the challenges of our age: cancer, disease, water, climate, race—all things that challenge us.
Fifty years ago our Prime Minister, along with others, was asked to write a message which was inscribed on a disc that was left on the moon's surface. John Gorton wrote:
This is a dramatic fulfilment of man's urge to go 'always a little further'.
May the high courage and the technical genius which made this achievement possible be so used in the future that mankind will live in a universe in which peace, self-expression and the chance of dangerous adventure are available to all.

Fifty years on, that is the lesson of Apollo 11, and the world will forever be grateful.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:01): On indulgence, and at the strong suggestion of the Deputy Prime Minister, I move:
That this House record its remembrance of the 75th anniversary of the Cowra breakout and offer its thanks to those who gave their lives in service to Australia, remember the costs of war that are inflicted on all peoples and recognise the people of Cowra for their contribution to reconciliation and Australia's contemporary relationship with Japan, an ongoing relationship with Japan, a great friend.

Cowra is, in the words of a former Japanese ambassador to Australia, the spiritual home of Australia-Japan relations. The story of Cowra is the story of unimaginable consequences, militaristic ideology, the goodness of ordinary people and the willingness of two enemies to become the best of friends. During the Second World War, Cowra was the location of prisoner-of-war and internment camps that housed thousands of Japanese and Italian prisoners of war and Indonesian civilian internees.
The Cowra breakout of 5 August 1944 was neither expected nor, in its time, properly understood. By all accounts, the relations between captors and prisoners before the breakout were benign. Cowra was a world away from the war and its many fronts. The prisoners were not required to work. The camp met the requirements of the Geneva convention and it was regularly inspected by representatives of the International Red Cross. But, below the surface, there was a cauldron of angst and despair. Japanese prisoners felt deep shame about being in captivity. The words of their field service code were clear: do not in death leave to posterity a stain on your honour by having suffered in life the disgrace of being a prisoner.
At Cowra, in the words of the Red Cross delegate, the Japanese soldiers experienced moral isolation. To them, they had been disowned and discarded. They were dead to all but themselves. They lived in a deep and mistaken sense of shame. This adherence to a militaristic code of duty resulted in the men deciding to break out of Cowra and end their lives.
On 5 August 1944, at two in the morning, around 1,000 Japanese prisoners of war, armed with improvised weapons such as kitchen knives, baseball bats and pieces of wood, attempted to break out from the Cowra detention camp. They met brave resistance from Australian soldiers. Three Australian soldiers were killed that night: Private Benjamin Gower Hardy and Private Ralph Jones, who were posthumously awarded the George Cross, and Private Charles Henry Shepherd. Three more men were wounded. Another Australian serviceman, Lieutenant Harry Doncaster, was ambushed and killed during the recapture of the prisoners. During the breakout, 234 Japanese servicemen died—many at their own hand, some at the hands of their comrades, all in line with the perceived expectations placed upon them. A subsequent military court of inquiry found that conditions at the camp were in full accordance with the Geneva conventions and that the actions of the Australian garrison resisting attack averted an even greater loss of life.
It was after war's end that something deep, wonderful, and human started to occur at Cowra. In 1946 the men of the Cowra sub-branch of the RSL noticed that the graves of the Australian soldiers who were killed during the outbreak were unkempt and overgrown. The men started to tend them. Then it was noticed that the Japanese graves nearby were also untended, so their working bees were extended. In time they started to plant trees: gums, kurrajongs, wattles, pines and oleanders. Gardening became meditative and, through pulling up the weeds, mowing the lawns, carting water and planting trees, forgiveness was found. Peace and reconciliation were found.
In 1964 it became an official war cemetery. It's the only Japanese war cemetery outside of Japan anywhere in the world. Today the Australians and Japanese both lie in peace in Cowra soil. And that was just the start. A Japanese garden and cultural centre was built, student exchanges and cultural exchanges took place and, in time, the former prisoners would return as free men to Cowra and bring their families. They were welcomed in our country by Australians as friends. The Cowra peace bell is a tribute to their ongoing commitment to peace and the spirit of friendship, respect and reconciliation that now unites Australia and Japan.
Seventy-five years on we pause to reflect on the price of war and the courage of all those who accept the burden of service, we pause to honour the past and ensure it is never forgotten and we give thanks that, in the years after the brutality of war, Australia and Japan have forged a deep and enduring friendship. I can think of no better reflection of that than the honour I had to join Prime Minister Abe in Darwin as we remembered the bombing of Darwin—an act of silent grace by Prime Minister Abe that I've never seen before. On this anniversary we remember all who lost their lives, both Australian and Japanese, and commit ourselves to a world in which such conflicts are consigned to history and peace is our future.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (15:18): I move:
That this House place on record its appreciation of the long and meritorious service to the Parliament by the Clerk of the House, Mr David Elder, and extend to him and his wife and family every wish for a healthy and happy retirement.

The Clerk is a very humble man. He has been a gentle reminder to all of us who have had the good grace to serve in this parliament during his tenure, whether here or down the road—and there are many who have had that opportunity; hundreds of members, if not over a thousand, whom he's stewarded have come through this place—of the dignity and great honour it is to serve in this chamber. There are 151 members here, many of those for the first time, following the last election. All of us remember—I'm sure new members do, because it was only a few weeks ago for them, and I'm sure all of us do, whether it was 12 years ago, as it was for me, or much longer than that, as it was for the Leader of the Opposition, who was first elected back in 1996—the day when we first walked onto this carpet and how special a privilege it was for us.
We approach the parliament in the morning, and we look up at this atrium; you leave the chamber, you see the flag and you nod to the Speaker—a reminder of our country, our history and our responsibility to it. It's something that connects us all, despite our often very significant differences at a partisan or any other level. But we are united in this, and this House is united in showing its deep appreciation to the Clerk.
This place doesn't just rely on the beliefs, the courage, the passion and the integrity of all of those who come here and the enthusiasms of all of us who have been elected; it also relies on the dignity and institution of this House—the impartiality, the judgement and the enthusiasm of those who serve this parliament, whether as Clerk, attendants, Serjeant-at-Arms or others. Our Clerk—the 16th Clerk of the House of Representatives—has worked, as the Speaker has just reminded us, in this building and the one down the road for 38 years. I'm pleased you've only had nine prime ministers, not 10!
Mr Albanese: Don't speak too soon!
Mr Morrison: It's his last day, mate, so I can be confident of that!
But, in keeping with the tradition of all those years, he has not spoken a word in this parliament in one of these microphones. You won't find any word he's said in the&nbsp;Hansard, really, in terms of offering commentary on bills or anything of that nature. Though he has been among us, he has not joined us in those debates, muttering interjections or any of those things, but for 38 years he's let his actions speak for him in the dignified way that he's conducted himself—his judgement, his integrity, his demeanour. We have seen the true character of the Clerk through the very decent, honest man that he is. He reminds us that we are all—from the father of the House to the newest member—only temporary custodians of this institution which we inhabit for a time.
So, can I say more informally to you, David: thank you for your service to our country and to this parliament. You have served it with tender love and devotion, because that has been your passion and your service, and we thank you. We thank you for your dedication. We wish a very happy and long retirement to you, Louise and your family, who have earned, I have no doubt, this retirement with you that you can share with them. So, on behalf of the government, I want to extend our thanks and appreciation for everything you have done for us, for this parliament and for our democracy. May God bless you.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much Martin.
Can I also join you in welcoming my colleagues who are here today, Greg Hunt who is also the Minister assisting me for the public service, to Ben Morton, to Zed&nbsp;Seselja, and to those who may be linking in from other places.
Can I also Martin, place on record my appreciation and that of the Government and all the Governments’ if I can be so bold, to say that you’ve served- for your service, can I thank you for your advice personally, and can I thank you for your dedication to the welfare of the Australian people over an outstanding public service career.&nbsp;
Over almost four decades - we’re having a dinner at the Lodge tonight for Martin and Heather and a number of friends and we can reflect on four decades of stories I’m sure, and that has included more than a decade at the helm of three different Departments, and great Departments of this public service. You’ve been committed to fearless advice, no one can accuse you, not of doing that, to policy reform and making this country a better place.
I wish you and Heather all the very best for the new challenges that lay ahead and we’re a grateful nation thank you very much.
Please thank Martin Parkinson.
I want to also acknowledge all the other Secretaries who are here today, including the incoming Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Phil Gaetjens who tells me his tie is where it’s always been- at home! Not around his neck. There are many things I’m familiar with with Phil, not just that. And congratulations to you Phil and I’m sure you’ll pick that up in the weeks ahead, and I look forward to working with you.
This place, our Parliament House, is on Ngunnawal land.&nbsp; Can I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people, their elders past, present, and those importantly, who are emerging, who we want to encourage and who we want to celebrate.
To any servicemen and women who are here today, to any veterans particularly as yesterday we marked the commemoration of Vietnam vets. Can I say to you, simply on behalf of our nation: ‘Thank you for your service’.
And today of all days I want to widen the circle to all who serve the Australian public in the APS; those of you in this room, or across Australia, wherever you happen to be in every state and territory as well as overseas, thank you for what you do for our country and all of your fellow citizens.
More than 240,000 Australians work for the Commonwealth Government in one form or another.
About 80,000 are in the ADF. Add to that another 16,000 or so in the civilian arm of the APS providing for our nation’s defence.
There are thousands more men and women in Home Affairs and our other security agencies, working every day to keep Australians safe through intelligence gathering, securing our borders, counter-terrorism, taking up the fight to those who would seek to do us harm.
One of the greatest achievements of these agencies is 16 thwarted terrorist attacks and that’s something that the heads of those agencies can be very proud to have been able to achieve.
Thousands more are devoted to growing our economy, because we all know everything else stems from that. And ensuring Australians get a fair go in their daily lives, delivering on our infrastructure program, making our industries more competitive, opening up new markets, enforcing our corporate laws.
The list goes on – some 19,000 people in the Tax Office ensuring everyone pays their fair share according to the laws of this country, we think people should pay less tax, but they should all pay the taxes that they should pay. And to share the support of the services- and to provide the support for the services we all need by providing that tax revenue. There’s about 6,000 people administering $85 billion worth in health funding a year; and more than 5,000 people running our legal and integrity systems at the Commonwealth level.
Or the roughly 11,000 Australians in agencies working on cutting edge science, from CSIRO to Geoscience Australia; from the tropical North to Antarctica.
I could go on, but this snapshot tells you we’re a pretty big show it’s complex, it’s extraordinarily diverse in all of its functions.
To meet the challenges of today and tomorrow, it also needs, as it has been, needs to be professional, capable, flexible, technology-enabled, citizen-focused, as Martin was saying, and open to outsiders and diverse viewpoints, both within and without.
And while the upholding of the best traditions of integrity at the same time, accountability and service that have been hallmarks of an apolitical APS for the past 118 years.
Today I want to place six guideposts out there to show the way forward as I see it as Prime Minister and for my Government for the public service, for the evolution of our public service and priorities for the future.
My remarks today are framed by a humble recognition that modern government is hard. Change is ever present. Expectations of the public have never been greater. And just as it is in business, the customer - and in our case, the public - is always right.
To support the Government across multiple, fast-moving policy and implementation challenges, the APS needs to evolve. Nothing new about that. In some cases, conventional wisdom needs to be challenged.
And most importantly, in whatever role you have in the public service, we need to make sure you have a clear line of sight, from wherever you are, whether you’re up in Bamaga, or over in Bunbury, whether you’re here in Belconnen, wherever you sit, whatever you do, if there’s something between you and the people you’re trying to serve, in your view, then we’ve got to deal with that. You need a clear line of sight between what you are doing everyday, every decision you’re making every day, every contribution you’re making every day, straight through to the Australian public. It’s not about impressing your boss or impressing your Minister, or- we’re just people along the way.
That clear line of sight is what I would want every single person who works in the Commonwealth Public Service, whether it’s me, whether its Ben or Stuey, or whoever in Ministerial ranks, Secretaries, or the first year recruit into the public service. A clear line of sight. So I hope therefore my remarks today will give you a better idea, a greater understanding of how the APS can better support the government and through the government, our nation.
Now my first guidepost is one I spoke of when I announced Phil Gaetjens’ appointment.
It goes to the heart of the relationship between the Executive branch and the public service that enables all of us to do a good job. We have to get our relationship right between Ministers and the public service.
Because the best teams are the ones where everyone knows what their job is and they do their job well rather than being in a constant running commentary about the job someone else should be doing. I’ve seen those teams. They lose. The teams where everyone knows what their jobs is, what their role is, and focus on that, those teams win. And we’re going to be a winning team.
My approach as many of you would know and who’ve worked with me in other portfolios, and it’s been my great privilege to have serves as a Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, as a Minister for Social Services, as the Treasurer and of course now as Prime Minister. I have enjoyed wonderful relationships with the public servants that I have worked with at senior and junior levels. And my approach has been based on a simple, straight-forward formula for managing that relationship– respect and expect.
Respect the experience, professionalism and capability that the public service brings to the table, both in terms of policy advice and implementation skills. And then having set the policy direction, expect them to get on and deliver it.
It is also about respecting the fact that responsibility for setting policy, for making those calls and decisions lies with the elected representatives of the people, and expecting Ministers to provide that leadership and direction.
Now this imposes an important responsibility, I think, on Ministers. And I’ve made this very clear to my Ministers. They must be clear in what they are asking of the public service. They must not allow a policy leadership vacuum to be created, and expect the public service to fill it and do effectively the job of Ministers.
One of the worst criticisms I can tell you, in the locker room of politicians, that one politician can make of another, is that they’ve become a captive of their department as a Minister. Now that is not a reflection on the department, not at all, not at all, but indeed on the Minister. It speaks to a Minister not driving their policy agenda. Nature abhors a vacuum just as much here in Canberra as anywhere else. And it will get filled. And I expect my Ministers to be in the center driving policy agendas for their agencies and departments. And so I’ve selected and tasked my Ministers top set and drive the agenda of the Government. I believe the public have a similar expectation of my Ministers as well.
This is very important for how accountability is designed to work in our Westminster democracy.
Ministers are accountable to the Parliament and to the public through our democratic process for the policies of the Government. Now I know you all know this but it bears repeating in the context of this principal, a public servant providing advice in a well prepared brief will and must exercise all due diligence and professional care in its preparation, and be absolutely certain and passionate about what they put in that document. But ultimately it is the Minister who must decide, whether approve or not approve, to provide comment, feedback, as they appreciate, because ultimately it is the Minister who will be held accountable by the public. And that’s how it should be.
Only those who have put their name on a ballot can really understand the significance of that accountability. As much as you might appreciate the Westminster system, until you put your name on a ballot, that changes everything.
So I know that sometimes you may feel frustrated, or go how on earth my brief was so perfect, as I’m sure they all are, at the end of the day our Ministers, I, my colleagues, have got to look constituents in the eye, face the public, look them in the eye, and be responsible for those decisions. And that gives you a very unique perspective.
When I played Rugby, my coach used to describe this difference as the bacon and eggs principle, the chicken is involved, but the pig is absolutely committed to the task. It’ll catch on.
That is why under our system of Government it must be Ministers who set that policy direction.
And it is why, having set that direction, they will have high expectations, as they should, of the public service when it comes to implementation and delivery of the Government’s agenda.
You are our professional partners in this undertaking.
The public service is the indispensable engine room for any successful government in delivering on its commitments to Australians. I mean this most sincerely.
I have always believed that, guided by clear direction from Ministers, the public service is at its best when it is getting on with the job of delivering the services Australians rely on and ensuring Governments can implement the policies they have been elected to deliver for the Australian people.
It’s important not only to establish clear lines of accountability. It is also fundamental to ensure our democracy keeps faith with the Australian people.
That’s what ‘respect and expect’ is all about.
My second guidepost is one I spoke to Secretaries about with the Deputy Prime Minister, in May, even before I had recommended my Ministry to the Governor-General.
You’ll remember President Clinton and his famous lines about “it’s about the economy, stupid” he would say.
Well for us, “It’s about the implementation”. That’s and important guidepost.
We need a step-change on service delivery.
Ensuring services are delivered seamlessly and efficiently, when and where they are needed, this is a key priority, the key priority of my Government.
Just as good business strategy is always about how you execute it, the same is true in Government policy. It’s only ever as good as its implementation. And you are the implementers.
I don’t know how many beautiful strategy documents I’ve seen over my course of life, in public service and in other fields, people can celebrate these strategy documents, they can be incredibly impressive, but I tell you what, the only strategies that are any good are the ones that are implemented and work.
And the ultimate test of a strategy is not how pretty it looks, but how well it’s done.
Good government is about receiving excellent policy advice. But that advice is only as good as the consideration in detail that it gives to implementation and execution.
And this is not an exercise in providing a detached or dispassionate summary of the risks that can be logged in the “told you so” file for future reference in memoirs.
It’s about telling Governments how things can be done, not just the risks of doing them, or saying why they shouldn’t be done. The public service is meant to be an enabler of Government policy not an obstacle.
The Australian people need to be at the centre of APS service delivery. That is the thinking behind Services Australia. This isn’t some fancy re-branding exercise.
It’s a message to the whole of the APS – top-to-bottom – about what matters to people.
It’s about what I call ‘doing the little things well’ – everything from reducing call waiting times and turnaround on correspondence, right through to improving the experience people have as they walk into a Centrelink office or any other government service office around the country.
I want to send a message to everyone who is in the service, in whatever role you have – you can make a difference to the lives of the Australian people.
We all have a job to do and that is to serve them.
I’ve talked about the need for a culture of regulatory congestion busting in our bureaucracy.
That doesn’t mean cutting corners or not meeting regulatory requirements.
But it does mean being relentless in finding ways to help Australians make things happen and reach their goals. Not sitting passively while families and businesses struggle to navigate unnecessary rules and unnecessary regulations.
We need interactions with government to be simpler, more human, and less bureaucratic.
Whether it be in delivering services like the NDIS, or rolling out our ambitious infrastructure program, or removing unnecessary barriers to business investment.
It’s why I have tasked my Assistant Minister Ben Morton with revitalising our regulatory reform and deregulation agenda, with a new Deregulation Taskforce which is being led by the Treasurer, out of Treasury.
A key focus is on working with business to identify and remove unnecessary barriers to investment, with a focus on sectors and activities which have the most to gain.
At the departmental level, Secretaries will need to be proactive in identifying ways to bust congestion in the Commonwealth bureaucracy. And all Ministers will continue to remain responsible for ensuring that regulations in their portfolios are fit-for-purpose.
I also want congestion busted in the public service hierarchy which can block your contribution. You don’t have to be in the SES to have a good idea. Did anyone know that’s true? I saw this in Treasury when I used to do budgets.
I used to love going down to the Treasury building in those weeks before the Budget. People there eating pizza well into the night, working really hard, and taking great pride in their work. I remember one night I sat down and I spoke to one of the officers who was working on one of the statements in the Budget which had to do with good debt and bad debt. And I remember meeting one of- their parent, their father, I forget where it was around the country one day, and he reflected this conversation I’d had with his daughter that night. And he was terribly proud of the work that she was doing. And there she was, crunching away there in the bowels of Treasury, in the middle of a Budget process making a big difference to understanding how we treat debt in this country. And really changing the conversation, taking pride in their work.
It was the same when I would go out to the Social Services when Finn Pratt was the Secretary and I remember talking to that wonderful little team that was working on distribution modelling when we were going through some social services reforms a few years ago, and one of them from- I recall, was actually there on an internship I think at the time or they were recent recruit, and couldn’t believe that in their first year in the service here they were sitting down with a Minister crunching through distribution modelling processes.
More recently I visited DFAT and I particularly want to commend there, Frances on the outstanding job she’s doing as secretary of DFAT and I want to thank the- I went there to thank the officers who had worked in difficult situations regarding getting children out of some of the most unsafe places in the world, who had secured one of our citizen’s safe release out of North Korea and my favourite, I could almost say my favourite part of the public service, I’m spending so much time with them recently, the Office of the Pacific, driving our Step Up initiative. And to say thank you to Ewen&nbsp;and all the team there.
I mean this stuff, I get it, I see it, I appreciate it.
And of course during my time at immigration and border protection, the remarkable and courageous efforts of everyone involved in Operation Sovereign Borders. Many of the most critical initiatives that came out of OSB and some of the most initiative were the product of the contribution of line officers in the public sector, working together in teams and focusing on solutions, not problems. Public service at its best.
And I want to harness that to enable your meaningful impact on the decision making process.
I am concerned, I recently learned that in a survey, just over a quarter of the APS does not really feel they can impact what’s going on. That really does concern me. I want people in the APS to feel they can make a contribution. I don’t want you to feel shut out. You need to feel that you can make a difference. Otherwise why are you here? I make the assumption that you’re here to make a difference and I think that assumption is absolutely correct.
Now to be a bit harsh, I think that result is a failure of public service management to enable that real engagement. We’ve got to work harder on that. This is one of the things I expect to see our public service leaders change in the future.
I want to draw further down into the public service for advice to those doing things on the ground. I want more input from you, more visibly in what’s coming through to me in my office and the offices of my Ministers. I want the gatekeepers who control access to Ministers to ease up a bit and let you in. Let me see what others are thinking.
So don’t be surprised if you find yourself in my office or one of my Minister’s office in the future, wherever you happen to sit. And if you get a call and someone who says they’re the PM, it may not be a prank call.
But after this speech, I suspect there’ll be many such prank calls in the next 24 hours.
My third guidepost is called “look at the scoreboard”.
We must have a strong emphasis on delivering outcomes, with priorities, targets and metrics across all portfolios. That’s not new.
Faced with scarce resources, setting priorities is essential. Setting targets and metrics at the same time helps us stay on track. And this is the point. Sure it provides some necessary accountability when performance measures are in place, for people management but the real purpose is to ensure we are getting done what we set out to do.
There are three basic questions I would ask you all to consider every day at work:
1.&nbsp;&nbsp; What are you trying to do?
2. &nbsp; How do you know you’re on track to get there?
3.&nbsp;&nbsp; What does it look like when you’ve got there?
In other words what does success look like, at the start, along the way and at the end?
This is the information that helps me and my Cabinet be informed to make the decisions and adjustments to policy that keeps us heading in the right direction, and providing you with the clarity you need to get on with your job.
A friend of Stuart Roberts’ and mine, General Jim Molan used to have this great sign, stating that no strategy ever survives contact with the enemy. And you know, things have to be changed along the way. And the only way you know that is based on the data and information that’s coming back. That doesn’t mean that the programme’s failing, it just means that you need to constantly adjust and stay focused on your goal.
I want public servants to know and share in the success of public policy. I want you to feel good about what you do, the contribution you make and the positive difference you can make to the country and its future. Because otherwise, again, what is the point?
If your success is measured solely in career advancement through the seemingly infinite grades of the public service, I don’t think that’s enough. It’s not what I want as a citizen from my public service, let alone as the Prime Minister. And I think the overwhelming majority of public servants feel the same way.
Rather than complicating your life, I would suggest these three questions that I’ve outlined, open the door to a more satisfying APS career for you and a better experience for the Australian public.
My Government will continue to set clear priorities and strong targets for the APS.
I have established with Martin’s great assistance and leadership, a dedicated Priorities and Delivery Unit in PM&amp;C and all Cabinet Ministers are developing their own set of objectives and targets.
This is something we’ve been doing a lot of work on since the election. We’ve made good progress, but there’s a lot more to be done.
Now the fourth guidepost is called, I’m sure you’ll love this one “look beyond the bubble”.
There are many highly organised and well-resourced interests in our democracy. They come to Canberra often. They are on the airwaves, they’re on the news channels. They meet regularly with politicians, advisers and departments to advance the policy ideas and causes on behalf of those who they represent.
Some will be corporate interests. Some will be advocating for more welfare spending or bigger social programs. Many will be looking for a bigger slice of government resources.
Yet the vast majority of Australians will never come to Canberra to lobby government. They won’t stay at the Hyatt. They won’t have lunch at the Ottoman. They won’t kick back at the Chairman’s Lounge at Canberra airport after a day of meetings.
And what these Australians who don’t do those things do every day is work hard. They pay their taxes. They put their kids through school. They look after their families. They give back to their communities and they are the centre of my focus as PM and my Government.
These are your stakeholders, not the myriad of vested and organised interests that parade through this place.
They rely, those Australians I’m speaking of on the services that you deliver, that make their lives just that bit easier and better. And they want value for money for those services, through the taxes that they’re paying.
They expect governments to focus on what matters to them:
-&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; A strong economy that generates more and better jobs and better paid jobs.
-&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Ensuring Australians are kept safe from threats abroad and at home, it’s a convulsing world at the moment, and we all have a job to keep calm and to provide that reassurance to them
-&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Making sure services are reliable and responsive to their needs.
I want the APS to have a laser-like focus on serving these quiet Australians. Those who don’t meet here, and you never hear from largely, they’re too busy doing life. Australians who just get on with it, but who often feel their voice gets drowned out by the shoutier ones in the public sphere and parading through this place.
There is strong evidence that the “trust deficit” that has afflicted many Western democracies over recent years stems in part from a perception that politics is very responsive to those at the top and those at the bottom, but not so much to those in the middle.
This will not be the case under my Government.
Middle Australia needs to know that the Government and including the public service, is on their side.
My fifth guidepost and forgive me to all the AFL people in the room, but I’m going to use a Rugby League example, feel free to apply your favourite AFL player of all time- I know the Minister for Health is going to do this, but given I’m a Rugby League fan and my Chief of Staff is, we’re using a Rugby League one from this podium today- it is called the Ray Price principle, those of you who know of the Rugby League legend from Parramatta, Mike Pezzullo will well know about this, he’s known as Mr Perpetual Motion.
Ray was everywhere. His work rate was unmatched. The conditions, his opponents, never fazed him. He could read the play and always stay ahead of the game.
The APS needs to be the same. It needs to evolve and adapt amidst constant change. Old ways of doing things need to be challenged and, if necessary, disrupted.
As you know, David Thodey is leading, and is completing now, finalising now, his major review of the APS and I expect his report to pick up this theme of how the service needs to change so it can respond to new and emerging challenges – economic, social, technological and geo-political.
We need the APS to be an exemplar of innovation and adaptability. More agile and more responsive to the public where they live.
There are many dimensions to this challenge, let me focus on three quickly.
Firstly, we need the public service to be more open to outsiders.
Information has never been more available and expertise in our society has never been more dispersed. Citizens from all walks of life have never had more outlets to express their views – their likes and their dislikes.
To succeed, government needs to tap these insights, and these skills and energy from more points on the compass than those who have only ever worked in the public service.
While some of our brightest minds will want a lifetime career in the federal bureaucracy, many of you here, many Australian’s won’t. And we need to find ways for smart, dedicated Australians to see a stint in the public service as part of their career journey.
And likewise for those who’ve chosen a life as career public servants to see that time outside of the APS in the non-government sector and in the business sector, that that is also an important part of their career journey. And their career choice. Their life choice. The APS system should reinforce and reward these choices. And I’m not confident it currently does.
This is about reinforcing two important values as the Health Minister and Assistant Minister- Minister assisting me for the public service reminded me of just over the weekend.
First the importance of outside and mid-career experienced recruits to informing the understanding of how sectors and the economy operate on the ground.
Second, the career development value for long term public servants of their own experience in the private sector. In the same way as experience in a ministerial office is valued, so should be a private sector secondment.
The APS needs to be world-class at collaborating with external partners on all the challenges we face as a country – everything from grasping the productivity opportunity of the digital economy, to ending the export of waste to using Big Data to dramatically improve service delivery.
The second area where disruption and cultural change are needed is in breaking down the bureaucratic silos and hierarchies that constrain our capacity to fix problems.
We’ve only had this problem in the public service for 118 years.
We need an APS that’s more joined-up internally and flexible in responding to challenges and opportunities.
The model I’m most proud of in recent times, and there are many, is the way the APS responded to assist Australians in North Queensland hit by the devastating floods earlier this year.
It highlighted the way I like to work as well: pulling the right people together, removing obstacles to the delivery of programs, engaging with those most affected on the ground, and demonstrating that the Government can be there for them when they need it most.
This really made a difference. It saved lives, literally, and it saved livelihoods. And it saved a way of life, in Australia that has been there for hundreds of years.
This is the sort of agile and responsive public service, which Shane Stone most recently had the privilege to just lead that small team. That sort of attitude we need to further build across all arms of government as Australia navigates rapid change and a more uncertain world.
It will require departments to become more adept at reallocating resources to fit changing priorities. Not just ask for more. Because Mathias will say no. I know it can be done because I have driven it myself in three different portfolios prior to service as Prime Minister.
The third area of disruption is obviously greater use of digital technology which Minister Robert is very closely involved in.
The digital revolution - with the exponential rise in connectivity, data generation, processing power and personalised service delivery - continues to reshape our jobs, industries and lives on a daily basis.
With our fellow Australians among the most enthusiastic early adopters of technology in the world, harnessing the power of digital technology is not an option for the Australian Government. It’s the future of it.&nbsp;
Government needs to connect instantaneously and seamlessly with Australians to answer questions, provide services, make payments and solve problems. I like how Martin referred to it before, when they engage with the public service they don’t feel like they’re going back in time.
So providing a roadmap for our work on data and digital transformation is important, and that’s what the Digital Transformation Strategy did last year and our goal is to have all government services available digitally by 2025.
This is part of a broader transformation, of challenge that includes tailoring policies and service delivery to individuals and local communities and using data and analytics for better policy and service delivery.
Just as technology opens up new opportunities, it also creates new vulnerabilities. Whether it be working through the ethical and privacy dimensions of the digital revolution or protecting our systems and our national security from malicious cyber activity, the Australian Government cannot be anywhere but on the forefront, on the frontier of that activity.&nbsp;
Now you’ll be pleased to know, I’m getting to the end.
My sixth and final guidepost is “honour the code”.
It’s something that I observed amongst the veteran’s community, and I take, and I’d encourage you to take your lesson from them, and our serving men and women in the ADF. They are bound together by a code, an unbreakable code. That sees them act at the highest levels of integrity under the most extreme levels of pressure. It is that code that keeps them together and where that code fails or where that code breaks, then we know what the consequences of that can be.
It’s about governance and integrity across the service.
I want to reaffirm my Government’s and my personal commitment to an APS that is apolitical, merit based and committed to the highest standards of integrity.
These core elements of the Westminster tradition are as important as they have ever been, not least to securing the trust and legitimacy of democratic government that is needed to implement good policy and to deliver services successfully.
And on the critical relationship between Ministers, their staff and the bureaucracy, let me underscore what I have said directly to all of my Ministers. I expect my Ministers to be demanding. I also expect them and all of their staff to discharge their responsibilities with the highest standards of professionalism and within a values framework of mutual respect. And where that isn’t occurring, there are ways and processes to deal with that.
It’s important we value diversity of course in the public service. This is right in and of itself. It is in keeping with the more diverse, pluralistic society Australia has become over many decades. And it chimes with our national ethos of “live and let live”.
I believe a commitment to diversity should encompass diversity of viewpoints within the APS. There is compelling evidence that this helps teams find answers to complex problems by bringing together people who approach questions from different points of view.
The American academic Jonathan Haidt has made this point powerfully in challenging worrying trends toward conformity in the university sector. And I think his observations are relevant to the future of our public service.
It’s vital that the APS avoid the sort of stale conventional wisdoms and orthodoxies that can infuse all large organisations.
I expect there will be more debate on those issues as I have raised today throughout my address when the Independent Review of the APS, the Thodey Review, is received by the Government formally.
The review will be finalised shortly and I want to thank in particular, David Thodey who I’ve already had an opportunity to meet with, and the review panel for their time and commitment to this exercise. It’s been a big undertaking. And it’s been a fair dinkum effort.
Once the report has been received, I will be asking the Secretaries Board under Phil Gaetjen’s leadership to evaluate the review’s recommendations and to report to Cabinet on relevant issues and findings.
So as we gather here in this Great Hall, I want to remind you of a poignant feature of this house of democracy.
This is one of the few parliamentary buildings in the world where you don’t have to walk up steps to enter it.
Our Parliament isn’t a Parliament over the people or above them, but one that people, that Australians, can freely and easily approach.
I want this to be a metaphor for how Australians see their government. And our government.
Our work is not governing over people, but to humbly govern for people. With a clear line of sight always to those people.
Working with people.
Governing for all Australians.
Delivering for them and never letting anything get in your line of sight between you and the people you have chosen to serve, as much as I have.
It is a privilege to serve the Australian people and I am grateful for the enthusiasm and passion of our public service who share this good, and decent and honourable vocation.
Thank you very much for your attention today, I know I’ve unloaded a lot on your today, but I thought it was really important, at the outset of this term, for me to give you a very clear understanding of where I’m coming from, and where my team’s coming from. And we very much look forward to working with you in the years ahead.
Thank you for your attention.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much Michael.&nbsp;
Tim wasn't someone given to disappointment, but there were exceptions. He was Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Trade and he was on a visit to India.&nbsp;
He was in New Delhi and his staff had noticed that an interesting meeting had appeared on his schedule. He was to meet with the Indian Minister for Transport. Tim was particularly excited about this day.
He was going to have this meeting on his own - staff were not permitted to go into this special meeting that it would seem that he had personally arranged.&nbsp;
On that day, he went in, sat down with the Minister for Transport. Staff waited patiently outside - it was a rather lengthy meeting - and as he came out, the staff noticed that he had a very glum look on his face. A very frustrated look on his face.&nbsp;
And they said, “What’s up Boss?”&nbsp;
“That man doesn't know his trains!”&nbsp;
It's true. Tim Fischer had a great love of trains, a boyhood fascination that stayed with him for life, and we all have a train story about Tim.&nbsp;
But when I spoke to Judy the other day from Vietnam, she said, “I hope people remember more than Tim than his love of trains.”&nbsp;
And that's what we're doing here today.&nbsp;
It was one of many things we loved about him but Tim was so much more than that.&nbsp;
Today we gather to celebrate the life of Timothy Andrew Fischer AC. We gather with Judy, with Harrison and Dominic to extend to them all of our comfort, all of our love and all of our support and to give thanks for your remarkable husband and father of whom I know you are truly proud.&nbsp;
We gather amongst friends to farewell a dear and true friend. We gather as Australians to honour a veteran, a colleague, and a patriot who served his country faithfully and well.&nbsp;
Tim Fischer was an original. Emphatically made in Australia. He was - and I'm sure Macca wouldn't mind me saying - Australia All Over.&nbsp;
A big man in every sense of the word, as big as the country he loved and served.
His big hat, his big hands, his big frame, his big beliefs and passions, his big view of Australia, and of Australians. He had a big courage, but one he combined with a gentle and forgiving kindness that understood human frailty.&nbsp;
He was a deeply honest man, and he was no stranger to humility.&nbsp;
I heard a preacher say once, “God uses those who care.”&nbsp;
In Tim Fischer, this gave God a lot to work with.&nbsp;
Tim was infectious. For Tim, life was about people.&nbsp;
He had the ability to focus all of his attention on you. He would give himself over completely in his engagement with you - you had his attention, you mattered. He listened and he always remembered.&nbsp;
I was having a beer with Tim once at the Gardeners Inn pub up in Blackheath one night and a fellow came up to him and he said, “You won’t remember me.”&nbsp;
And as I'm sure you know, he remembered his name, he remembered what he talked about and where he met him and it was something like twenty three years previous.
Rule number one - we were just hearing of rules number two and three - of Tim's list of tips for new MPs was to ensure they kept in touch with at least 10 close friends from outside of politics to ensure they kept those friendships alive.&nbsp;
Tim understood the value of people in his life and he never expected anyone else to do what he wouldn't do himself.&nbsp;
In 1986 when a young refugee from Laos devastated by the separation from his family stormed the Immigration Department's office here in Albury it was Tim who walked inside, against all advice, to talk to him, and it was Tim who peacefully resolved the siege hours later.&nbsp;
When his country called, Tim Fischer never failed to answer.&nbsp;
From proudly serving in Vietnam in the Australian Army to his election to both state and federal Parliaments, to his leadership of the great National Party - and I acknowledge Michael McCormack here, the leader of the Nationals today - as Minister for Trade, as Deputy Prime Minister and his many roles post politics.&nbsp;
No one was ever left guessing what Tim believed and what he was passionate about and he always channelled that passion into action.&nbsp;
As acting Prime Minister, he revelled in running the country from Mount Kosciuszko. As Trade Minister, he championed an end to protectionism and greater engagement with Asia.&nbsp;
And because, as much as Tim fought fiercely for the people of his beloved rural and regional Australia, he was big too in his view of Australia's place in the world and he left a great mark upon it.&nbsp;
In the wake of the Port Arthur tragedy in 1996, a truly horrific page in our nation's history, where John Howard who is here today with his wife Janette garnered the strength and mettle to mount swift action with new gun laws, it was as Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the Nationals that Tim Fischer shared that resolve.&nbsp;
And for him, this task was arguably even greater. Gun laws were not popular in regional Australia in 1996 and where there was resistance, Tim copped the brunt of it.&nbsp;
He stumped up and he persuaded, together with the Prime Minister, and convinced regional Australians about the need for change.&nbsp;
It wasn't easy.&nbsp;
He stood firm with his Prime Minister, co-committed as Leader of the Nationals, to that great Coalition which we share to this day, unwavering until it was done.&nbsp;
Australians are now safe today because of him.&nbsp;
I'm sure the former Prime Minister Howard would agree they were Tim's laws too, and we are indeed truly grateful.&nbsp;
This was his finest moment among so many, and Australia will always be in his debt.&nbsp;
After leaving Parliament Tim continued to put his country first, answering the call from both governments of all sides of politics.&nbsp;
For Tim, it was always about Australia.&nbsp;
His authenticity, his preparedness to be himself made him who he was.&nbsp;
A tower of strength, a titan of regional Australia, a giant of a human being, a man of deep faith, a devoted and adoring husband and father, a dear and loved friend, the son of a grateful nation.&nbsp;
Tim Fischer was one of a kind.&nbsp;
And the boy from Boree Creek has left us too soon.
May he rest in peace.
As he enters eternity, he will no doubt be greeted with the words, “Well done, good and faithful servant.”&nbsp;
And for those who he has left behind here, we can take comfort in the simple fact that we knew and we loved Tim Fischer.
And we are better for it.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:01): I move:
That the House record its deep regret at the death, on 22 August 2019, of the Honourable Timothy Andrew Fischer AC, a Member of this House for the Division of Farrer from 1984 to 2001, place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service, and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.

Timothy Andrew Fischer was Australia all over. He was an Australian original—the boy from Boree Creek. He was loved, he was admired, he was respected, he was revered. He came from humble beginnings in Boree Creek, and at the recent memorial service, which the Leader of the Opposition, I and many in this place had the opportunity to attend, we learnt of his humble family beginnings in a very loving and hardworking family. Coming from such a modest start to become a titan for regional Australia was his greatest achievement. Like Bob Hawke, who we remembered in this chamber just a few short months ago, Tim transcended the political divide probably more than any I could nominate in this place, and that's why I think so many of us in this chamber and those who have been in this chamber have a story. We all have a Tim Fischer story, I suspect.
If you ever wanted to know what it's like to tour with Elvis, go on the&nbsp;Indian Pacific&nbsp;with Tim Fischer for three days! I did, and as you walked up and down the carriages amid so many other railway enthusiasts, there was none greater than Tim Fischer. He would stop, he would sit and he would listen to their stories. Those big hands would shake the hands of his fellow Australians, and people would just line up as they engaged with him because Tim had this amazing ability just to focus all of himself on whoever was opposite him. He made them the centre of the universe. There was no trick to it. There was no performance in it. It was 100 per cent pure Tim, and they got 100 per cent of him when he was in that moment. This is why, Judy, he was so loved—so, so, so loved.
Tim knew this country like few others, and he loved it as much as anyone possibly could. He was the best of us, and he made all those he encountered better, too, by knowing him. Tim lived a life bigger than I suspect he could have imagined as a young boy on the family property. At just 11, Tim left the farm to board at Burke Hall and, then, Xavier College in Melbourne. It was a lonely time, as his brother reminded us, but Tim was always willing to have a go, and by his final year he was made a prefect thanks to his dependability and trustworthiness in reports—characteristics that many in politics would later come to appreciate. He also joined the school paper. It was where I'm sure he got all his insights into and his knowledge of the media and its wiles—a precursor to his habit later in life of writing columns for the local paper and calling into newsrooms around the country to make sure that they had his view of whatever the issue of the day might be.
Educated by the Jesuits, Tim embodied their call to be a man for others. For Tim, it was always for others. When the call came to serve his country in Vietnam, Tim served proudly and courageously. Given the option of going to university or serving instead in a special rural youth service at Holsworthy Barracks, he said, 'No. You either do something properly or nothing at all.' Recognising the opportunity to gain something from his military experience, Tim applied and was one of the few accepted for officer training. After his training, in 1967, Second Lieutenant Tim Fischer was told that if he wanted to go to Vietnam he would have to extend his service by nine months, and, typical of the man we know, he did—not just once but twice.
He returned to the farm humbly and modestly and worked quietly through so much of what he saw in Vietnam. Not long back, Tim again heard the call to serve his country and, at the age of just 24, he entered the New South Wales parliament as both the youngest-ever Country Party MP and the first Vietnam veteran to serve in any Australian parliament. Thirteen and a half years later, he came here to Canberra.
It's easy now, when we remember Tim, to think first of his many quirks and endearing traits: the stoop, the hat, the big hands I've mentioned, his unique cadence and its faint echo of a childhood speech impediment that was never totally mastered. And then there was that singularity, that individuality that set him slightly apart from the rest of the world. Whether it was his famous and insatiable passion for trains, his love of Bhutan—and he remained a passionate adherent to the indicator of national happiness all the way through his life—his trademark Akubra or his command of chess, there was none like him. But to only remember these things about Tim would be to do him a great injustice. He was a deep thinker; a true representative of the bush; a man respected throughout our region; a man of immense political skill, content with his own company but also one of the people. He was a great coalitionist—one of the greatest, I would say—and a formidable leader.
In 1993, when my side of politics lost what was called 'the unlosable election', under Tim's leadership the Nationals actually picked up two seats. And in 1996, together with John Howard, he delivered the coalition one of our greatest-ever victories, increasing Nationals representation yet again. He threw himself into the role of trade minister. He was tireless—a respected negotiator who championed an end to protectionism and who championed a greater engagement with Asia. As trade minister, he built on 20 years of engagement in the region, and during that time he visited every country in the region but Sri Lanka and the Maldives. He did most of it at his own expense prior to coming into the job. What did every visit and interaction teach him? Respect—mutual respect. That was his currency for engagement.
It seemed appropriate that, when I learnt of Tim's death, Jenny and I were on our way to Vietnam for our recent visit. One of the first countries he visited as trade minister and Deputy Prime Minister was Vietnam. During that visit, he didn't just hold bilateral meetings; he tended to his soul as well. He visited an orphanage built by Vietnam Veterans Reconstruction Group, and he made a private visit to Long Tan. He made many trips to Vietnam. He said he wanted to 'help speed the healing of the scars of conflict', because he said he could 'foresee a future of peace, co-operation and prosperity for both Australia and Vietnam', and he was right. That is now being realised.
Tim was a man of formidable character. Former deputy John Anderson wrote of how 'magnificently freeing it is to work closely with someone who is essentially honest and transparent', and it was that character that defined his finest hour. After Port Arthur, he put the wellbeing of Australians and what he knew to be right ahead of populist politics. Gun laws were not popular in regional Australia, but he stood shoulder to shoulder with John Howard, and, as John Howard said, 'showed tremendous guts and leadership'. Together, they introduced and passed through this place gun laws for which Australians will be forever grateful to Tim Fischer and to John Howard—and we owe a special debt to Tim Fischer in his finest hour.
That was the campaign, I'm told, that Tim was most proud of. Later, in 1998, he had to face the backlash of the gun laws and the first incarnation of One Nation, and he took it on. He didn't demonise those with a different view. Instead, he just sought to persuade them, and in most cases he did. He was pretty persuasive—relentlessly persuasive. The Nationals lost only two seats at that election, which was a remarkable outcome in the course of the argument he was taking to his home territories.
When Tim left this place to genuinely spend more time with Judy and their two then-young sons, we lost him from the parliament but we did not lose him from national service. He served at Tourism Australia. He served and championed the Royal Flying Doctor Service, as its chairman. He served, with distinction, as our first resident Ambassador to the Holy See, appointed by the Rudd government, working closely with the Vatican on the canonisation of Saint Mary McKillop.
I'm pleased to inform the House that, as some may know, Tim was held in such high regard that His Holiness Pope Francis awarded Tim, in his final days, the Order of Saint Gregory the Great, in recognition of his personal services to the Holy See and for the example he set in his community and country. Tim will also be remembered for his tireless advocacy for one of our greatest soldiers, General Sir John Monash. It is fitting that Tim Fischer's name will now join with that of Monash in a perpetual scholarship to be supported by the government. The Tim Fischer John Monash scholarship will be awarded each year by the General Sir John Monash Foundation to a worthy scholar from a rural or regional background, to follow in his very big footsteps. It is a lasting legacy that pays tribute to Tim's belief in education, service and leadership, but most of all his passion for the future of regional Australia.
In mourning Tim Fischer, we remember a statesman, a mentor, a fierce advocate for the region, for our country and for its people. But we mostly remember a very dear friend. Judy and Harrison and Dominic have lost far more than the rest of us: an adored husband and father. We thank you for sharing Tim with the rest of us, Judy, Harrison and Dominic. Dominic is here today, as is Judy. We thank all of his family. His brother, who is also here today, spoke so beautifully at the memorial service. Thank you for sharing those stories with us. We also thank you for caring for him so wonderfully in those final years.
Tim Fischer made this country a better place. He made many of us better people. Now, may he rest in the arms of a loving God. God bless Tim Fischer.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:00): I move:
That the House records its sadness at the passing on 10 August 2019 of the Honourable Dr Alexander James Forbes, CMG, MC, a former minister and member for Barker, and place on record its appreciation for his remarkable public service and tender its sympathy to his family.

Alexander James Forbes was a soldier, a scholar and a statesman. He was the last surviving Liberal minister of the Menzies government and one of our last links to that big-hearted generation of World War II veterans who returned home to serve the citizens of Australia in this parliament. He was born in Hobart in 1923. Jim Forbes was educated at Knox Grammar School in Sydney and St Peter's College in Adelaide. His youth was interrupted, as so many of his generation, by war. After graduating from Duntroon Military College, he enlisted on 15 December 1942, the day before his 19th birthday.
In 1943 he was in Darwin when it was under attack, and on June 1945 Jim Forbes was awarded the Military Cross for his service in the South Pacific. His father was Brigadier Alexander Forbes, who had received the same award in the First World War and his brother, Lieutenant Patrick Forbes, would receive it during the Korean War. This may be the only instance of three members of an Australian family being awarded the Military Cross in three consecutive wars. That is remarkable service from a remarkable family.
On returning home from the war, Jim Forbes left the Army to pursue further study. He completed a Bachelor of Arts at the University of Adelaide and went to Oxford, where he earned a PhD. It was at Oxford that he married the love of his life, Margaret Blackburn. She is the daughter of one of Australia's most remarkable soldiers, Arthur Blackburn, an Anzac who landed at Gallipoli, a VC recipient and a Second World War prisoner of war. Margaret and Jim had five children and were married 67 years.
Jim Forbes entered this parliament as the member for Barker in 1956. He would be re-elected seven times. He would serve as minister in five different portfolios under five different Prime Ministers. Sir Robert Menzies appointed him Minister for the Army and Minister for the Navy. Menzies's view of Jim Forbes was unequivocal; he described him as a very great man. In this position, Jim Forbes brought the controversial policy of national conscription to cabinet in 1964. This was a decision that will be debated throughout the ages. His argument was that conscription through a lottery was fairer than a voluntary army, where the burdens fell on some groups more than others. What we can say, more than half a century on, is that Jim Forbes never asked a young Australian man to do what he himself and his family had not done.
Later, Jim Forbes would serve in the Holt, McEwen and Gorton governments. However, it was as immigration minister in the McMahon government that Jim Forbes drew the attention and ire of his kids, something that I think none of us in this House ever want to do. Jim's daughter Emma was a teenager at the time and had taken little interest in her father's career. All that changed when he deported British rock star Joe Cocker for possessing marijuana. Emma would later remark:
… can you imagine being a teenager in 1972 and your father has just thrown Joe Cocker out of the country?

Jim Forbes retired from parliament at the 1975 election, but he continued to serve his party and nation. Over the next decade he would serve as a federal president of the Liberal Party and the chairman of the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories. He also served on the Council of the National Library, including as its chairman.
But war and politics had taken their toll on this great Australian, and in his retirement Jim realised it was time, in his words, 'to catch up with normal life'—to do the sorts of things that the average person does. So he reconnected with old friends. He played golf and he gardened. He surrounded himself with books and family. He said, at the age of 90, 'I have now arrived at the point where I feel normal.' There is hope for us all! To mark that milestone, there was a family celebration and he was asked to say a few words about his life. On that day, he didn't speak of war or politics, or the honours that he had received. Instead, he simply turned to the woman he loved, raised a glass and said, 'To Margaret'. It's his love that endures.
Jim Forbes lived to the age of 95, and is survived by his much beloved wife, Margaret, and his children Sarah, Emma, Alexander and David, as well as nine grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. What a marvellous life! We send them our deepest sympathies as we remember the life of an honourable and brave Australian.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Nieves, and to all the colleagues that are here today, thank you for being here also.
But can I start by acknowledging the Ngunnawal people, and their elders, past, present and emerging.
Can I acknowledge any veterans here today, any serving men and women in our Defence Forces.
I’ll often start a set of remarks by making those acknowledgements but today it’s particularly poignant because we know in both of those communities, in our Indigenous communities, in our veterans communities, that suicide has touched them in a way that is disproportionate really to the rest of the country. And so it is particularly poignant today to acknowledge them here at this important event.
Nieves, thank you for your welcome here today. Can I also thank Julian and Mike for their leadership of this group, we are all here, not from any stripes of politics today, we're all here in one cause as Nieves has said.
And I particularly acknowledge Greg Hunt, my colleague and friend over many years for whom we share a passion in this area. Can I acknowledge Chris Bowen as well and the work that he's doing.
I get a lot of letters. We all do. All parliamentarians do. I probably get a few more than I used do these days.
I got one that was very upsetting recently. Jenny and I went to a wedding of a friend in Western Sydney a few years back, and as is the case I was Treasurer at the time, there's lots of photos, there's lots of selfies. And I had a photo, Jenny and I with a beautiful young family and two&nbsp;kids, and recently I had a letter from the mother in that photo.
The beaming teenage boy in that photo, Luke, had taken his own life in the past year and she'd written to me to tell me about it. When you look at the photo, there's no tell tale sign, there's nothing. A beautiful young boy there with a beautiful family. He was 17.
More than half of all Australian adults personally know someone who has died by suicide and can tell a story like this. This is a curse as I've described it on our society. That reaches into families, it reaches in to communities and it's indiscriminate. And it causes carnage, hurt, pain, loss, for those left behind.
And today we gather together I think in a united purpose to break this curse of suicide on our country to take back the lives that would be touched by this in the future.
It's hard to know of any other more important project that we have than to protect the lives of our people. But it does involve coming together as we are this morning. It does involve doing everything in our power that we can think of to help Australians who are at risk to come out of the shadow of suicide and to be able to see brighter and better days. To have the care and support of family or friends of community of the person sitting next to you on the bus or the train or wherever it is, and to simply be able to extend that hand of support so people know that they are not alone.
R U OK day's coming up soon. R U OK was started many years ago by a friend of mine who we lost to cancer. We went to school together. And that is a very simple Australian act of just extending a hand, and you never know who you might extend that hand to and you never might know the difference that that will make. But what I love about R U OK day is it is just a simple expression of empathy and support for our fellow Australians.
Julian’s right, as a government we have set ourselves a very bold goal, a towards zero goal when it comes to suicide prevention because what other goal could you have?
Zero is the only option that you must work towards as a government. Now that doesn't mean we're unrealistic about the challenges. We are not unrealistic about what the results may well be. But we are determined, and I believe all of the Parliament is determined. When I discuss these matters with the state and territory Premiers and Chief Ministers they are also determined, and it's a topic which can unite us all. So that's why over half a million dollars has been put into youth mental health and suicide prevention.
The largest suicide prevention strategy that a government has undertaken in this country, to strengthen the headspace network, and to focus on Indigenous suicide prevention in particular, and early childhood and parenting support to help build up the resilience and the awareness.
$375 million to expand, improve that headspace network, $34 [million] on the Indigenous programs, Indigenous youth suicide prevention, support for Indigenous Leadership that delivers culturally appropriate trauma informed care. $12 million to support Australian parents and their children in a range of initiatives that help parents recognise when their children are struggling and improving their mental health skills and training in schools. $15 million to create a new national information system to ensure communities and services can respond quickly to areas affected by a high incidence of suicide and self-harm.
And Greg the work that he did with Pat McGorry when there was that suicide cluster up in Northern New South Wales, it just goes to show that with good evidence and good information and people who are prepared to step up and work together and make a difference, then it can, you can you can impact on this area and we must continue to.
20 new headspace sites for rural and regional Australia and new mental health telehealth services funded through the NBS is very important in regional communities, particularly those who are suffering, they're affected by drought presently and there is of course additional resources going into supporting the mental health of Australians living in drought affected communities. Mental health and wellbeing projects funded through our $1.25 million community health and hospitals program, and $22.5 million in youth and Indigenous health research projects as part of our $125 million dollars, million mines mission into mental health research.
More than 3000 Australians took their own lives by their own hand in 2017. It's a leading cause of death of young people, and although we know that's too high, the high number of suicides are in fact amongst middle aged men over, and men aged over 85.
Our plan reflects the broad spectrum upon which this curse impacts on Australia and someone who's leading that charge within our government as a very well respected practitioner in this area is our national suicide prevention advisor Christine Morgan who I believe is here of course today.
She has a big job, and she needs all of our help because it's her job to get all of us to work together and to focus on this goal and working with Nieves and her team and all the commissions and all the community leaders, every sports coach, every school teacher, every one you can find, every parent, to be able to work together to address these terrible, these terrible things that are happening.
Experts at Lifeline, headspace, beyond blue the many professional services all working together to take on this important national goal.
So it is a big job. But it's a job that we can't look the other way from. It's a job that we can't acknowledge needs to be done.
It's a very difficult issue to talk about. It stirs up all sorts of terrible emotions amongst us because the reality of what we're facing.
So I want to thank everybody who’s joined here in this room today and well beyond this room, and to any of those Australians out today who are feeling isolated.
Any Australians who are out there feeling under the pump. Any Australians out there who are struggling with mental health issues.
There is an Australian who will reach out their hand to you.
You are not alone.
And we can be there for you.
And we want to be there for you.
Thank you very for your attention.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much, Denita. It's great to be here with you and I want to thank you for your leadership when it comes to the thing that matters and creating jobs in this country. I want to talk a bit more about that but can I start off by acknowledging the Ngunawal People and their elders past, present and emerging. Can I also acknowledge any members of our Australian Defence Force or any veterans who are with us here today and simply say thank you for your service. Can I thank the building industry too for the great job they do in employing veterans in this country. You are a key part of the initiatives that we have to ensure that we're getting our veterans into work and you understand their skills, you understand what they have to offer which is just simply outstanding. I want to thank all those in the building construction industry who are giving our veterans a go. I know they are transforming your businesses and doing wonderful things. So thank you very much.
To Denita, to Hedley Davis the President of the Master Builders, and to all of the building and construction leaders who here today. You’re about jobs and that's what I'm about. We do the things that create jobs. I want to thank you for the jobs you do create and that you will create, more importantly, in the future. I want to acknowledge that one of the reasons I'm standing here is because of your contribution to this important national task. And I want to thank you also because the Master Builders is not a shy organisation. It's an organisation that speaks its mind. It's an organisation that speaks clearly and it stands up for the things that they believe in. You have done that when it comes to issues of negative gearing that the Labor Party sought to change at the last election. You've done that, particularly to highlight the terrible impact that could have had on our residential housing markets and the residential building industry. How it would undercut home values, how it would push up rents and it would hit 1.3 million mum and dad investors. The MBA wasn't shy about those things. It wasn't about politics or partisanship or anything of that sort. It was going to have a serious impact on the residential building industry in this country and so you spoke out and you stood up and I know a lot of the flak you copped from it as individual builders in your communities and you got a fair bit of lip, I would have thought, around the place because of the fact that you actually stood up for what you thought would be good policy. I want to thank you for showing that strength. I think it is a real positive thing that there was one organisation in an industry body that was prepared to call these things out and I appreciate that very much.
But that wasn't the only thing. You stood up when it came to Labor's policy to ban and abolish the Australian Building and Construction Commission. Why? Because you know what it would do to your industry. You know what it would do to jobs. You know what it would do to investment. You know what it would do to people who want to work in the industry. It was in your industry's interests to ensure that there is the rule of law on building sites in this country. So you spoke up for it, as I expect you to, and equally, where there are issues that our Government is engaged in, I'm sure if you have different views to us on this you will similarly speak up and as you should. I don’t have any problem with that because I know when the MBA is raising issues, they're raising it from the perspective of their members and that's as it should be on every occasion.&nbsp;
Since the election, we’ve gone further with introduced legislation to give courts more power to deregister law-breaking unions and officials because we believe that sort of lawlessness has no place in the Australian building construction industry. That lawlessness puts up the cost of building hospitals, it puts out the cost of building roads, it actually takes jobs away from Australians looking to work in the building and construction industry. So I'm not surprised that you remain passionate and strident advocates for the rule of law in your industry because that is the industry in which militant unionism has been the most thuggish, has been the most lawless. And you've been at the coalface of that struggle for a long period of time and I thank you for your strength.
On the issue of jobs, 1.2 million Australians work in building and construction. One in 10 workers, the third largest employing industry behind retail and health services and there are trends we can be encouraged about. Construction is projected to record employment growth of 10 per cent over the five years to May 2023 and I'm thrilled about this because our Government is all about jobs. With help from industries like yours, we’ve created 1.4 million jobs since we were first elected six years ago and we made a commitment at the last election to create 1.25 million more new jobs over the next five years. But we will only achieve that with you if you, if your industry is in position to go forward and get things done and employ people and take up new projects. And that will include some 250,000 jobs for young Australians.&nbsp;
Almost three-quarters of Australians today aged between 15 and 64 have a job. It has never been higher than that in Australia's history. This is the biggest job performance of any government at any time in this country. More Australians are in work today, not just in actual numbers because population is higher, but as a proportion of the working-age population than ever before. A lot of things have happened in the last six years, but none put a bigger smile on my face than young people in jobs. Last year, more than 100,000 Australians aged over 55 got a job. So it's not just young Australians getting more work but it’s Australians of all ages getting work, getting jobs. And when someone has a job they have choices, and you're in the business of giving people choices by ensuring they have jobs.&nbsp;
Last week we also received the national accounts for the June quarter and it does show that Australia continues to grow. Now, we want to be growing higher than the level it is today but we're all very aware of the headwinds and the challenges that our economy faces today. Whether it's the global headwinds that we're all very familiar with or it's the domestic ones, particularly in relation to how issues of national disasters and drought has impacted on our national economy. But despite that, we continue to generate jobs as an economy. We continue to grow as an economy. We're in our 29th year of economic growth. I saw it reported the other day when they were talking about the difficult circumstances faced on the other side of the globe where they've had negative quarters of growth. Whether that's in the United Kingdom or Germany or parts of Scandinavia or even closer to home here in Singapore. They look at Australia now as an economy that has remarkably not experienced these things for a very long time and we're intending to keep it that way by having the right policy settings in place.&nbsp;
When we put the Budget together last year it wasn't a surprise to us that these were the challenges that we were facing. When we put the Budget together the previous year and the year before that, Budgets where we have put together packages and plans to reduce taxes, to increase our spending on infrastructure. Most recently to lift our investments in skills. Since the election embarking on a deregulation agenda again in a new wave of initiatives that has been commenced under Assistant Minister Morton working with the Treasurer. Expanding our trade opportunities. All of this was being done because we know and understood the economic challenges Australia is facing. So it wasn't our plan, knowing all that, to put a higher tax burden on the economy. That wasn't happening. It wasn't our plan to take away the rule of law from the building and construction industry or give more power to military unions to undermine the performance of the building and construction industry. That wasn’t our plan but it was certainly our opponent’s plan. When we fashioned this year's Budget it was done to address the circumstances that we indeed now face and we will continue to implement that plan to ensure that our economy remains strong.&nbsp;
But there are other parts of that agenda like the digital economy which I think is really transforming our economy and will have major impacts on productivity into the future and particularly in the building and construction sector. And I know from my experience working around this sector for a very long time, issues of payment security and payment is a big deal. And the cash flow that comes from those issues is the difference between your subbies or indeed your own principal’s industry builders getting through one quarter or not. And so the digitisation of our payments system is a fantastic way to ensure that we can speed up the payment times that occur particularly in your industry. And at the same time improve the integrity of payments within the building and construction industry. This is a major productivity booster. The new payments platform which is already up and running - I'd be encouraging you to get your members on it for no other reason than if you’re on it and the person you’ve got the contract with is on it then there's no excuse for you not to get paid quicker. The Government has moved to 20 day payment terms, encouraging the states to come down to the same level. In New South Wales they're doing the same thing. We want to see payment cycles come down. I want to see the acceleration of cash digital timers within the economy because I know that that can create greater confidence and give greater headroom to businesses to be able to invest, pay their staff and make plans for the future. And I think this is a big, big challenge for us.&nbsp;
Now, in our program you'll be very aware of our big commitments to infrastructure and that infrastructure plan is over $100 billion strong. Almost half of that will be spent in the next four years. Around $10 billion of that will be spent this year. So when it comes to actually bringing forward infrastructure spending in Australia, you had me at hello. Because we're already doing it. We've been doing it now for some years with this program. At the last Budget, we increased it from $75 billion to $100 billion and from the day after the election, pretty much, I've been sitting down with Premiers and making sure that we're working with them to bring these projects on as quickly as we can. Now, of course, we're partners in these projects and we work with state governments in providing them with the resources to get on with those projects. That's why I'm pleased with the relationships that we have, particularly in New South Wales and indeed Victoria. So there's nothing partisan about it. I will work with anyone who wants to build stuff and get on with building stuff. And so the other day we made our announcement regarding the extension of funding for the Monash Freeway. Earlier in that week were out with the&nbsp; New South Wales Government at the Western Sydney International Nancy Bird Walton Airport and some $600 million dollars in works that were going into civil works and earthmoving works for construction of that airport. You're very familiar with all the other infrastructure that sits around that major project.&nbsp;
But it's not just that – there are 30 carparks in Melbourne we’re building and I want to see those built soon and built fast and that's what Alan Tudge is working with the Victorian Government on at the moment about to get as many of those projects happening as soon as we can. A lot of our congestion-busting projects in our metropolitan areas are just like that. But then you go out in the rural parts of the country and we've put a million dollars into every single shire and council that was affected by the drought. Why?
Because we wanted them to spend it on projects like the sort of projects that many members of those subbies or others who work to you are actually involved in to ensure that we kept the skills up and we kept the volume of work occurring in those regional areas.
So there is a very big, there is a very big infrastructure agenda. The tax cuts which we took to the last election, which Labor resisted, fought against, opposed, and then pretended support in the Parliament. Those tax cuts came out in July, and Australians will decide how they spend that money. That's up to them. But we believe people should keep more of what they earn, we believe you should keep more of what you earn, in what you do every day. That's why we've reduced taxes for the vast majority of businesses in this country because we know the money's better off in your hand than being sent here to Canberra or indeed anywhere else. But these projects will create jobs. Western Sydney Airport alone 11,000- and it's just the airport, I'm talking about the aero-tropolis, or the things that sit around that, that’s just 11,000 jobs there and 28,000 jobs ongoing with these projects. The Melbourne Airport rail-link $5 billion, the biggest game changing city building infrastructure project that Melbourne has seen in generations. Now why do I talk about in those terms? I mean not everybody here is involved in rail construction between, for a project like that there’ll be many builders who are involved in civil construction there’ll be builders involved in residential construction, commercial construction. When you have that link going up through sunshine with, what I call the quick-link, how others want to describe it that's up to them.
It’s got to be a quick link. Then those projects transform cities, they open up opportunities for commercial development they actually change the way cities operate. They create new hubs for employment. These projects whether it's Melbourne airport or whether it's Monash freeway. So people will get home sooner and safer, or to work for that matter sooner and safer or the Western Sydney airport or the North-South Link in Adelaide. These projects create opportunities for people to go invest in cities and in regions all around the country.
One of the other things we're working hard on is I want to see more tier two and three contractors in these big projects, and I commend the work that Michael McCormack has been doing working with the inland rail, in breaking these projects up into smaller contract sizes. And I commend the work that Gladys Berejiklian’s done in New South Wales with the Pacific Highway breaking these projects down. And when I last met with Premiers and Chief Ministers we talked about this at some length because there are very practical issues here. We don't have the depth of big head contractors in this country, we are investing a lot of funding in infrastructure at the moment and that has been necessary. I remember when I first spoke to Phil Lowe about these issues many years ago when I was Treasurer we agreed it was important to really invest in the infrastructure pipeline in this country and wherever possible bring it forward. So these discussions are not new. That's why we've been doing it, but making sure that these big projects can spread to other smaller contractors relieves some of the price pressures, some of the cost pressures. Now you still can have materials issues, that's that's just a natural thing particularly in the big metro areas which we have to contend with, but that doesn't mean that tier two and three contractors can't play a bigger role and provide greater competition in the procurement process that the states are involved in. And then again the smaller projects, be they a few million bucks on car park projects and things like this and local parts of our major cities, they're projects equally that I think can make a big difference and we're really excited for how they can be positive. Now two areas where we're particularly focused on at the moment when it comes to productivity that I think really impacts on the building sector.
Is the first one is, is the work we're doing on deregulation and what we did some years ago is we went and basically cleared out the equivalent of the back room in the in the office. a whole bunch of derelict regulation and legislation it was all out there. It mean you couldn't use that room anymore. But the removal of it was necessary.
But we understood that that didn't have the profound impact on reducing costs of regulation that I know business is hungry for. So we've commenced a new process since the election which Ben Morton is leading and he's already met with state and territory planning ministers and building ministers, as has Karen Andrews and she's working through those issues as well.
And what this is about, is looking at particular activities. So what is the regulatory anatomy of, to take one of the industries we're particularly interested in and that is the agribusiness industry, of which building is, the great thing about the building industry is they're pretty much connected to every single part of the economy there is. You’re building- everyone needs stuff built. And that's what you guys do. And when looking at these areas we're going okay. Someone wants to make an investment in building these businesses. What's all the regulation state, federal, local that applies to that entire timeline from the idea, through to shovels in the ground, and then actually completion of the project and looking at the things that cause the biggest delays. So it's not necessarily sometimes about how how much regulation you get rid of, although that's important. It's about which regulations you get rid of because there are some things with just slow the whole thing down.
And you know who knows what those things are? You do. Because you deal with it and it's important we then engage as heavily with the sector through the leader and your state counterparts to ensure that we can start chipping away and making some big differences in this regulation area. Now when I discussed this with Premiers and Chief Ministers they got it they did understand that at a macro level the importance he's had to supporting increasing productivity within their economies. So I look forward to the progress we're making there.
But the other area where I want to make a big difference is skills.
Now you've told us that you've often finding it hard to get the right people when you have a vacancy to fill particularly those of you who are working in the Eastern states. So we're supporting skills development in the construction industry in a number of ways. One of those is a $9.2 million apprentice training alternative delivery pilots program.
And I was pleased to see the Master Builders Australia took part in that and they received $1.84 million to lead one of those pilots which I understand was recently completed, the MBA pilot was focused on training to help young people get apprentice ready and there were hundreds of participants including secondary students and recent school leavers. Almost half of them took up further study for industry employment including apprentices and so on. That's a result and it's potentially life changing for those young people. We're creating 80,000 additional apprentices over the next five years in primary skill shortage areas through a new apprenticeship Initiative program. And we're also looking more broadly at a vocational education system and the Joyce review which is well known, I know, to the media but also to many who work in the sector.
Again an area where we can transform the funds that we invest in vocational skills training in this country actually do the most important thing. Someone gets trained with skills that a business needs in their business. That's what the ruler has to go- that's the ruler you have to put over every reform or change initiative when you look at vocational education training and that's the ruler I put on it. We hear the frustration and the Joyce review actually found this when they went and had a look at it. Young people and their parents frustrated that what they were paying for in training was not giving them skills that actually made them employable, an industry frustrated as- that what they were investing in for skills was not giving them the people that they needed. Now there were lots of trainers that were happy. There was lots of money moving around. There were lots of buildings and institutions that were, you know. But the point is getting someone trained with a skill that someone else needs, and that's the clarity I want to bring to what we plan to do in skills and I think the Joyce review has given us a really good pathway. And again I want to thank the Premiers and Chief Ministers for the early discussions we've had about this. We all know that the current system is not working. There’s a lot of money going into it and people coming and saying you need to invest in more skills. I'd be happy to invest more in skills but I'm not going to invest in dud projects that aren’t working. I'm not going to pour more money into a bottomless pit. That's not taking anyone, anywhere and I would think that industry will say the same.
You're investing in it too, you need people that you know can turn up on the job and add value each and every day. And there's nothing that I know thrills you more and I know this as a local Member of Parliament from southern Sydney in particular in the Shire, when I'm talking to people who’ve been builders, they don’t tell me about what they've built over the course of their career, particularly when you talk to a retired builder down at the football or wherever. They talk about the people they learnt with, the people they employed, the families that they had, the weddings they went to, they talk about the communities they created, and the love for what they did, they wouldn't want to do anything else. And it's tough and it's hard work, and it's got a lot of risk but often times the thing that keeps people in it, is the sense of responsibility that you have to the people you take risks to employ and you want to make sure that they can do well in life. And so our skills system needs to back that up but so does our safety and that's something I know the building industry is very committed to. Safety on the job and the safety that we build. We're taking a leadership role to address some of the extremely concerning building failures and issues we've seen in relation to non-compliant use of combustible cladding, the national construction code restricts the use of combustible cladding on high rise buildings and the states and territories are responsible for enforcing it. But that doesn't mean there isn't a role for the Federal Government. The Minister for Industry Science and Technology, Karen Andrews, has been facilitating cooperation with the states and territories as chair of the building Ministers Forum and in July it was great to see all building ministers agreed to a national approach on implementing the Building Confidence Report and establishing a dedicated team as part of the building, the Australian Building Codes board. See when it comes to solving these sorts of problems, everybody's got to do their job. There's a great temptation on these issues to try and manage upwards.
I'm a believer in the federation, always have been. I think states have important responsibilities and important roles and jobs to do, so does the Commonwealth Government. And so when issues occur that fall within the state domain, well I expect them to do their job and they should expect me to do what is the Commonwealth’s responsibility. But just shifting things between Commonwealth and state because of feeling of frustration because the State Government won't move. That's not the answer. We just have to get state government’s to move in those situations and through this process that's been occurring. And I think we're in a much better position today than we were some months ago in addressing those issues in the industry. But everyone has to take responsibility for their bit and be honest with each other and work together as a team. And that's how I think we continue to take the industry forward. So we're very aware of the pivotal role that you all play in our economy and we want to ensure that that continues.
We want to ensure that we have the right settings in place that enable you to employ people and get on and do what you love doing. I assure you that we will continue to listen carefully, because you do speak with an industry voice, an industry voice that is about your industry's interests not about any political parties interests, it's about your interests. I've always known that from the MBA and I’ve had an association going back well before I ever entered politics, be very forthright in the views that you put forward and you're always prepared to sit down and talk through difficult issues whoever you need to do that with. I want to thank you for your candour in doing that. I want to thank you for the strength that you've shown. But most importantly I want to thank you for the jobs you create. Let's go and create a lot more.
Thank you.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:00): I rise to acknowledge that today marks R U OK? Day, a national day of action on suicide prevention. R U OK? Day was actually started by friend of mine many years ago, Gav Larkin, who I went to school with. We lost him to illness some years ago, but I'm sure he'd be incredibly pleased with the way that this has taken off over all of these years. It's built around a simple expression of empathy and support for our fellow Australians, which comes naturally to us all. It's all about extending a hand. You never know the difference it could make to somebody in their hour of need.
Most weeks I, like many in this place, receive letters from Australians who all too often recount the tragedy of losing a family member or a friend to suicide. You hear stories from parents who talk about how their young kids in their teens and their early 20s are attending the funerals of their friends. It breaks your heart and you wish you could go back in time—something you might have said; someone you might have reached out to; something you might have noticed. More than half of all Australian adults have had a direct experience of this; that's how many people personally know someone who has died by suicide.
R U OK? Day is a time to restate a commitment which I know is shared across this chamber. It's a clear statement of the government to all Australians everywhere that we are progressing a towards-zero goal, with our commitment to mental health and our suicide prevention plan, which we are pleased to have the support of the entire House for. As important as these services are, it's actually the human connection that in so many instances will make that difference. A conversation can make a difference. It can save a life. The four steps of R U OK? Day, I'm sure Gav would have me say, are: ask, 'Are you okay?'—don't be afraid to ever ask that question—listen to the answer carefully; encourage action; and check in afterwards. Friends and family can make all the difference, but you have to be willing to ask, 'Are you okay?'


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well he got me, Dame Mary, my great, great aunt would be very, very proud.
Mr. President, First Lady Mrs. Trump, thank you so much Mrs. Trump for the amazing night you've created for us here.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends, Jenny and I are truly grateful for this wonderful honour and the hospitality that you Mr. President the First Lady have extended to us and to our country.
As we join you here tonight, in the home, your home, and that of the American Presidency.
This of course was once the home of President Teddy Roosevelt who I've always greatly admired. He was also a New Yorker, he was also unconventional.
He was no captive of the establishment. He was also accomplished. Indeed some might say a maverick. He was his own man. He was a do-er and above all he was inspired by the great character of the American people. There is nothing he believed his nation could not do.
And this is the heart of American greatness. Mr. President, your belief in America and its people echoes this great spirit of that great president.
And it's backed up by your life's experience and the passion and work of your Presidency.
And Mrs. Trump, your kindness, warmth, and quiet grace in the welcome to Jenny and I and especially here tonight has been very special. And as Jen has said, very sweet.
General Washington once said it is infinitely better to have a few good men than many indifferent ones. But the same is true of the friendship of nations.
Australia will never be accused of a indifference in our friendship to the United States.
And tonight Mr. President we are reminded that the United States feels the same way especially under your leadership.
I've noticed tonight the Marines who are on duty tonight, and I thank you for your service. But not just to the United States but to our alliance as well.
In 1943 the US Marine 1st Division was engaged in the first ever large scale U.S. offensive against the Japanese at Guadalcanal. At the same time Australian forces were in New Guinea also locked in the fiercest of some battles against the Japanese.
We both prevailed each doing our bit. Each carrying our own weight.
When the US Marine 1st Division arrived in Melbourne after six months of heavy fighting they were welcomed with a rendition of the Australian fake anthem Waltzing Matilda.
More than 75 years later the first division still plays Waltzing Matilda whenever they ship out.
It's true Mr President, we have been in a lot of battles. But we have also stood together to realise the dividend of peace. Prosperity that comes from our embrace of enterprise and free markets and the rule of law. Our great immigration societies, education, liberal democracy and a commitment to the fulfilment of human potential.
This has been importantly included in our work together to expand the frontiers of science, technologies, and exploration.
To reach into space as we first did together 50 years ago.
When you launched, and we kept Apollo 11 in contact through the honeysuckle project, with earth and we beamed those most famous of images of all time to an enthralled and inspired humanity.
Events that no doubt inspired a young Andy Thomas from Adelaide who's with us here tonight to launch into space on the Endeavour. Almost 30 years later. And now we hope to do this again under the vision of your Presidency, Mr President.
Our generation and our times call this great republic and our great Commonwealth to live up to the calling of young free nations to continually point the way to freedom.
In Australia we are reminded of this friendship by the great spire with the eagle atop that looks out across our nation's capital in Canberra.
And earlier today we gifted a bronze statue of Les 'Bull' Alan, an Australian soldier carrying a wounded Marine off the battlefield on steep slopes in New Guinea in 1943 for is gallantry he was awarded the US Silver Star and the Military Medal whilst fighting alongside US troops.
Mr President we would be honoured if you would permit Australia as a gift to erect a life-sized memorial of this image here in Washington, at a place of your choosing, as a constant reminder of our dedication to our American friends and the bonds we have formed.
But for now ladies and gentlemen please join me in a toast.
To 100 years of mateship, and to 100 more.
To the people of these United States to the President and his magnificent First Lady.
And may God bless America.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: …Thank the panel before us for their leadership on this issue.
So we all know more than we ever wanted to know about terrorism. In our part of the world together with New Zealand, that was brought home to us in a very real sense very recently. In Australia we’ve averted 16 separate attacks through the outstanding work of our agencies in recent years.
And we now face a new threat as we all know, to peaceful societies. And the terrorists and violent extremists are weaponising the internet by spreading hate.
And we have a simple rule that says that our expectations of behaviour in the physical world should be the same as our expectations for behaviour in the digital world. Similarly the rules of the physical world, should equally apply in the rules of the digital world. There should be no leave passes or different tolerances for different types of behaviour along the lines that exist in real space. So we cannot allow the internet to be weaponised by violent extremists.
The terrible events of Christchurch has united Government, industry, and civil society to make sure that this can never happen again. God forbid it does. It’s exposed significant shortcomings though, the events in Christchurch, in industry and government responses which we now all addressing.
The industry is taking steps to prevent this foreign content being streamed and uploaded, re-uploaded on digital platforms. And it must. This hadn’t been the priority before. But I'm glad it is quickly becoming one now.
Through the shared terrorist violent extremist Christchurch protocol, government and industry will now work in lockstep to respond to a live-streamed attack. That’s good. And we endorsed these guidelines and strategy.
We also have a role to play in combatting the shared global challenge. That is why in support of our close neighbour and friend New Zealand, Australia led the G20 Leader’s statement on preventing exploitation of the Internet, terrorism, and violent extremism. I want to thank, in particular, the President of the G20, Shinzo Abe for allowing that to be part of the meetings in Osaka.
In our neighbourhood the ASEAN Regional Forum. They called for change and to meet citizen’s expectations that they would be protected from online harms. And to deliver on the commitment to provide regular public reporting of the Christchurch Call.
Australia, New Zealand and the OECD are developing voluntary transparency reporting protocols on the major platforms. This will set the first global reporting standards for industry to meet. And I welcome the support of all of those who have sought to shape these protocols.
We'll start by delivering a benchmark to practice. Defining metrics and creating a common network so that we can measure progress and take action together. These are the practical steps that are necessary.
And I think there is a widespread agreement about the need to take action. But we've got to keep checking up on ourselves to make sure it actually happens. Or we’ll let down everybody outside this room who depends on it.
In Australia we're working with industry to combat violent extremist content including introducing new criminal offences to ensure that it is expeditiously removed and reported to the police.
The industry built this new digital world and we have to work closely with them to ensure we can deal with the technologies that can help protect us from this digital world as well. Without the industries deep and engaged involvement in this, as committed to solving this problem as they are to pursuing the commercial objectives for which they were formed. Then it will be very difficult to overcome.
One thing is clear though, digital platforms must not be used to facilitate terrorism and violent extremism. Our shared sense of humanity must and will prevail. And the rules of the physical world must apply in the digital.
So Australia stands with all those here today, to expect the public trust in the digital environment continue. Thank you.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much Ivo and thank you all for coming out here this morning. The Council is a 98 year old organisation, and it’s stood for the opportunity to come and hear from a perspective and today I come from the Australian perspective and to contribute some of our thinking on what is a very complex world at the moment and where Australia sees its role in it and particularly our relationship with the United States. And so this is a great opportunity, there’s a whole bunch of things going on in New York at the moment but I know there’s a lot of things going on here in Chicago so we wanted to be here in Chicago to be part of this discussion here as well and it’s wonderful to be here and to address this body. I want to thank Ambassador Hockey for being here and Ambassador Culvahouse for being here, they’ve been doing a great job in managing the relationship that we have with AB down in Canberra and Joe who’s been here now for some years and he’s been doing a great job. And David Bushby who’s our new Consul-General and he’s just taken up the role here very recently in Chicago and looking forward to the great work he’s going to be doing.
It was a little over 120 years ago that Teddy Roosevelt gave a memorable speech titled ‘The Strenuous Life’, many of us in politics know it well. It was done at the Hamilton Club, which is just a few blocks from here in Chicago. And on that day in April 1899, he told his audience that “the twentieth century looms before us big with the fate of many nations.” He said that “if we are to be a really great people,” the United States, “we must strive in good faith to play a great part in the world.”
He added: “Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs, even though chequered by failure, than to take rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy much nor suffer much, because they live in the grey twilight that knows not victory nor defeat.”
Now he preached not a life of ease but one of strenuous endeavour.&nbsp; In Australia we put it this way, “If you have a go, you should get a go” and that is a theme that I have used to describe my own Government’s approach to encouraging Australians to pursue their own individual aspirations. I am sure TR would probably not mind that reference. Without a spirit of enterprise, of endeavour, of aspiration, no nation will deliver security, economic prosperity and national unity to its people.
And a guiding principle of mine is that regardless of our ability, our size or our circumstances, we are here to make a contribution, not just take one. That is actually what fairness means in Australia.&nbsp;The principle of mutual obligation and it applies at nations’ levels as well.
It’s also how we approach our alliance relationships, how we build a strong economy and a secure nation, how we provide for our families and enable them to contribute to their communities as well. So against that backdrop, I want to cover three themes.
First, I want to spell out what our approach as a nation is of strenuous endeavour – and what that means for the great alliance with the United States.
Second, I want to explain what it means for the approach that we will take to the new and more challenging global environment that confronts us all.&nbsp;
Third, I want to talk about Australia’s place in the global economic landscape; how we are ensuring that Australia is well-positioned to succeed in what is a rapidly changing global economy.
Now the importance of our alliance on this first point was set out in 1908, when our nation as a Commonwealth was only 7 years old, Australia’s second Prime Minister Alfred Deakin defied our principal ally, Great Britain at the time, and wrote directly to President Roosevelt, inviting the Great White Fleet to visit Australia. Deakin wrote that “no other Federation in the world possesses so many features [in common with] the United States as does the Commonwealth of Australia”. &nbsp;
President Roosevelt’s Secretary of State Elihu Root, strongly recommended that Australia be added to the fleet’s itinerary. He told the President: “The time will surely come, although probably after our day, when it will be important for the United States to have all ports friendly and all causes of sympathy alive in the Pacific”. That was a long-sighted view and it’s proved to be true.
The fleet certainly received a friendly welcome in the port of Sydney which is Joe and my hometown. On 20 August 1908, it is said that well over half a million Sydneysiders turned out to watch the arrival of the fleet. We saw at the Pentagon just this week a shot of that scene. Now that is quite a turnout for a city whose population at the time was only 600,000.&nbsp; That’s a big crowd. It was the largest gathering yet seen in Australia, far exceeding the numbers that had celebrated even the foundation of our Commonwealth as a nation just seven years before.
That visit was the beginning of a strong and enduring partnership between our nations and we have been alongside the United States in every conflict since.
We have always been prepared as Australians to make a contribution to that alliance, not just take one.&nbsp;You do that over 100 years and more and your alliance only gets stronger and stronger to the point where it is today. And public support for our alliances is incredibly strong. Your Council’s own survey as we were just discussing outside, of public attitudes to foreign policy published earlier this month found support for America’s security alliances has never been higher. And we welcome that.
You can be assured that we are determined to continue to expand and strengthen our alliance.&nbsp;
On this visit, we have agreed to increase our co-operation in space research. Now this isn’t about writing cheques to NASA or anything like that, this is about Australia as a Commonwealth investing in our own businesses in Australia, our own capability in Australia, to create jobs in Australia, in our space industry so our space industry can participate in the noble and visionary project of the return to the moon. Not about writing cheques to NASA, NASA’s got plenty of cheques, but the Australian industry needs to develop and frankly it’s about 20,000 jobs in Australia and turning an industry into Australia into a $12 billion industry by 2030. And so that industry in Australia can partner and participate with commercial partners here in the United States.
We are also working together to build an integrated supply chain on rare earths and critical minerals; this is both a strategic as well as an economic issue for Australia, essential for our defence and high technology applications. And we are deepening co-operation on so-called frontier technologies that will shape the global economy for decades and beyond. Very much in both our national interests.
We are substantially increasing our economic, security and infrastructure co-operation in the South West Pacific. We are modernising our alliance cooperation arrangements.&nbsp;The bottom line is that when we made a commitment to the alliance, we meant it and we will never take it for granted because there is a temptation and a great danger in complacency around alliances.&nbsp;To welcome the protections provided by them but not necessarily the obligations. It is a temptation that our nations have meticulously resisted and continue to.
We are committed to working with the US internationally because we agree it has borne too many burdens on its own. Australia will continue to pull its weight.&nbsp;We look to the United States often but we don’t leave it to the United States. We do not opt for the grey twilight. We do not shrink from strife. The challenges of a changing world are things we confront.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are grappling with the end of one era now and really what is the dawn of another.&nbsp;&nbsp;
Like TR more than 100 years ago, we confront a changing economic order and transformative technological change.&nbsp;This isn’t fresh news. Like TR, we should approach this challenge with confidence, resolve and clearly articulated principles to guide us. And this is the central focus of what my Government and Australia is doing in the Indo-Pacific.
It is the region where we live, it’s our neighbourhood. It’s the region that will continue to shape our prosperity, our security, our destiny and, increasingly, our global balance of power.
Our engagement with the Indo-Pacific will be shaped by five key principles. Firstly, a commitment to open markets and the free flow of trade based on rules, not power. Respect for sovereignty of nations, their independence, irrespective of their size. From the smallest Pacific nation to the largest economies in the world.
A commitment to burden-sharing with strong and resilient regional architecture. Respect for international law and the peaceful resolution of disputes. And a commitment to work together to resolve challenges of common interest including particularly on our oceans – we’re the biggest island continent in the world, our oceans impact heavily not just on our economy, on our security, but how we do life in Australia and always have not just in modern times but going down in over 60,000 years of the oldest living culture in the world, our Indigenous Australians. Oceans, climate, illegal fishing and plastics pollution. Practical issues that need addressing.
We also need to work together to find ways to reduce trade tensions that have developed over recent years.
China’s economic growth is welcomed by Australia and we recognise the economic maturity that it has now realised as a newly developed economy.&nbsp;This was the point of the world’s economic engagement with China. Having achieved this status, it is important that China’s trade arrangements, participation in addressing important global environmental challenges like the ones I just mentioned, that there is transparency in their partnerships and support for developing nations, all of this needs to reflect this new status and the responsibilities that go with it as a very major world power.
The world’s global institutions must adjust their settings for China, in recognition of this new status.&nbsp; That means more will be expected of course, as has always been the case for nations like the United States who’ve always had this standing.
So it is also true that China’s economic expansion was made possible by the stability underwritten by US strategic engagement and the international community who built the global trading system and welcomed China’s accession to the WTO.&nbsp;
We should remember that it was 75 years ago - at Bretton Woods - that the United States led the way in the creation of financial institutions and economic forums that established equitable rules to stabilise the international economy and remove the points of friction that had contributed to two world wars.&nbsp;
That was the dividend of peace. And investing that dividend of peace in a new world order. And I agree with the assessment made in the President’s 2017 National Security Strategy that while the global economic system continues to serve our interests, it needs some reform. We cannot pretend that rules that were written a generation ago remain appropriate for today. Why would that be true in this area and not in any other?
It is clear that global trade rules are no longer fit for purpose.&nbsp;In some cases, the rules were designed for a completely different economy in another era, one that simply doesn’t exist any more. In other cases, our rules are not comprehensive.&nbsp;And it is clear that our rules are not keeping pace with technological change that is happening at an unprecedented pace. But we do need the rules, we do need the rules. A study by Accenture estimated that digital commerce now drives 22 per cent of the world economy, you know these figures. A separate study by McKinsey Global Institute showed that data flows grew by a factor of 45 in the decade to 2016.
But there are many existing obstacles and many emerging barriers to the expansion of the digital economy. Left to proliferate, such barriers will distort and choke the global economy and the great benefits that have flowed to all nations. That’s why Australia is taking a leading role in developing e-commerce rules at the WTO. That’s a practical thing to do.
There is a broader imperative at work.&nbsp;We must demonstrate that collectively we have not lost our ability to adapt and adjust our trading system to new realities.
When there were 144 members of the WTO, the Director General at the time likened the WTO to a vehicle that had one accelerator and 143 brakes.&nbsp;
We cannot allow that to continue. We can no longer move at the speed of the lowest common denominator. It is time for the system to catch up with the world.&nbsp;And we intend to help that process in a practical way, making our contribution based on our experience and I’ve got to say we’re positive about it. The world has just reached a change point, that’s all. There’s no need to catastrophise it, there’s a need to understand it to adjust the institutions and the rules to accommodate it. There’s no need to engage in a heavily polarised debate on this issue, there’s a much more practical issue at the heart of all this and we just have to reset to ensure that can provide the same peace and stability and prosperity that will last. We’re totally up to it, we still have the wisdom and capability to achieve it and so Australia won’t be a bystander in that process, we’ll be involved. We’ll be rolling our sleeves up, we’ll be playing our part and just in case you think we’re doing that because we’re terribly friendly and wonderfully affable people, which we are, the real issue is it’s in our national interest.
The reason we’re here today is it’s a great Council, it’s a great institution, I’m here today because one in five Australian jobs depends on trade and our connection with the rest of the world depends on that. I’m here today because of what’s happening with plastics in our oceans is bad news for our local environment in Australia so we need to do something about it. I’m here today because of our friends in the Pacific, our family in the Pacific, people are stealing their fish, that’s got to stop if they want to have a secure future for their families and their people. And these issues are the things we need to move the dial on.
Ladies and gentlemen, moving onto the third point I want to talk about today, TR was right when he said in this city 120 years ago that “no country can long endure if its foundations are not laid deep in the material prosperity that comes from thrift, from business energy and enterprise.”&nbsp;
The Australian government understands this point very acutely. My government is unashamedly pro-growth. Every time the issue of inclusive growth comes up I say we’ve got to have growth first for it to be inclusive.
And there is a simple reason for it. Without a strong economy you cannot provide your citizens with the living standards they aspire to, the essential services they rely on, the protection and conservation of the environment they live in and the security under which they wish shelter.&nbsp;&nbsp;
That is why my government will always seek to promote and reward enterprise and aspiration and I think this is one of the great connections between Australia and the United States and we’ve talked a lot about growth on this trip.
The Australian economy is now in its 29th year of uninterrupted economic growth, that’s a world record. I think it’s one of our nation’s greatest achievements if not our greatest achievement.&nbsp;Since 1992, Australia’s economy has grown faster than any other developed country.
We are determined to build an even stronger economy. Most recently we have legislated A$158 billion in personal tax cuts because we believe Australians should keep more of what they earn and that acts as an incentive for them to get out and realise their aspirations.
And record tax relief for small and medium businesses similar to what you’ve achieved here in the United States.
This year our budget will be in surplus for the first time in 12 years. The Ambassador knows a lot about that too he did a lot of the heavy lifting as part of our government in its early days. We will eliminate net debt within a decade. Our AAA credit rating remains in place despite the tremendous shocks we’ve had to our economy. The most significant, and I’m not talking about the GFC, I’m talking about the end of the mining investment boom ripped $80 billion of capital investment out of our country and that sent a shock through the system far greater than the global financial crisis which was of more acute effect in the north Atlantic. In Australia the big hit to our economy actually came through that event and we retained our AAA credit rating through that process, one of only ten nations in the world to achieve this outcome from all key rating agencies.
We are pursuing the most ambitious trade strategy in Australia’s history. In the last six years we have secured duty-free or preferential access to an extra 1.7 billion consumers.&nbsp;Seventy per cent of Australia’s two-way trade is now covered by free trade agreements, up from 26 per cent when our government came to office in 2013.
We have concluded or are negotiating trade agreements with 17 of our top 20 trading partners.&nbsp;Australia gets it. You don’t get rich in Australia selling things to yourself, you’ve got to take it off shore, you’ve got to take your economy off shore and you’ve got to look out for prosperity and we’ve been doing that for a long time. That’s why we’re negotiating an ambitious FTA with the European Union, and hope to commence negotiations with the United Kingdom as soon as it leaves the EU.
These efforts are paying dividends. In the year to June 30, Australia recorded a record trade surplus of around A$50 billion, that’s three times larger than the previous record.&nbsp;Despite global headwinds, Australia has recorded 19 consecutive monthly trade surpluses and I hasten to add the United States continues to enjoy a healthy bilateral trade surplus with Australia of some A$29 billion in 2018 and just in case you were wondering, the US has had a trade surplus with Australia since the Truman administration. So there is no better deal than the one the US has with Australia, not a tariff on anything that comes in, that is the gold standard of trade relationships that set out I think where Australia sits in the economic landscape in the United States.
So ladies and gentlemen, our strong economy means we can plan for the future and we will maintain a defiant optimism in the complex and often confusing world that is out there. Why? Because we know who we are, we know what we’re about, we know what our principles are, we know who our friends are, we know who our partners are. We’ve got a clear plan and we want to work with everybody but we’re very clear and consistent we hope in our communication and in the way we follow through and how we live out our values and our relationships with other nations. &nbsp;
This investment means we can continue to meet commitments to our alliance partner. That we can play our part in particular.
We are building a stronger Defence Force by restoring Defence funding to 2 per cent of GDP by 2020-21. That will make us, by the way, the second of all five eye countries, it’ll make us greater than the United Kingdom and will make it also greater than Japan and it’ll also make us greater than Germany. &nbsp;And we embarked on the largest regeneration of the Navy since the Second World War, investing A$90 billion to invest in 57 new vessels mainly in Australia. And this is part of a broader A$200 billion defence capability upgrade that we’re doing.&nbsp;
We rely on the United States for a large share of this equipment. Australia spends over $A4.4 billion on US military hardware annually.&nbsp;That’s more than $A12 million per day. It means we are one of America’s most interoperable allies and most trusted I would say.
We are modernising our national infrastructure to ensure our economy is even more efficient and more productive. We are investing A$100 billion in nation-building infrastructure over the next decade. That’s a plan that others can invest in as well. Our plan will bust congestion, improve the lives of Australians, speed up supply chains and ensure our products reach global markets on time. We are building a new Inland rail network and a new airport in Western Sydney. And co-located with the new airport, the new Western Sydney Aerotropolis will become a global hub for sectors including defence and aerospace, freight and logistics, agribusiness, pharmaceutical industries and biotechnology.
As we expand our economy and make it more productive, we will continue to be open to foreign investment. The United States is by far the largest source of investment in Australia and the largest destination of Australian investment.
More than a quarter of all investment in Australia originated in the United States - nearly A$940 billion. US majority-owned affiliates in Australia employ 310,000 Australians, paying nearly $30 billion in wages and salaries annually. That’s why we’re here – it’s about jobs, it’s about wages for Australians.
It’s not one-way traffic. Australian investment in the United States is also growing strongly. Yesterday, with President Trump, I participated in the official opening of a new Pratt Industries manufacturing plant in Ohio – the largest new factory in the United States since President Trump was elected. And last month, Bluescope Steel, a great Australian steel company, announced a $1 billion expansion of its North Star steel mill in Delta, Ohio. These projects are the practical evidence of an ever closer economic relationship between our two countries. And there’ll be more as there’ll be more investment from the US and Australia.
So our great partnership, ladies and gentlemen, was started and cemented in the presidency of Teddy Roosevelt. A presidency that left an indelible mark on America and defined its place in the world. Our shared temper of mind and our capacity for strenuous endeavour have consolidated that friendship.
We think in similar ways. We share an instinct to ‘have a go’. And a reflex to support those who have that go so they get that go.
It is evident in the strength of our alliance. It is evident in the strength of our shared commitment to embracing the challenges of the new global order. And it is evident in the strength of our economies and our determination to improve the lives of our peoples.
Thank you so much for your kind attention.
MODERATOR IVO DAALDER: Well thank you that was terrific. It’s refreshing to start a Monday morning with defiant optimism, we’re not used to that these days, but it’s great to have. Also we really appreciate what you said about the alliance, it’s important to note our forces have been fighting alongside each other for over 100 years in every single war including for the last 18 years in Afghanistan, a remarkable testament to the strength of the alliance.
We have about 10 minutes so I’ll get to some of the questions from the audience, the first one though I want to get to is Ohio, we’re in the Mid West we’re in Chicago, it’s important the trade relationship you mentioned with the United States is really important, where do you see the future growth potential in that relationship between the United States and Australia, in particular how do you see the Mid West playing a role?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I think in the two examples I outlined in terms of Australia’s big investments whether it’s Bluescope or what Anthony Pratt has been doing down there in Wapakoneta, there you go I got it right this time, that speaks I think of the ingenuity of Australians to understand where the opportunity is. You know I talk about Anthony’s business, they’re in 27 states now, what Australia has done in the recycling of paper and the mills process and the technology they built there through Pratt Industries in Australia, he’s basically brought that model to the United States where the level of recycling is much, much lower. So his business in Australia is probably about half the market in Australia [indistinct], in the United States it’s about five. But they have the technology and the know how to turn that into something much greater than that and they’re doing something much different to everybody else but they’re also doing something quite important environmentally as well. I think Anthony wouldn’t like me to describe him as a sort of environmental warrior although they’re the outcomes they’ve achieved, but his business model is just good for the environment, that’s where I think he’s really merged these things/
So why am I telling you this story? I’m telling you this because Australians are quite innovative investors, we deal with great technology in Australia to solve some of these big challenges. My own government is going to focus very heavily on the technology around waste management. It’s our waste it’s our responsibility, it’s a very practical that I want our government and our country to pursue but it’s going to create a lot of jobs too, it’s going to create lower cost industries for Australia and it’s going to create a clear environment so it’s just win win win.
So where we can see those opportunities, and I think there are a lot of those across the United States and we can bring a lot of that know how from what we’re doing in Australia here to the United States, and similarly I think the partnerships we can have in the agriculture sector, the ag tech sector, the fin tech sector, I mean the entire Mid West so much of its primary industries depends on this new technology, I mean technology is going to shape a lot of the opportunities here. Farming practices are going to change.
In Australia at the moment we are going through one of the worst droughts in memory but the resilience…drought is not a new thing in Australia and so our farmers have had to, by sheer will and necessity of the environment they live in, have had to develop some of the most advanced farming practices in the world. So there’s a great deal to learn off each other and I’m sure David will be exploring all of this in his new role as Consul.
MODERATOR: You talked about China, you described China as a success in fact off our policy, I think most people would agree with that but we are at a stage where there is debate certainly in the United States about the meaning of that success. So in our own opinion polling we find a very divided public between those who think China’s role and emergence in world power represents a critical threat to US security and those who say no actually it’s something that we can deal with. How would you describe the future strategic relationship [indistinct] China?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I think the first thing to do is acknowledge that Australia and the US come at this from a different perspective. We have a trade surplus with China, you have a trade deficit, and quite a significant one and so that is I think going to affect the lens through which you see China and its economic success, I suppose. From Australia’s point of view, the engagement with China has been enormously beneficial to our country and that’s what led us to develop the Comprehensive Strategic Partnership we have with China, the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement which was quite revolutionary [indistinct] and we want to see that continue.
The fact, as I was arguing in my presentation, has taken us to a place where China has a resource and capability that it never had before and it has invested a great deal of that in its own strategic defence and its capability and that obviously presents a different calculus to the Indo Pacific than existed 30 years ago. And so that’s why I just encourage everyone who’s engaging in this issue to sort of step back and appreciate the history of what’s happened here and to have a bit of, I think, confidence and optimism that there are options and there are ways that we can manage this into the future. The world can have two very large economies and they can be mutually beneficial but the point is we’ve got to go for the gear change now. It won’t continue to work if we try to force it into the old model and the old rules and understandings that have been there before that have led us to this point. They have served their purpose and now we need to find a new way of this working. So that’s why I’ve been quite supportive of the President trying to strike a new deal with China, there’s some serious issues which have to be addressed in that trade relationship. Issues which once addressed will also benefit Australia. Issues on forced technology transfer affect Australian companies too. IP issues affect Australian companies too. And there are global responsibilities on the environment and the other things which Australia is very invested in and everybody needs to pull their weight on that so with great economic power comes great responsibility and we need to step up and gear change.
MODERATOR: You described the centrality of Australia in at least the bilateral relationship, maybe together with Japan, one of the countries that has an extraordinarily important relationship with China and an extraordinarily important relationship with the United States. Is there a role for Australia either alone or perhaps together with one or two other countries to try and figure out a way that we can build a relationship between the United States and China that benefits both and also Australia? Is there something that you can do proactively?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, and we’re doing it. It’s part of the reason for being here but it’s also important we work through things like the East Asia Summit, the close relationships as you say with Japan, with Indonesia with whom we’ve just completed a comprehensive partnership with them, and also with India as a major and a strongly emerging economy in the Indo Pacific region. So [indistinct] a small country, but one that is greatly respected and has I think very interesting insights into this [indistinct]…gave a very impressive overview when he spoke at the Shangri-La Conference earlier in the year. But the thing about the Indo Pacific, and Australia is no stranger to this either, our objective here is pretty straightforward, we want to be independent sovereign nations and to be able to get on and do what we do and run our countries the way our people choose to and that’s what is prized. And I find there a great complementarity of nations in the Indo Pacific. We all have our different histories, we all have our different ideologies or philosophies or systems of government, this is why I’m always encouraged by the ASEAN nations – a more eclectic group of nations you couldn’t find but we’ve been working pretty closely together for 45 years and I think that shows the attitude of the Indo Pacific and that is why ASEAN has been very much at the centre of how we look at the Indo Pacific and we enjoy that relationship.
So understanding that nations in the Indo Pacific who simply want to be independent and sovereign I think is the basis for great engagement and a coalition of positive intent.
MODERATOR: I know we’re out of time so I’m going to ask one soft ball question, which is coming at you from our audience, what do you believe Australia or Australians do better than any other nation or that the United States should bring into this country?
PRIME MINISTER: What do we do better? Look there’s heaps of things we do better. We’re going to have to push our flight back.
I’ll tell you what’s most important I think, I think what Australia really brings to the table is we’re a massively optimistic people. We’re a glass half full country. We’re a country that has achieved amazing things and we tend not to crow about it, we’re quite understated. But we’re a very strong and resilient country proud of what we achieved and what we’re doing in the world and most importantly to lift living standards for our own people.
We’ve got our challenges as I said, the drought at the moment is breaking the nation’s heart and while I’m a long way away from home this is something I’m getting regular reports on and I’m looking forward to getting home and getting out in those rural communities where they’re really hurting. But despite droughts, despite floods, despite wars, despite economic challenges, despite being a long way away from the rest of the world where [indistinct] has catered for centuries, we have prevailed and succeeded. And why? Because we have a go, and we get a go and when we do that I think we add something very special to the world.
MODERATOR: Mr Prime Minister I can’t think of a better leaving point than that optimism, that’s a great way to end, we really appreciate you coming.


Prime Minister
Much has changed since the United Nations was established.
Australia was there in the beginning. And we are here today because we continue to believe that differences can be resolved through dialogue and mutual respect.&nbsp;
Because we believe that an international rules-based order is essential for global stability, security and prosperity.&nbsp;
Because we know that you can’t have prosperity without peace.
The world today is complex and contested. Many fatalistically see a polarised world where countries feel pushed to make binary choices. Australia will continue to resist this path.
Australia will continue to seek to honestly maintain our great alliances and comprehensive partnerships in good repair, from our great and powerful friends to our smallest Pacific Island family neighbours.
Approaching its 75th anniversary next year, the UN must reform and evolve to respond effectively to the challenges of the 21st Century.&nbsp;
And to fulfil its core mandate, the UN must be ever mindful of the principles and values that have always been foundational to the UN’s efforts.
Peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with international law. Respect for the sovereignty and independence of all states. Open markets that facilitate the free flow of trade, capital and ideas. Freedom of faith, freedom of expression. Respect for human rights, and combatting disadvantage, discrimination and persecution based on disability, gender, religion, sexuality, age, race or ethnicity.&nbsp;
These are the liberal democratic values which underpinned the UN at its inception. These are Australia’s values. We believe they should remain the guiding principles and values for the UN into the future.
The alternate path of lowest common denominator transactionalism and relativism is a dead end.
The UN is the prime custodian of the rules-based order.&nbsp; It is also the custodian of mechanisms for dialogue and adjudication which buttress them.&nbsp;
It has a challenging task ahead of it.
For Australia’s part, we will continue to practice what we preach.
Last month, Australia ratified a maritime treaty setting out a new sea boundary with Timor‑Leste.
This followed the first-ever conciliation initiated under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
This demonstrates that the UN and its norms are central to a cooperative rules‑based approach to global challenges.
In the Pacific, we are also stepping up.&nbsp;
Australia is the single largest development partner for Pacific Island nations.&nbsp;
This is an instinctive response for Australia, consistent with our clear national interest and our commitment to our Pacific family, our vuvale, our whanau.
Our goal is simple - a Southwest Pacific that is secure strategically, stable economically, sovereign politically and sustainable environmentally.
The UN’s work in partnership with Australia has also helped to build a more sustainable and resilient Pacific: to support local climate change actions and resilience, to strive for gender equality through the empowerment of women and girls, to support continuing improvement in health outcomes and to bolster regional peace, including through the Bougainville Referendum Support Project.
Today I want to take the opportunity to speak about Australia’s response to the great global environmental challenges.&nbsp;
Firstly how Australia is acting to protect our oceans.
Australia is an island continent.&nbsp;
Australia has the world’s third largest maritime jurisdiction, stretching from the great Southern Ocean to the vast Pacific and Indian oceans.
Over 85 per cent of Australia’s population lives within just 50 kilometres of the coast.&nbsp;
Australia’s Indigenous peoples have been linked to the land and sea for more than 65,000 years.
Our oceans connect Australia with the world. Ninety nine per cent of Australia’s trade by volume is carried by sea. By 2025, marine industries will contribute around $100 billion each year to our economy.&nbsp;
Our prosperity and security rely on the established laws that govern freedom of navigation, be it in the Strait of Hormuz or closer to home.
Protecting our oceans is also one of the world’s more pressing environmental challenges.
To protect our oceans, Australia is committed to leading urgent action to combat plastic pollution choking our oceans; tackle over-exploitation of our fisheries, prevent ocean habitat destruction and of course take action on climate change.
Scientists estimate that in just 30 years’ time the weight of plastics in our oceans will exceed the weight of the fish in those oceans.
Recently, I announced that Australia will ban exports of waste plastic, paper, glass and tyres, and we anticipate that starting in 2020. That’s about 1.4 million tonnes of potent recyclable material.
Australia is also leading on practical research and development into recycling - turning recycled plastic and glass into roads, manufacturing 100% recycled PET bottles and capturing methane and waste to create energy.&nbsp;
New technologies are coming on line with the potential to recycle used plastics into valuable new plastics - creating a circular plastics economy.&nbsp;
These include innovations like ‘bioplastics’ - compostable plastic replacements and technologies like the ‘Catalytic Hydrothermal Reactor’ - an innovative Australian designed technology that converts end of life plastics into waxes, diesel and new plastics.&nbsp;
These innovations show us a truly circular economy is not only possible, but is achievable. And it’s of course, essential. And Australia intends to do more.
Australia will invest $167 million in an Australian Recycling Investment Plan.&nbsp;&nbsp;
Our focus is to create the right investment environment so that new technologies are commercialised - preventing pollution from entering our oceans, and creating valuable new products.
Australia supports the High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy and we are working through the International Maritime Organization to address the way shipping contributes to plastics pollution in our oceans.
Australia supports the G20 work on marine plastic debris and the Osaka Blue Ocean Vision led of course by Prime Minister Abe.
We welcome the contributions and leadership from business and the private sector to address these challenges, including Australia’s own Minderoo Foundation. Industry led mechanisms for investing in new recycling technologies and mitigating plastic waste in rivers, beaches and oceans on a global scale is absolutely essential.
We must also act to safeguard the sustainability of our fisheries. This means cracking down on illegal fishing.&nbsp;
There are too many nations standing by while their nationals are thieving the livelihoods of their neighbours.
Australia is acting not only in our own interest but helping Pacific Island family to reduce illegal fishing which depletes the fish stocks Pacific Islanders rely on for jobs, revenue and their food security.
We have also worked together with Indonesia, and I congratulate President Widodo, we have been co-committed to an action plan to combat illegal fishing in Southeast Asia and thank Indonesia for their regional leadership.
And we are working with regional organisations to improve fisheries governance.
As well, we are providing patrol boats to 13 countries supported by aerial surveillance through our Pacific Maritime Security Program in Pacific Island nations to help them police illegal fishing in their waters.
We are leading efforts to preserve natural habitats and biodiversity, including through partnerships with other countries to protect migratory birds and their habitats.
And we have worked hard to prevent commercial whaling and to end whaling in the Southern Ocean.
Australia set up the International Partnership for Blue Carbon in 2015 with the aim of protecting and conserving mangroves, tidal marshes and seagrasses for climate change mitigation and adaptation.
And our Great Barrier Reef remains one of the world’s most pristine areas of natural beauty.&nbsp; Feel free to visit it. Our reef is vibrant and resilient and protected under the world’s most comprehensive reef management plan.
The UNESCO World Heritage Committee has found that Australia’s management of our reef is ‘highly sophisticated’ and is considered by many as the ‘gold standard’ for large scale marine protected areas.
Australia’s $2 billion Reef 2050 Long Term Sustainability Plan is based on the best available science and draws on 40 years of analysis, underpinned by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority.&nbsp;
Australia’s continued support for reef, coral and water quality science will ensure that the Great Barrier Reef remains one of the best managed World Heritage sites in the world.
Now, Australia is also taking real action on climate change and we are &nbsp;getting results.
We are successfully balancing our global responsibilities with sensible and practical policies to secure our environmental and our economic future.&nbsp;
Australia’s internal and global critics on climate change willingly overlook or perhaps ignore our achievements, as the facts simply don’t fit the narrative they wish to project about our contribution.
Australia is responsible for just 1.3 per cent of global emissions. Australia is doing our bit on climate change and we reject any suggestion to the contrary.
By 2020 Australia will have overachieved on our Kyoto commitments, reducing our greenhouse gas emissions by 367 million tonnes more than required to meet our 2020 Kyoto target. Now there are few member countries, whether at this forum or the OECD who can make this claim.
Our latest estimates show both emissions per person and the emissions intensity of the economy are at their lowest levels in 29 years.
In 2012, it was estimated Australia would release some 693 million tonnes of emissions in 2020. As of 2018, this estimate has fallen to 540 million tonnes.
Australia’s electricity sector is producing less emissions. In the year to March 2019, emissions from Australia’s electricity sector were 15.7 per cent lower than the peak recorded in the year to June 2009.
While we are a resource rich country, it is important to note that Australia only accounts for around 5.5 per cent of the world’s coal production.
Having met and we will exceed our Kyoto targets, Australia will meet our Paris commitments as well and we stand by them.
We are committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 26 to 28 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030.
This is a credible, fair, responsible and achievable contribution to global climate change action. It represents a halving of our emissions per person in Australia, or a two thirds reduction in emissions per unit of GDP.
At the centre of our domestic efforts is a $3.5 billion Climate Solutions Plan that I successfully took to our recent national election – supporting practical projects like capturing methane from waste, revegetation of degraded land and soil carbon.
Through our Climate Solutions Plan, we are supporting the transition to renewable energy – with projects such as Snowy 2.0, the largest pumped hydro station project in the Southern Hemisphere.
And we are investing significantly in research and development to use the best science and business expertise to commercialise new renewable technologies and integrate renewables into our electricity grid.&nbsp;
Australia now has the highest per capita investment in clean energy technologies of anywhere in the world and one in five Australian households has rooftop solar systems.
In 2018, $13.2 billion was invested in clean energy technologies in Australia. This builds on the estimated $10 billion invested in 2017.
We are also doing the right thing by our neighbours.&nbsp;
We recently committed to invest a further 500 million Australian dollars over five years from 2020 for renewable energy, climate change and resilience in the Pacific.
We have decided to invest this directly from within our international overseas development programme, rather than through additional budget commitments to the Global Green Climate Fund.&nbsp;
This enables us to target our support directly to Pacific Island nations, ensuring they receive this support more directly, in a more timely and targeted fashion.
At the same time, it provides greater transparency, fairness and accountability to Australian taxpayers who rightly demand attention and support from Government to address challenges at home, in particular bosting drought resilience through our investment in our national water grid infrastructure.
Australia is also committed with other countries to the Montreal Protocol, an agreement that will help protect the world from ozone depletion and combat climate change.
Under the Montreal Protocol, Australia will further accelerate its efforts and will use 60 per cent less HCFCs than permitted. I can proudly inform you that Australia is on track to fulfil our commitments and I urge all other countries to fulfil their commitments.&nbsp;
All of this adds up to significant and comprehensive action by Australia in response to the world’s greatest environmental challenges.
Australia is under no illusions about the challenges the global community confronts in the years ahead.
Today I want to reassure all members that Australia is carrying its own weight and more, just as we always have.
We are a generous nation playing our part in securing our shared future.
Reforming the rules of global governance, setting common standards to ensure global connectivity in the future, preventing conflict, building the capacity of developing nations, supporting essential health projects, protecting our oceans and taking action on climate change and getting results.
Like many leaders here, I get many letters from children in Australia concerned about their future.
I take them very seriously and I deeply respect their concerns and indeed I welcome their passion, especially when it comes to the environment.
My impulse is always to seek to respond positively and to encourage them. To provide context, perspective and particularly to generate hope.
To focus their minds and direct their energies to practical solutions and positive behaviour that will deliver enduring results for them.
To encourage them to learn more about science, technology, engineering and maths – because it’s through research, innovation and enterprise that the practical work of successfully managing our very real environmental challenges is achieved.&nbsp;
We must respect and harness the passion and aspiration of our younger generations, we must guard against others who would seek to compound or, worse, facelessly exploit their anxiety for their own agendas. We must similarly not allow their concerns to be dismissed or diminished as this can also increase their anxiety. What parent could do otherwise?
Our children have a right not just to their future but to their optimism.
Above all, we should let our children be children, let our kids be kids, let our teenagers be teenagers - while we work positively together to deliver the practical solutions for them and their future.
I am confident, once again, that Australia stands with you and together we have the wit and the capacity to surmount the challenges that come our way. Just as those who have come before us in this place have done, consistent with the values that have made that possible.
I thank you for your attention.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Acknowledgment of Gadigal, service men and women and veterans.
Your Excellency Margaret Beazley AO QC, Governor of NSW and Mr Dennis Wilson
Our 25th Prime Minister, the Hon John Howard OM AC
Sir Frank Lowy - Chairman of the Lowy Institute
Michael Fullilove - Executive Director of the Lowy Institute
Colleagues, friends, ladies and gentlemen
It’s an honour to be giving this lecture which bears the name of a great Australian – Sir Frank Lowy.
When we see your name we’re reminded of what is possible in Australia.
You had nothing, yet you built an Australian empire that reached far beyond our shores.
Above all, your name and life reminds us that our most valuable inheritance is always found within, in our character.
And we should acknowledge on a night like this, it’s a character that owes so much to your own father.
A man who suffered to death at Birkenau because he would not be parted from his tallit and tefillin.
What character, what faith. Because of that example, his son became a blessing to our nation.
While your childhood was darkened by the Holocaust, your eyes have always remained defiantly bright with hope for the future.
In your speech last year for this Lecture you said “the list of our blessings is long” … and that you believe Australia has never been in a better position to influence international events, and to benefit from them.
I believe that too.
Tonight, it is a great privilege as Prime Minister to deliver this lecture, named in your honour.
As a politician, my instincts and passions have always been domestic.
Despite my activity of the past year, I am not one who naturally seeks out summits and international platforms. But as Prime Minister you must always be directed by the national interest.&nbsp;
As has been the case for Prime Ministers past, so much of Australia’s future right now is being shaped by events and relationships beyond our borders.
Australia cannot be an indifferent bystander to these events that impact our livelihoods, our safety and our sovereignty.&nbsp;
We must, as we have done previously, cultivate, marshal and bring our influence to bear to protect and promote our national interests.
Tonight I would like to talk about the new and challenging world that Australia faces. And how my government is responding to these challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are living in a world in transition that former US Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, has described as “an unusually delicate moment in time.”
A new economic and political order is still taking shape.
We have entered a new era of strategic competition - a not unnatural result of shifting power dynamics, in our modern, more multi-polar world and globalised economy.
It is a time of technological disruption, some of which is welcomed, some resented and feared.
A time when global supply chains have become integrated to an unprecedented degree, and more of our economies are dependent on global trade than at any other time, including the major economic powers of the United States, China, Japan and Europe.
There is both the promise and the threat of automation and artificial intelligence.&nbsp;
There are fears, overstated in my opinion, of technological bifurcation – a sort of economic ‘Iron Curtain’ coming down.
It is also an era of continuing security threats from terrorism, extremist Islam, anti-semitism, white supremacism, and evil on a local and global level.
An era where pragmatic international engagement, based on the cooperation of sovereign nation states, is being challenged by a new variant of globalism that seeks to elevate global institutions above the authority of nation states to direct national policies.
Of polarisation within and between societies.
An era in which elite opinion and attitudes have often become disconnected from the mainstream of their societies, and a sense of resentment and disappointment has emerged.
An era of insiders and outsiders, threatening social cohesion, provoking discontent and distrust.
Whether directly or indirectly, these changes impact Australians.
On our jobs, what we earn, our living standards and the essential services we rely on, that depend on a strong budget and strong economy.
On our environment, our oceans, our coasts, our grazing and pasture lands, our water resources, our soil, that depend upon our practical conservation.
On our safety, that depends on our national security, afforded by our alliances,&nbsp; our defence, diplomatic and intelligence capabilities, our adherence to the rule of law and our ability to enforce the law.
On our freedom, that depends on our dedication to national sovereignty, the resilience of our institutions, and our protections from foreign interference.
Dealing with uncertainty is not new.
This is not the first time our children have grown up in a time of global tension and disruption. This is a context and perspective I fear is too often missing in our contemporary discussion of global issues.
My generation grew up under the threat of nuclear Armageddon, hoping as Sting put it, that “the Russians loved their children too”.
My parents’ generation grew up during the greatest global conflict in world history, including the Holocaust, the invasion of what was then Australian soil in New Guinea, the bombing of Darwin and Japanese subs in Sydney Harbour sinking ferries.
My grandparents grew up during the war to end all wars, where every neighbourhood knew the cost as 60,000 Australians were killed out of a population of not even five million; who then went on to endure the Great Depression, before backing up to fight to defend our freedom in the Middle East and the Pacific.
Those generations recognised the challenges of their time, and responded with a practical resilience, optimism and resolve, rather than the anxiety inducing moral panic and sense of crisis evident in some circles today.
And at every stage Australia has played its part as a force for good, in partnership with those who shared our outlook and our values.
The key to progress was individual, like-minded sovereign nations acting together with enlightened self-interest.
The Marshall Plan.
The rebuilding of Japan.
The Colombo Plan.
A co-operative and respectful internationalism.
On occasion these efforts were forged through international institutions established to serve the states that formed them.
On other occasions, the work was done by looser coalitions of partners.
But in all cases, it was the principled actions of nation states, most often led by the United States, binding together the liberal democracies of the western world.
And in all cases these actions were underpinned by common values that anchor these societies.
As I recently reminded the United Nations General Assembly, these shared values filled the vacuum to win peace, provide stability, achieve prosperity and extend liberty essential for the human spirit to thrive.
We can never be complacent or take comfort that such achievements are permanent. They require eternal vigilance.
To preserve this legacy in the face of the uncertainties of our modern world,&nbsp; we must approach the future with the same optimism, confidence and resolve, of previous generations, and through our commitment to the values and beliefs that have always guided our way.
The approach my Government is taking to these challenges is straightforward.
Know who we are and what we stand for, and allow this to guide our constructive engagement in and expectations of our international cooperation, including global institutions, and ensure that our national interests remain paramount.
Build a strong open economy at home, connected to global prosperity, enabling our capacity to protect and pursue our national interests.
Know where we live and work to promote stability, prosperity and engagement in our region by championing the common interest of sovereignty and independence as the natural antidote to any possible threat of regional hegemony.
And maintain our unique relationships with the United States - our most important ally - and China - our comprehensive strategic partner - in good order, by rejecting the binary narrative of their strategic competition and instead valuing and nurturing the unconflicted benefit of our close association.
Knowing who we are and what we stand for is as true today as it ever was.
We will continue to bring clear objectives and enduring values to our international engagement.
Freedom of thought and expression … of spirit and faith … of our humanity, including inalienable human rights.
Freedom of exchange, free and open markets, free flow of capital and ideas.
Freedom from oppression and coercion, freedom of choice,
These have never been more important.
And they are under threat, not just from the direct challenge of competing worldviews, but the complacency of western liberal democratic societies that owe their liberty and prosperity to these values.
Australia does and must always seek to have a responsible and participative international agency in addressing global issues.&nbsp; This is positive and practical globalism. Our interests are not served by isolationism and protectionism.&nbsp;
But it also does not serve our national interests when international institutions demand conformity rather than independent cooperation on global issues.
The world works best when the character and distinctiveness of independent nations is preserved within a framework of mutual respect. This includes respecting electoral mandates of their constituencies.
We should avoid any reflex towards a negative globalism that coercively seeks to impose a mandate from an often ill defined borderless global community.&nbsp; And worse still, an unaccountable internationalist bureaucracy.
Globalism must facilitate, align and engage, rather than direct and centralise. As such an approach can corrode support for joint international action.&nbsp;
Only a national government, especially one accountable through the ballot box and the rule of law, can define its national interests.&nbsp; We can never answer to a higher authority than the people of Australia.
And under my leadership Australia’s international engagement will be squarely driven by Australia’s national interests.
To paraphrase former Prime Minister John Howard, as Australians, ‘we will decide our interests and the circumstances in which we seek to pursue them.’
This will not only include our international efforts to support global peace and stability and to promote open markets based on fair and transparent rules, but also other global standards that underpin commerce, investment and exchange.
When it comes to setting global standards, we’ve not been as involved as we could be.&nbsp;
We cannot afford to leave it to others to set the standards that will shape our global economy.
I’m determined for Australia will play a more active role in standards setting.
I have tasked the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to come back to me with a comprehensive audit of global institutions and rule-making processes where we have the greatest stake.
And I want to send a message here tonight that we will be looking to tap Australian expertise as part of our efforts.
Ladies and gentlemen, the foundation for robust and credible Australian engagement abroad is a strong economy at home.
Without a strong economy, we cannot protect the living standards of our people.
Without a strong economy we cannot keep our people safe, protect and preserve our environment, guarantee the essential services Australians rely on and invest in national defence and global order.
That’s why bringing the budget back into balance and keeping that way is so important.
A strong budget is a cornerstone of Australian sovereignty in an uncertain world.
We are one of only ten nations with a AAA credit rating from all key rating agencies.
At the same time, we are pursuing the most ambitious trade strategy in Australia’s history. One in five Australian jobs is now dependent on trade.
We have concluded, or are negotiating, trade deals with 17 out of our top 20 trading partners.
We are working towards an agreement with the EU.&nbsp;
And we stand ready to swiftly secure a trade agreement with the United Kingdom as soon as they are in a position to do so. Post Brexit, the UK will become an important partner and voice in the advocacy for our rules based trading system and the benefits of open and fair trade.
In the last six years we have secured duty-free or preferential access for our exporters to an extra 1.7 billion consumers.&nbsp;
70 per cent of Australia’s two-way trade is now covered by our trade agreements, up from 26 per cent when the Coalition was elected in 2013.
Today’s trade data confirmed once again the longest run in consecutive monthly trade balances in 45 years.&nbsp; And for the first time since 1975, our current account is in surplus.
We are working to revitalise and modernise the global trading system.&nbsp; To ensure it matches the speed of change in E-commerce and embraces the opportunities of the digital economy.
At home we are lowering taxes, removing the burden of over-regulation, embarking on overdue structural reform of our vocational training sector to ensure we are meeting the dynamic skills needs of our growing economy. And we are building the transport, energy and water infrastructure our economy needs to grow.
This is all part of the comprehensive national economic plan we are implementing to keep our economy strong.
Ladies and gentlemen, of course our approach to the world is shaped by where we live.
We are an Indo-Pacific nation.
We are playing our part to build a secure, prosperous and inclusive Indo-Pacific of independent, sovereign and resilient states.
We have started with our Pacific Step-Up.&nbsp;
Australia’s national security and that of our Pacific family are intertwined.
This is a practical partnership supporting economic stability and prosperity, and strengthening security and resilience.
Our relationships with other nations in our region are flourishing.
We have concluded a landmark economic partnership agreement with Indonesia and aim to introduce implementing legislation next week.
And I look forward to attending the inauguration of re-elected President Widodo later this month.
In August we further strengthened our relationship with Vietnam, a nation of real consequence in our region.
Last year we elevated our relationship to a strategic partnership, reflecting our shared strategic interests and determination to expand cooperation even further.
ASEAN is at the core of our conception of the Indo-Pacific.&nbsp;
Next month we, our ASEAN partners and other nations in the region hope to conclude the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, embracing 16 economies with a combined population of 3.5 billion and combined GDP of US$25.7 billion.
The special importance of this agreement is that it will draw India more substantially into the Indo-Pacific economy.
India is a great success story of our region. &nbsp;A land of durable institutions and shared values.
A natural partner for Australia.
So I am honoured to accept the invitation of my friend Prime Minister Modi to visit India in January, including to deliver the inaugural address at the Raisina Dialogue.
The visit will be accompanied by a business delegation that I have invited Ashok Jacob, Chair of the Australia-India Council Board, to lead. This will bring Government and business together to pursue our India Economic Strategy that has captured the attention of our Indian partners and must now be realised.
My visit will be another step in cementing India in the top tier of Australia’s partnerships.
Last week we took another step, when Foreign Ministers of the Quad countries - the USA, Australia, India and Japan - met in New York.
This is the first time the Quad has met at Ministerial level.&nbsp;
Our Government has worked patiently to restore trust and confidence following the Rudd Government’s policy to disconnect from the Quad.
I am pleased we have been able to restore this important forum for Australia and the region.&nbsp;
It is a key forum for exchanging views on challenges facing the region, including taking forward practical cooperation on maritime, terrorism and cyber issues.
It also complements the role of ASEAN and ASEAN-led architecture.
This has been achieved with Australia’s steadfast friendship and support from Japan, which is broader and deeper than ever before.&nbsp;
Japan is our Special Strategic Partner, our second-largest trading partner and a fellow ally of the United States.&nbsp;
Prime Minister Abe is not only a great friend of Australia, but also one of the region’s elder and most eminent statesmen.
That’s why I am also pleased to accept Prime Minister Abe’s invitation to visit Japan early next year.
And I also intend to put more effort into our relationship with the Republic of Korea - building on our significant trade, energy and infrastructure ties.
I met again recently with President Moon. We agree that our relationship has significant further potential, including in hydrogen, critical minerals and security.
I would add that the Indo-Pacific would be even stronger if Japan and the ROK can overcome their recent tensions.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I can report from my most recent visit to the US at the kind invitation of President and Mrs Trump, that the state of our relationship is strong.
Our alliance with the United States is our past, our present and our future.
It is the bedrock of our security.
And it’s one that we contribute to as we undertake the greatest peacetime recapitalisation of our Defence Force ever and increase spending on Defence to two per cent of our GDP.
Deep US engagement in the Indo-Pacific is essential for maintaining stability and prosperity.
But even during an era of great power competition,&nbsp; Australia does not have to choose between the United States and China.
China is our Comprehensive Strategic Partner.
The strategic importance of our relationship is clear.
China is a global power making significant investments in military capability as a result of its extraordinary economic success.
It is the major buyer of resources globally.
It is having a profound impact on the regional balance of power.
It’s now the world’s second largest economy accounting for 16 percent of world GDP in 2018
The world’s largest goods exporter since 2009 and the world’s largest trading nation since 2013.
The world’s largest manufacturer.&nbsp;
The world’s largest banking sector, the world’s second largest stock market and the world’s third largest bond market.&nbsp;
And the world’s largest holder of foreign reserves.
We have benefited from China’s economic rise, just as China has benefited from Australia’s reliable supply of high quality energy, resources, agricultural goods, and increasingly services.
China has in many ways changed the world, so we would expect the terms of its engagement to change too.
That’s why when we look at negotiating rules of the future of the global economy, for example, we would expect China’s obligations to reflect its greater power status.
This is a compliment, not a criticism.
And that is what I mean when describing China as a newly developed economy.
The rules and institutions that support global cooperation must reflect the modern world. It can’t be set and forget.
In conclusion let me simply say that we will continue to stand up for Australia.&nbsp; Will defend our reputation. Will defend our interests, our jobs, our living standards, our environment, our cohesive and tolerant society, our kid’s opportunities for the future.
We will strive to protect the promise of Australia to every Australian.
A promise that was made to a young Frank Lowy to enable him to become everything that he could be. That promise is now being kept to millions more Australians who have come to Australia to make a contribution and not take one, to respect our laws, our unique lifestyle and freedoms.&nbsp; And who along with our resident population continue to make our nation the envy of the world.
How good is Australia Sir Frank, and may it ever be so.
Thank you for your attention.


Prime Minister
Connecting With Regional Australia
You know, one of the first calls I made when I became Prime Minister just over a year ago was to Fiona.
I was pretty honest. I said, look: I might not know one end of a sheep from the other. I might have more expertise with the plate than the paddock. But I know how important our farmers are.
I want to listen to them. I want to learn from them. And I want to walk with them.
Before I’d even sworn in my Cabinet, I was on a plane up to Quilpie to listen to Annabel and&nbsp; Steve Tully on their property Bunginderry in western Queensland! The Tully family has been there since the 1850s and is still there.
I went up there as a suburban boy from Sydney.&nbsp;
It wasn’t the first time I had been in such places. But what I saw and what I heard has stayed with me as I prepared and set the course for our drought response.
While I saw the ravages of the drought and the toughness of life on the land, I also saw the optimism of the people living that life. Their resilience and hardiness. Their hope and courage. And the strength of their close-knit communities across the generations.
Since then I’ve continued to make a priority of listening to the stories of so many more – in places like Dubbo in central NSW and Stanthorpe in southeast Queensland and Burnie in northwest Tassie.
They’re not just growers and graziers. They’re scientists, innovators and entrepreneurs. They work with cutting-edge technology. They study weather patterns and adapt to shifting global markets. They are the frontline of conservation and land management.
That’s why our farmers and graziers are amongst the best in the world.
Australian agricultural producers have a bright future.
They produce more than 90 per cent of our domestic food. Few countries can boast that.&nbsp;
And this supports hundreds of thousands of local jobs. And generates tens of billions of dollars in exports for our nation.&nbsp;
This industry has a strength in its diversity - the size of our continent means that different parts of regional Australia will be experiencing different growing and trading environments than other parts of our country.
It means even with drought, this past year, agriculture contributed $58 billion to our economy.
Regional Australia is a vital part of Australia’s economic landscape. And that is why we are now bringing together our plan to ensure our agricultural sector becomes a $100 billion sector by 2030.
This plan is focused on ensuring that our farmers have the tools they need to capitalise when times are good, and the hand-up they need to get through the tough times.
Right now, our immediate focus and priority is on dealing with and responding to the devastating drought.&nbsp;
Following the National Drought Summit we held a year ago, we have been rolling out the national drought response plan that was produced from that Summit, with the strong endorsement and support of the NFF.
And we have been doing so consistent with the revised National Agreement with the States and Territories on drought that set out clear responsibilities between each level of Government.
Under the agreement, the Commonwealth is responsible for looking after our farmers through the Farm Household Allowance,&nbsp; the Future Drought Fund (to enhance drought preparedness and resilience) and providing incentives for preparedness through taxation concessions, Farm Management Deposit Scheme and concessional loans.
States and Territories are responsible for animal welfare and land management, including through transport subsidies for fodder and water, and capacity building programs to improve business skills.
No drought response plan can make it rain. Nor can any drought response make life as it was when the rain used to fall. Droughts are hard and take an enormous toll, as this drought continues to.
Our job is to seek to support, sustain and build resilience in the face of this awful drought. This will not mean that rural and regional communities will be relieved of all the awful burdens of drought, nor will it mean that farming and grazing families, and those in the towns also impacted, will not have to make hard decisions about their futures.&nbsp;
This includes, as it always does, farmers and graziers deciding to choose a different life. Only they can decide this for themselves. Our job is to help them make the best decision for them and their families future.
And there will not always be agreement about what the right responses are. There is often disagreement, including within rural communities themselves about appropriate responses. This is why it is important to listen.
Anyone promising you different outcomes, simplistic solutions or creating expectations of unrealistic outcomes, is not being honest with you. They are leading you on, and making your burden even harder to carry. I won’t do that. I will listen, speak honestly and take all actions we can to ensure our efforts are both practical and effective.
So far we have committed more than $7 billion in measures at the federal level. While the biggest component of this is the Future Drought Fund, it is also important to note that around an additional $300 million was spent last year, with the same planned again this year and next year also.
It’s either already out the door, going out the door or budgeted to go out the door in real spending to support our drought response plan.&nbsp;
Our drought response plan is clear, and it has three pillars - immediate action for farmers and graziers, support for the wider rural communities, and long-term resilience and preparedness.
Our plan has also been informed through the extensive consultation, feedback and advice from our former Coordinator-General for Drought, Major General Stephen Day, earlier work of Barnaby Joyce as the Drought Envoy.
First, in the here and now, we’re looking after our farming families.
In particular, the Farm Household Allowance is providing much-needed money to farming families – over the four years of payment households receive around $105,000 to put food on the table, fuel in the car, and for essentials like clothing.
Last year $114 million was spent on the allowance, supporting about 6,500 families, more than three times the $33 million the year before.
FHA is for all farmers in hardship, including drought.&nbsp;
We recently conducted an independent review of the allowance to see how it could still be improved.&nbsp;
So we have moved to make it a 4 in 10 year payment, relaxed the assessment rules to better reflect how farm businesses are run and lifted the threshold for off farm income and assets to ensure those farming and grazing families taking action to help themselves are not penalised for their efforts.&nbsp;
And we continue to simplify the application process.&nbsp;
This week I’ll be introducing the first package of legislative changes to improve FHA.
And our approach is not to set and forget – with the drought continuing, we will continue to listen and refine our approach and provide assistance that’s needed when it’s needed.
We’ve also put more rural financial counsellors to work to help farmers with financial planning and help them make well-informed decisions about their futures.
I was chatting with one of them in Dalby on Queensland’s Darling Downs last month. And I can tell you that they’ve been a Godsend in drought-affected areas.&nbsp;
We’ve invested $25 million to help our farmers combat pests and weeds; $2.7 million to improve regional weather and climate guides; and $77.2 million for Bureau of Meteorology radars.
We built the National Drought Map - all of your drought data needs are in one place. Where to find mental health support, state drought declared areas and where assistance is available.
We funded the National Farmers’ Federation to develop a new online FarmHub that provides a single, trusted point of access to information and services.&nbsp;
And we have $1 billion available in concessional loans through the Regional Investment Corporation. These loans help farmers prepare for, manage through and recover from drought.
There are $75 million in taxation measures - including accelerated fodder storage asset depreciation.
The Government is also supporting farmers through the $50 million Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate scheme. Already more than 2,100 farmers have access these rebates.
And recognising the prolonged drought is also taking its toll on permanent horticulture plantings, on 4 October we expanded the rebate to also provide support for de-silting and new bores for growers of permanent plantings like apples, stonefruit, avocadoes and grapes.
But the drought’s impact isn’t only felt on farms.
Spending also dries up in regional towns, threatening the prosperity of local businesses.
That’s why the second pillar of our plan for drought is about community.
We’re stimulating local economies by giving $1 million each to councils in drought-affected areas, and this means over 120 councils, all of whom have shown some signs of drought, can undertake practical projects for their communities.&nbsp;
Like the Dubbo Regional Council that used its funding to improve water supply in Stuart Town, put in shades at the local livestock markets, and install a disability-friendly public toilet in the CBD.&nbsp;
These projects help keep the local economy moving.
Importantly, where possible, these projects are using local labour and local suppliers to ensure the economic benefits are felt locally.
Farmers are among the most resilient people I know; but ongoing drought can hit them hard.
We have to help as much as we can with the mental health issues that accompany this.
So we’re providing $30 million for targeted mental health support in drought-affected areas plus more than $50 million funding for major charities – like The Salvos and Vinnies – to assist rural Australians in desperate need with up to $3,000 in individual support payments.
But our farmers also need to prepare for the future because this drought won’t be the last.
So the third pillar of our strategy is about long-term resilience.
Its centrepiece is the Future Drought Fund that was passed into law in July.&nbsp;
The Fund starts with an initial $3.9 billion investment, growing to $5 billion over the next decade.&nbsp;
This will provide a sustainable source of funding to improve drought resilience and preparedness.
When it does rain we need to make sure we have water storages in place to help drought proof us for the future.
Yesterday, I was at Dungowan Dam near Tamworth where the Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack and the NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and I announced a $1 billion package for major investments in water infrastructure in NSW.
Together, we are spending $650 million to upgrade Wyangala Dam, as well as $480 million for the new Dungowan Dam.
These are great examples of a state government partnering with us to deliver water infrastructure.
I’m pleased the Queensland Government has now also given the green light to Emu Swamp Dam. But I want them to get on and build it.
The local farmers have been pushing for this for a long time – in fact, they’re tipping in $24 million of their own money alongside the $42 million we’ve committed and up to $18.6 million from Queensland.&nbsp;
Reports suggest that water from a new dam could boost farm revenues by up to $75 million every single year.&nbsp;
So it sounds like a good investment to me!
In total, the Federal Government has now committed about $1.5 billion for 21 water projects across Australia.&nbsp;
These projects include:

Dams, like the Dungowan Dam I announced yesterday - a new 22.5 gigalitre dam;
Pipelines like the $20 million South West Loddon Rural Water Supply Project in Victoria that will include 88 km of pressurised pipeline to connect the Wimmera-Glenelg system in the west with the Goulburn system in north-central Victoria, 272 km of trunk mains pipeline to provide the core supply system; and 862 km of pipelines to provide access from the trunk mains to individual properties; and
Irrigation schemes like the $25.27 million project in Scottsdale in Tasmania. This project includes a 9,300 megalitre dam, a pump station, a mini-hydro power station that’s estimated to generate 623 kWh/ML; and, 92 kms of&nbsp; underground pipeline network, delivered under gravity pressure.&nbsp;

And there are still 50 more projects on the table – and we need all the states to get on board.
Much of the potential for growth in agriculture will come from more irrigation.&nbsp;
So making sure we have enough water is essential if agriculture is to become a $100 billion sector.
To make sure we’re building the right infrastructure in the right places at the right time, we’ve set up the National Water Grid Authority.
It began operating this month and will work with the states and territories to develop a national plan for investment in water infrastructure and identify a pipeline of projects.
This will deliver a more coherent approach to water infrastructure across the country.
And it will ensure our investment decisions are based on the best available science. It means having the first national plan for Water Infrastructure and supporting investment in that infrastructure like never before.
Dams and pipes will sustain our farms and our towns - and increasingly, we are going to find them powering our towns and cities as well.
And for those areas for whom the curse of drought was overtaken by the inundation of floods, in North Queensland, they know the swift response that was set in train by our Government to provide them with the confidence to rebuild.
Generations of effort and achievement washed away in 48 hours. How cruel was that? But we have had their backs.
To this end I wish to acknowledge the tremendous efforts of the North Queensland Livestock Industry Recovery Agency, led by the Hon. Shane Stone and all involved in getting that region back on its feet.
While the drought is biting, and floods have decimated herds, the sector remains strong and has a strong future.
Agriculture is a key pillar of the Australian way of life and the economy.
In fact, the total value of our agricultural production is currently almost $60 billion a year.&nbsp;
That’s 50 per cent more than a decade ago, even though we’ve been in drought for much of that time and even though trade tensions have impacted the value of our exports in the past year.&nbsp;
This is a real achievement. But I know we can do even better.
Our vision is for Australia to exceed $100 billion in farm gate output by 2030.
This is a bold vision. But it’s an achievable one. And a vision first outlined by the NFF.
The Agriculture Minister, Bridget McKenzie, will work with industry to develop the Agriculture 2030 plan to help the industry realise its vision.
There are enormous opportunities for our agricultural industries in the years and decades ahead!
The world’s population is expected to be 9.7 billion by 2050 and global demand for food is expected to rise by 54 per cent between now and then.&nbsp;
Much of this growth will come from Asia where the rising middle classes are seeking quality food.
Australian agriculture is well placed to meet this demand.
We have a reputation for quality, safe and sustainable products.
Our trade deals with China, Japan and Korea have already opened up large markets.
And we’re working on more trade deals to provide the best opportunities for our exporters.
Right now, we’re looking to ratify a trade agreement with Indonesia – the world’s 7th largest economy by purchasing power – and this would lower tariffs for producers of grains, beef, dairy and horticulture.&nbsp;
I’m also determined to secure a trade agreement with the European Union.
With over 500 million consumers, the EU is a huge potential market for our agricultural exports.
Many of our products are currently shut out of this market or can only come in in small quantities.
A trade deal would secure greater access for our exports to this $17 trillion market. And it would make a big contribution to the agriculture sector reaching its $100 billion goal by 2030.
And Post-Brexit, there will be a UK trade deal too.
The Government is investing in a range of other policies to help the industry achieve our $100 billion goal.
We’re making new investments in research and development – like a $35 million investment for a new Queensland-based research centre that will help future-proof farmers’ crops from drought.&nbsp;
We’re supporting the adoption of cutting-edge technologies – like drones that provide data on crop management – with the full adoption of digital agriculture potentially yielding $20 billion by 2050.&nbsp;
We’re building roads and rail networks, including inland rail, to help our farmers get their products to markets faster, and we’re removing red tape so it’s easier to transport farm equipment around the country.
We’re tackling the pests and weeds that cost our farmers billions of dollars a year.&nbsp;
We will keep farmers safe from protests and farm invasions through new anti vegan-terrorist laws. They don’t like being called vegan-terrorists, so let me say it again: vegan terrorists.
We’re also working with the industry to make sure it has the skilled workforce it needs.
And we’re improving the management of our soils and native vegetation.
Former Governor-General, Major-General Michael Jeffery has been re-appointed as the National Soils Advocate.
While we have areas of highly fertile soil, overall our soil is poorly structured and affected by salinity.
Our farmers are the stewards of this precious resource.&nbsp;
With around 60 per cent of our land used for agriculture, they are at the forefront of managing this vital asset on behalf of the rest of us.&nbsp;
We must support them in this so agriculture continues to prosper and provide for all Australians.
I made a decision early on to do my best to keep in contact with the families I’ve met in regional Australia.
Having spoken to hundreds of people in our regions over the past fourteen months, the difficult thing I struggle with - is knowing that no matter how hard you work, no matter the passion and diligence, there is so much about agriculture that is outside of our control - but we support each other because that is what we can do.
And with the hope of an optimist we look forward to, for those of us so minded we pray for, and as always together we plan for better days, to secure not just the economic future for our agricultural sector in Australia, but the way of life it has supported since our modern nation began.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Once again, Namaste.
[Applause]
The High Commissioner, fellow Members of Parliament, in particular Josh Frydenberg the Treasurer is here from our Cabinet, as indeed of course is Alan Tudge, a member of our Cabinet, and David Coleman, our Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs amongst many other things and to all the colleagues who are here from all sides of politics, can I welcome you all.
Friends, for more than fourteen years, the doors of this Parliament have been thrown open to celebrate Deepavali.
And this is getting bigger and bigger every year, like everything in India does.
[Laughter]
We have lots of great events in this Great Hall but the best events are the ones where the community is involved and I get to wear something like this.
[Applause]
The turnout tonight is wonderful and there is a great spirit about the gathering we are having here this evening. And we join with hundreds of millions around the world participating in this 2,500 year old festival of faith.
A wonderful celebration of light over darkness.
Of knowledge over ignorance.
Of good over evil.
I said in a similar gathering here in this Parliament a week ago, a Prayer Breakfast, and I talked about the importance of faith in people’s lives.&nbsp;
And I said that faith wasn’t about piety. Faith was about understanding our human frailty.
And in that understanding of human frailty, we are connected all to each other in our vulnerabilities.
And so when we understand that, we do pray for knowledge over ignorance and we do pray for light over darkness and we do pray for good over evil, which this wonderful celebration is about.
More than 700,000 people of Indian descent now call Australian home. Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Muslims amongst many others.
It is our fastest-growing diaspora in Australia and it is a community that has given so incredibly much to Australia.
India is the world’s biggest democracy and it is one of the greatest beacons of light to democracy and we are pleased to see a wonderful powerful economy being built on such a strong, democratic foundation.
There is so much we share together - democracy, language and even a national day. The links and history between our peoples are great, through both peace and war.
We are the most successful multicultural country on earth in Australia.
[Applause]
And as I often talk about in functions like this, there are many metaphors which are given to explain multiculturalism in Australia.
But the one I like best is garam masala.
[Laughter]
Garam masala, that better? Getting there?
Getting the cloves, the cardamom, you put it all together. You have one of them on their own - rubbish.
[Laughter]
It doesn’t leave a good taste in the mouth.
But when you blend them all together, you taste them, you grind them up - wow.
[Applause]
And that is the fragrance that comes from Australia’s multicultural society, of which those of Hindu faith and the Indian national people have come here representing so magnificently.
But there is more to acknowledge in this relationship.
We often speak of the 26,000 Australians who were casualties at Gallipoli. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;
But what we don’t often speak of is the 1,400 Indians who fell, and the more than 3,500 who were wounded in that battle, side by side with our ANZACs.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;
Last year, a small community in Cherrybrook, in Julian Leeser’s electorate, and he’s here. No one is more committed to this relationship than Julien, I can assure you, because he’s actually learning to speak Indian. Congratulations.
[Applause]
And they raised the funds to erect a memorial to the Indian soldiers who joined the AIF.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
I’m reminded of the story of the Garhwal Rifles – Indian troops who served on the Western Front.
They suffered through all the horrors and hardships of trench warfare in the Great War.
On Christmas Eve, 1914, they were dug in near the French village, a small little French village of Neuve-Chapelle.&nbsp;
And then something odd happened.
The guns fell silent and music could be heard from the German lines and we know the story of Christmas carols.
It was the Christmas Truce – a spontaneous act of peace and compassion seen up and down the Western Front.
The Indians looked on as the Germans began to place small candle-lit trees along their trenches.
And while that reminded those of the Christian faith of Christmas, the lights reminded those of the Hindu faith of Deepavali.
This was a story and an experience which is often remembered amongst those of the Christian faith when they look back at that time.&nbsp;
But here was an engagement with another faith, a little piece of home, far away on a foreign shore, in a foreign war.
And so the guns would remain silent on that Christmas Day.
And so light, for that short period of time, did prevail over darkness.
Good did prevail over evil.
And there was a Deepavali message we can all embrace regardless of whatever faith we have.&nbsp;&nbsp;
So I wish you all a very happy and joyous and prosperous Deepavali.&nbsp;
[Applause]
It is a wonderful time for family, it is a wonderful time for friends and community to reflect on the wonderful life that those who have come to Australia over many generations or more recently and the contribution that you’ve been able to make and that we can celebrate together.
But best of all, it’s a wonderful time of celebration and some really good food. Enjoy.
[Applause]


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (16:16): I move:
That the House commemorate the anniversary of the national apology to the survivors and victims of institutional child sexual abuse.

I join with all in our chamber today, I join with the Leader of the Opposition and I join with all of those across the country as we mark the first anniversary of the Australian government's and parliament's apology to the victims and survivors of institutional child sexual abuse. I remember that day incredibly well. It is burned in my memory forever, and I remember on that occasion speaking of those around the country who still would not be able to get out of bed without the horrific memory of what they have lived with ever since those unutterable things were done to them all those years ago or even most recently. And so we come again today and, as we commemorate this day, they, the survivors, are the ones we have in the front of our minds and deep in our hearts. And we also remember those for whom it was just too much, and they are no longer with us.
A year ago, our nation said sorry. I described it as:
… a sorry that dare not ask for forgiveness … a sorry that does not insult with an incredible promise …

It was a sorry as if we lay prostrate before those to whom it was offered, with nothing to say other than to reflect on the terrible events that have afflicted their lives. We acknowledge the national trauma—a national trauma that was hiding in plain sight—the silenced voices and what I described as the 'muffled cries in the darkness' and 'the never-heard pleas of tortured souls'. That is still true today—ritual crimes of sexual abuse committed by enemies in our midst, enemies that all too often cloak their evil in roles where they should be trusted more than any: teachers, priests, pastors, coaches, counsellors. Because they held positions which our society deems respectable, they were believed. A survivor named Ann said, 'My mother believed them rather than me.' As a parent, those words still just make me shudder.
Our apology, which brought all parties, all people in this place, together in this House, was one of our most difficult moments, but it was also the parliament at its best. I particularly want to thank the then Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten, for his partnership on that day, for sharing and carrying that burden on behalf of this parliament with me on that day as we stood in this place, as we spoke to those who sat silently in the chairs and around the gallery—many of whom are back here again today—and as we went out onto the lawns also and as we went into the Great Hall. So thank you, Bill. Thank you very much. We can both tell those stories.
Last year, I met Aunty Mary Hooker, a Bundjalung woman who was on the lawns of Parliament House after the apology . I was reminded of that today. She told me that she gave evidence to the royal commission because, she said, 'The truth needed to be told.' Aunty Mary passed away two weeks ago, and until the time of her death she had on the television in her home a photo of the two of us from that day. It wasn't about any one prime minister; it was about what that day meant to her and how what we did a year ago at least provided her with some measure of solace.
The apology required us to confront a question, a terrible question, too horrible to even ask: why weren't the children of our nation loved, nurtured and protected? So we said sorry for the hurt and the horrors, for the violation of dignity and self-worth, for what was done, the acts too unspeakable; sorry for what was not done, and should have been, as we looked the other way instead of helping or intervening; sorry to families who are forever scarred and destroyed; sorry to those who weren't believed. Our failure as a nation was catastrophic and inexcusable, and no apology can undo it, yet we apologised because we should have and we must have. And I would like to think of it as an ongoing, continuous apology. I agree with the survivor who said, 'Child sexual abuse is not just a crime against the person; it's also a crime that attacks the social fabric of the nation,' and in these acts the fabric of our society was rent, and our apology was just one humble but important step in trying to mend it.
On this day one year ago, we paid tribute to the thousands of people who came forward bravely, with courage, to tell their story to the royal commission. And there weren't just a few; the numbers make us shudder. Seventeen thousand came forward, and nearly 8,000 recounted their abuse in private sessions of the royal commission. A year ago, we pledged—I pledged—that we would report back to the Australian parliament, to the people, on the progress we are making on the implementation of the recommendations of the royal commission, because now it's only actions that can prove the worth of our sentiments, and that is what today is the opportunity to do. But, in providing these introductory comments, I think it's important for us to go back to where we were a year ago and simply allow the horror of those events to impact us with a heavy blow.
The government will continue to report annually on this progress, as we should. Of the royal commission's 409 recommendations, the 84 regarding redress have been addressed through the implementation of the National Redress Scheme. The Commonwealth has a further 122 recommendations that we are working on either wholly or partially with our state and territory colleagues. I am pleased that work on these recommendations will advance. Around one third have already been implemented, and the remainder are well underway. The Commonwealth has also taken on a national leadership role for more than 30 additional recommendations that were primarily addressed to the states and territories, and we are working closely with those states and territories on those matters.
We tabled the first annual progress report last December and we will continue doing that each year for five consecutive years or, frankly, for as long as it takes. All states and territories also published 2018 annual progress reports and will also provide annual reporting. This year, we have also encouraged a further 42 non-government institutions, whose conduct was called into question at the royal commission, to report on their actions and to change their practices. The public accountability across governments and non-government institutions is crucial and vital.
One year on, I can report the National Redress Scheme has been operating for just over a year and is giving survivors access to counselling, psychological services, monetary payments and, for those who want one, a direct personal response from an institution where the abuse occurred. So far, more than 600 payments have been made, totalling more than $50 million, with an average redress payment of $80,000. More than 60 non-government institutions or groups of institutions are now participating in the scheme, and that represents tens of thousands of locations across Australia where this happened. And there are other institutions that have chosen not to join, perhaps captured by lawyers, legal advice—perhaps deaf to the cause of justice. All they are doing in not joining this is doubling down on the crimes and doubling down on the hurt. And so to them who have not joined, I say: join. Do the decent thing. Do the right thing. Do the honourable thing. It is not just what survivors expect and their families and the families of those who did not survive; it is what every decent, honest Australian demands and what we in this place, all as one, demand as well.
I also acknowledge that the Redress Scheme needs to do better in supporting survivors. The rate of response is not good enough, and it must improve. Applications have not been processed as fast as I want them to be. That is why earlier today, Minister Ruston announced a further investment of $11.7 million in the National Redress Scheme, to improve its operation and to better support survivors. I want better outcomes. The funding will support case management of applications to reduce the number of different people a survivor may be required to deal with while their application is being processed. It will also allow the government to hire more independent decision-makers to finalise applications as quickly as possible.
On 5 March 2019, the government also committed funding of $52.1 million to boost support services for survivors of institutional child sexual abuse. This funding will support 34 existing agencies to June 2021, as well as five additional providers, to offer redress support services to survivors in remote and regional areas, male survivors, survivors with a disability, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander survivors as well.
The royal commission made many recommendations for the Australian state and territory governments to work together to prevent the horrors of the past from occurring again. One of those was a national strategy to prevent child sexual abuse, and I can report that all governments are currently working on a 10-year strategy. Over 350 consultations have now taken place as part of that work, and I expect it will be released in coming months. As recommended by the royal commission, the strategy will include education and awareness raising, improved support services for victims, initiatives targeted at offender prevention and at children with harmful sexual behaviours, and improved information sharing, data and research.
We've also been working with our state and territory colleagues to enhance working-with-children checks in line with royal commission recommendations. We're closer to our goal of making the standard of checks consistent across the country and have started rolling out a database to be able to share this information more easily. This database will also allow agencies that issue these checks to be aware of whether an applicant has been refused a check in another jurisdiction. In response to the royal commission, the parliament has recently passed the Combatting Child Sexual Exploitation Legislation Amendment Bill 2019. The act introduces new failure-to-report and failure-to-protect offences—much needed for Commonwealth officials who have care, supervision or authority over children. It strengthens laws on forced marriage and overseas child sexual abuse committed by Australian citizens and residents. To address challenges facing our law enforcement agencies, the act strengthens child sexual abuse material laws, including in relation to material accessed online. The act also amends Commonwealth law so it is no longer using the term 'child pornography'—an outdated phrase that did not reflect the heinous criminal acts depicted in child sexual abuse materials.
We're close to finalising our online safety charter, which sets out the government's expectations—on behalf of the Australian community—for social media services, content hosts and other technology companies. Businesses that interact with children in the real world have to meet high standards of safety, and digital businesses should be treated no differently. The charter is due for release by the end of this year. The eSafety Commissioner is making the online environment safer for children by developing resources for Australian schools and organisations to provide best practise online safety education. The royal commission produced some groundbreaking research work on the nature and scale of sexual abuse in Australia. We want to build on that work, and that's why I've announced Australia's first national child maltreatment study. This will be the most comprehensive study of its kind undertaken anywhere in the world.
We're establishing the National Centre for the Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse. The royal commission recommended the national centre should raise awareness of the impact of abuse, increase our workforce's knowledge and their competence in responding to victims and survivors, and coordinate a national research agenda. The government has committed $25.5 million over five years to establish that centre. I've asked all states and territories to also contribute. We'll be consulting on the scope, function and governance arrangements in coming months.
The royal commission also found that more needs to be done to ensure that places where children and young people meet are safe, so I was pleased earlier this year when COAG endorsed the National Principles for Child Safe Organisations. There are 10 principles, and they include things like making sure that leadership takes responsibility for child safety, that staff and volunteers are properly trained to care for our children and that children are taken seriously. All government agencies are implementing these principles. We're also working with state and territory governments to get them implemented consistently across our nation. We also want organisations that work with children to adopt these principles so they can guide their decision-making and the way they operate.
Earlier today, Minister Ruston handed over to the parliament the parchment etched with the apology's wording. It will now take its place in the Members Hall, along with other items that tell some of the stories of our nation. It's not one of the pretty stories. It's not one of the stories we can be proud of. It's only one that we can be deeply ashamed of. The oak table used by Queen Victoria when signing the royal assent that enacted Australia's Constitution is there and the Yirrkala bark petitions are there, but also are the apologies made to the Stolen Generations, to the forgotten Australians, to the former child migrants and for the forced adoptions. These items of ceremony, struggle and suffering sit in the symbolic heart of our Australian parliament on public display, because that's who we are as a people. We confront the ghosts and horrible misdeeds of our past because it's right to do so, but we also do it as a living memory to us all—that we should never see them repeated. For it to be here in this place, let it be a remembrance for us, let it call us to account, because these things are part of our national story, and we've got to own all our stories to be a complete people.
Many of the survivors who gave evidence to the royal commission were asked to share a message with the Australian people about their experiences as part of this display, and more than a thousand Australians have done so. One of them, whose name is not known, wrote to us and said, 'Let our voice echo.' Well, it does in this chamber today, and may it ever be so. May all those brave voices continue to echo. Let it bounce, but not just that; let it permeate into how we remember what they have told us. 'They are believed,' we said a year ago, 'We believe you.' We still believe you, we will forever believe you and we are sorry, as we said a year ago, and we remain sorry.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well friends, Jeremy, thank you for those incredibly kind words.
Before I make some other acknowledgements, can I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land of the Gadigal people, their Elders past, present and future and can I thank you for your acknowledgement earlier of them and their incredible place in our great national life.
Can I acknowledge also, as is always my habit, to acknowledge any veterans or serving members of the Australian Defence Forces and say thank you for your incredible service.
Your Excellency Mark Sofer, Ambassador to Australia from Israel, to Jeremy Leibler to Richard Balkin, to Gusti, thank you so much for your kind words and making such a special effort to travel this incredibly long way to be here with us tonight.
To Amira Aharonovich, Director-General of the Jewish agency to Israel, to my parliamentary colleagues who are here, to Dave Sharma, the local member, and a wonderful and great friend of the Jewish community not just here but all around the world and acknowledging given his outstanding service as Australia's Ambassador.
My great friends who have come a long way. It's great to see Solly and Mrs Lew here tonight, thank you so much for coming up and to Mark who's here and to John and everyone and Stephen, it's quite an honour for them to come along tonight.
I'm a bit overwhelmed particularly by you making that effort and I thank you very, very much.
Josh sends his apologies, he can't be here tonight. That's the only apology I'm aware he's giving for tonight.&nbsp;He will take up other matters. He wishes he could be. He's home with Amy and the kids and he's been working hard so I gave him a leave pass to go home tonight. But I know he would very much like to be here.
Gabrielle, who is here with us and Reverend Nile who is here as well who's here, a great friend of Israel, as well. It's wonderful to have you here with us.
You try and do things a little bit better. My father, as I've shared, I remember at Stephen’s house some time ago, he was the former mayor of Waverley and had a lot to do with the establishment of Moriah College.
Now, I could say tonight it's great to be here at the Sydney Boy's High School reunion to many of you, but he was made and honoured by the Jewish community in Waverley many, many years ago and for you to honour me tonight is very special.
It means a lot to me and it meant a lot to my father who is under the care of the wonderful staff at the Royal hospital not far from here at this moment. He hasn't been well for some time and he's getting such wonderful care, and when I learned from my brother that's where he was going to be looked after I smiled because I know how much he's loved within the Jewish community here in Sydney and he's in great, great hands.
I'm also very humbled to follow my predecessors from both sides of politics.
From Bob Hawke whom we lost only this year, to John Howard, an absolutely staunch friend of Israel and from who I've taken so many lessons and who has instructed me so much in my own [inaudible] in this area and, of course, Julia Gillard as well and you've honoured her, and it is a privilege to follow her in this way.
The rollcall of recipients points to an unshakeable nature of the relationship that exists between Australia and Israel.
Israel is the polaris star above the cut and thrust of the things that we deal with on a daily basis. It's a beacon of democracy. A country governed by the rule of law with a free press infused with a multicultural character and aligned with our great ally, the United States.
Not too many of them in that part of the world.
Like us, Israel grapples with its arid natural environment, an ancient land. And seeks to build a strong economy - and is very successful at it - based on research and collaboration and a highly skilled citizenry.
Friendships have ebbs and flows, but the friendship between Australia and Israel has not had ebbs and flows; it's been a steady course of endearment.
I'm mindful we're celebrating that 70-year anniversary and it's an appropriate time to reflect on our friendship particularly tonight and in reflecting we go back to the terrible days of World War II.
There was no nation of Israel, instead broken and scarred Jewish people were scattered around the world and the horror on show was seared in our consciousness.
It was in this setting that Australia chaired the 1947 UN committee that voted in favour of dividing the territory of mandated Palestine.
That same year we became the first country to cast a vote in support of the partition plan as we've been reminded tonight.
With the benefit of hindsight as I remarked on the 70th anniversary it was not an obvious choice to make at the time.
Today it is, but at the time, no. These things are rarely simple at the time, but Australia lifted up thine eyes and saw a nation which in the words of the then Prime Minister "could be a force of special value in the world community".
We know that to be true.
At a global level - and I know it to be true at the local community level, as well.
Two years later in 1949, Australia officially recognised the new state of Israel and presided over the vote which formally committed Israel to the UN.
We are proud of what we did then and we remain so proud today.
We stood up when it mattered then and now.
Israel can always depend on Australia.
We believe in the nation of Israel.
We believe in its right to exist in peace, within secure internationally recognised borders, and we will say so for as long as we have breath.
And we continue to advocate for a peaceful future for the region which is what Israel so desperately desires.
To this end we have a long-standing commitment to UN peacekeeping operations.
One example being the UN truce supervision organisation. We participated in the UNTSO since 1956, our longest commitment to any operation now, we have 13 ADF personnel there right now.
We're also taking a strong stand against the targeting of Israel and the UN General Assembly, as we were saying before.
The UN was born out of the horrors of World War II, born out of an ethos of ‘never again’, but all too often an institution born in the same way, that's supposed to do so much good has allowed anti-Semitism to seep into its deliberations, all under the language of human rights; and we're not buying that, my government is not going to buy that.
Our government is not going to buy that.
And this is why, because we know the character of our friend Israel and we will defend it.
We stand with our friends and under this government, that is what will occur.
We've set up a trade and defence office in West Jerusalem to deepen ties on trade, defence industries, investment and innovation.
Our bilateral trade is now more than $1.3 billion a year and we are now collaborating in areas ranging from food and water security, to science and technology, and clean energy.
We're working with our Jewish friends in the critical area of water management and Israel has virtually drought-proofed its cities and I'm delighted the NSW Government recently signed an agreement on water cooperation with Israel's minister of natural infrastructure, energy and water.
We're all learning through each other. One area where we stand together in particular is standing against extremism, in all of its forms.
In March, I spoke at the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce in Melbourne.
It was just a few days after the horrific attacks in Christchurch; and I took the opportunity to speak about the nature of extremism, because I knew it was something the audience knew too much about, and in too personal a way.
And I said that extremism is an inability to tolerate difference.
I said we can disagree, but we must learn to disagree better.
To feel threatened by those who don't share one's world view, that's what it is, and it takes many forms.
It can be religious, it can be secular, it can be political and, sadly, we live in a world where this inability to tolerate difference is becoming more prevalent and there have been attacks on mosques and Islamic cultural centres in New Zealand, Canada and Afghanistan and on churches in Sri Lanka, Egypt and the Philippines just to give a few of the many examples, and I know that grieves the Jewish community as much as it does the attacks that occur on the temples and, of course, a new round of the age-old scourge of anti-Semitism has found expression in attacks on synagogues in Pittsburgh, in San Diego, Copenhagen, in Harlem, a Jewish museum in Brussels, a Jewish supermarket in Paris and there are too many more places.
And sadly, we see and hear of anti-Semitic instances occurring in our communities. We can't pretend it's not happening here. It is. You know better than I do.
We've seen Swastikas daubed across political material, anti-Semitic graffiti scrawled on a Jewish-owned cafe and reports of children being harassed because they are Jewish.
I know what my Jewish colleagues faced in the last election and on a daily basis, it would, seem now.
I regularly get messages from Josh when he shares with me the things that are happening in the community, in the Jewish community and in many cases directly to him and colleagues like Julian Leeser here in NSW.
It is shameful, absolutely shameful. These incidents, they just have no place in Australia. They are so foreign.
It's like the country just wants to eject it out of its system, but yet it persists; and that's why we must remain so vigilant about these things.
We can't be casual about these things.
We can't overlook it or just pretend.
We can't mistake the ignoring of these things with grace, because they're two different things.
Grace is what I've so often seen in the Jewish community.
The responsibility we have as Australians, first, is to maintain the standards that we set and apply them in these areas.
I said in March, an attack on one faith is an attack on all. An attack on innocence and peace, is an attack on us all who love peace and innocence.
That's why after Christchurch we expanded our Safer Communities Fund in priorities of religious schools and places of worship.
It's why we have continued throughout this program some $70 million grants in 2016 and we're adding another $58 million to that program over the next four years.
I wish that others saw our synagogues and churches and temples and mosques just simply as places of worship, which they are, places of community, places where women and men and children can just seek to find peace and solace and be better people, reflecting on themselves and how they can contribute to their communities and the welfare of others, better neighbours.
So, our pledge to keep you safe and to call out extremism in whatever shape or form it may take, whether it's on the right, whether it's on the left, whether it's religious or whether it's secular, it's ugly and it has no place here.
In Australia, I want people of faith and people of no faith to be able to live out their chosen beliefs and to safely navigate the contour of their lives as they see fit.
Throughout the history of our modern settlement we have witnessed a tremendous Jewish exceptionalism in our country and I often speak of my ancestors who arrived here on the first and second fleets, not by choice.&nbsp;
But they weren't alone, because on the First Fleet were 12 of the finest Jewish colleagues. In time, they built a Jewish community that added something absolutely rich to our country.
During the Great War, 200 Jewish Diggers lost their lives fighting for Australia and another commanded our forces. After the Second World War, Australia offered a home to more holocaust survivors per capita than any nation other than Israel. So proud of that.&nbsp;
Jewish Australians make up less than half a percent of our population, but they have made a remarkable contribution to our national life.
The roll call&nbsp; - Sir John Monash, Sir Isaac Isaacs, Sir Zelman Cowen, Sir Frank Lowy, John Gandel Governor Linda Dessau, the others I've mentioned here – Mark, Solly and everyone - thousands more who in their own way have sought to do mitzvot and be a light unto the nations.
Jewish people have served in the most senior positions ranging from Governor-General, Chief Justice, Commander of the Australian Corps to the Head of State and now Federal Treasurer, and there's only one high office that a Jewish Australian has not held, but Josh says he knows a way to fix that.&nbsp;You really should have come, Josh.
Jewish Australians can be so proud of men like Josh and Julian, my colleagues who embody so much of what our country can be, and more broadly the Jewish community is the most important link that we all have with Israel.
It's where my relationship with Israel began, with my Jewish mates who I went to school with, who I played footy with, who I spent time with and enjoyed very, very much. It has long underpinned the partnership and it will continue to.
So I'm very pleased that the Israeli president Reuven Rivlin has also said he will visit Australia next year and we look forward to welcoming him and this will be the first visit by an Israeli head of state in 15 years, and we're very much looking forward to welcoming him and I am very much looking forward to take the many invitations I've had to return to Israel, and I look forward to doing that as soon as I possibly can and once things are in a position where someone can issue me that invitation.
Otherwise I'll just have to get on the boat as I do!
I thank them both for the kind wishes they've sent through Jeremy tonight.
Finally, may I express my gratitude to the WZO and the ZFA, the Zionist Council of NSW for bestowing this prestigious award on me and all of your kindness for being here tonight to be part of this.
As I said, it means a great deal.
I visited Israel long before I entered Parliament and like so many, I feel that deep familiarity.
You cannot walk on that land without it sinking into you. You can't.
The bible stories I learned as a child that mean so much to me today, that my parents and grandparents read to me and lived out in their own lives.
Israel has a place in my heart, a place that deserves peace and prosperity, worthy of the faiths and cultures that have grown out of our Holy Land.
In accepting this award, I see it as another manifestation of the friendship between Australia and Israel.
In standing true with Israel, I just see it as doing my job as an Australian Prime Minister.
That's what I believe is expected of an Australian Prime Minister and it is my great thrill to be able to perform that role, my great personal thrill, and so it's nice to get an award for doing your job, but what it really is about I think is a celebration particularly of my role as Prime Minister of the tremendous relationship there is between the two countries, and that will remain.
We are a steadfast friend, since its modern creation, to Israel, and our commitment remains as firm today as it was 70 years ago, if not deeper and stronger.
Thank you so much.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:00): I move:
That the House record its deep regret at the death, on 17 November 2019, of the Honourable Benjamin Charles Humphreys AM, a Member of this House for the Division of Griffith from 1977 to 1996, place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service, and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.

When Ben Humphreys was first elected as the member for Griffith, in 1977, he had never been to Canberra and never set foot in Parliament House. After attending one of his first caucus meetings, he was taken aback—and forgive:
God, I thought all these blokes were mates down here.

In his words, he arrived in Canberra green, with a small 'g'. In 1977 there were only three Labor members in Queensland, and he believed he'd be a oncer. He wasn't, though; he was elected seven times.
He brought to this building and the one down the hill the life experiences that our country always needs. Ben's father was a veteran of the Great War. He suffered lifelong injuries after being run over by a horse-drawn artillery gun. He and his mother were regular visitors to the repat hospital in Brisbane. It was there he saw a hospital full of men struggling with painful ailments, lingering legacies from the Great War: chronic lung conditions from gas poisoning, kidney problems from trench nephritis, the lasting impacts of shrapnel wounds and gunner's deafness. The young Ben saw the suffering and he experienced the burden so often carried by families when the guns fall silent.
In the 1950s, aged 18, conscripted for national service, Ben joined the Navy. He then went on to train as a motor mechanic and then served with the Royal Australian Navy's fleet air arm as an airframe fitter. Later, he opened his own mechanic garage, and two of the blokes who helped him get that business off the ground were veterans from the Second World War. Ben's warmth and outgoing nature meant he made many friends far and wide. In time, his ability to gather people was seen as the right skill to help Labor in its rebuilding effort after 1975. That judgement was right, and in 1977 his seat was one of just two additional seats picked up by the Labor Party. Ten years later he was made veterans' affairs minister.
It was there that the lessons of his life guided his path. He developed a close friendship and relationship with Tim Fischer, and together they helped right the wrongs that were inflicted on our Vietnam War veterans. A motion ordering the service of our Vietnam veterans was passed, moved by Humphreys and seconded by Fischer. The welcome home parade was supported, and the arduous process of designing and completing a Vietnam Forces National Memorial here in Canberra was approved and completed. In 1990 he oversaw a project that will never be forgotten: to mark the 75th anniversary of the Gallipoli landing, 58 of the last surviving veterans were flown back to Gallipoli, with nine widows also accompanying them. It meant chartering a special Qantas 747, QF 1915, taking with them veterans, carers, junior legatees, nurses and doctors and the love and respect of a grateful nation. There has never been a flight like it, I imagine: four passengers in their 70s, eight in their 80s, 54 in their 90s and one passenger aged over 100. It was something very special for Australia. On return, Ben Humphreys said it all humbled him, and he was a very humble man.
Ben Humphreys was a substantive minister who helped ensure we kept our promise to the men and women who serve in our name. Tim Fischer once said Ben Humphreys genuinely had the wellbeing of the veterans first and foremost in his mind. Kevin Rudd, who was mentored by Ben, said he was a kind, gentle and good man. At the end of his time in parliament, Ben remarked that he should have struck a medal for his wife, Beryl. Instead, today we give her the thanks of the country for sharing Ben with us. Mr Speaker, I offer the heartfelt sympathy of this parliament and of our nation to Beryl, and to their grandchildren and to their children. Ben was a great Labor man and will be well respected for as long as there are days.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:12): Over recent weeks, Australians have been responding to bushfires across the continent. Many of us here in this place have sat with those who have bravely fought them and who have tirelessly supported those who have been fighting these fires. We have sat, as I did with Owen Whalan up in Taree, and listened to their stories, held their hands and tried to offer words of comfort wherever we could. But mostly we've been simply amazed, once again, that in Australia's most difficult moments we always find the best of Australians in the way that they respond to these events.
I would like to update the House on the fires as we know them now and on recent action in relation to the fires as they have spread across the country. Dangerous fires in New South Wales continue to burn. More than 1.4 million hectares have been burnt. As of this morning, there are more than 60 fires burning. More than 1,900 firefighters and support personnel, along with 95 aircraft, have been battling these fires. Tragically, four people have lost their lives and dozens more have been injured, including those fighting the fires. Over the past two weeks more than 550 homes—not just buildings but homes—have been destroyed and nearly 1,000 more outbuildings.
In Queensland, fires are continuing to burn in the south-east. They have burnt through 183,000 hectares since September. Fifty-five fires are still burning across the state and 20 homes have been confirmed lost. More than 3,600 firefighters have been on the front line for more than two weeks, along with aircraft. Nearly 50 firefighters have sustained injuries, including the pilot of a water-bombing helicopter that crashed near Toowoomba. The situation is ever changing and a state of fire emergency has been declared across 42 local government areas.
In Victoria we've seen an easing in recent days following the catastrophic fire conditions of last Thursday. This easing should assist firefighters in coming days battle the fires as they continue to burn.
Last week parts of South Australia experienced catastrophic fire conditions. Sixteen houses have been destroyed along with 21 other structures and four firefighters were injured. While conditions have eased, fires continue to burn across southern parts of the state.
We are watching in Western Australia closely. Severe to extreme fire dangers are forecast today over southern and central fire weather areas.
The government, through Emergency Management Australia, is working very closely with its state and territory counterparts. I place on record my deep thanks and appreciation for all the premiers for working so closely with the Commonwealth, and I thank them each for their leadership in their respective states during these difficult times. We work in partnership, with everyone knowing their jobs and their responsibilities. It's no different at a government level than it is when you're out in the incident response centre or you're on the fire ground itself. Everyone needs to know what their job is and get it done.
I want to acknowledge the tremendous national effort taking place with firefighters travelling from every state, as well as from New Zealand and the United States. I've had the opportunity to thank both the President this morning and, of course, the Prime Minister of New Zealand earlier. We also thank those who have come from Canada to help where it is needed.
Fire-bombing aircraft have been in action against these fires. These are national assets and ensure the best possible aerial firefighting equipment is available to help Australians. As well, the RAF have transported firefighters and equipment to and from centres across the country. Disaster recovery assistance has been provided under the jointly funded Commonwealth and state Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements. In New South Wales on the ground assistance is coming from the state government also. We're also providing extra financial assistance to the Australian Government disaster recovery payment. This is a non-means tested payment of $1,000 for eligible adults and $400 for each child. There is also the disaster recovery allowance, which is a short-term income support payment to help those who have experienced a loss of income as a direct result of the bushfires. The disaster recovery payment has been activated in 14 local government areas in New South Wales and the allowance has been activated in 32 areas in New South Wales. Both of these payments are administered by the Department of Human Services.
Yesterday, in New South Wales, working with the state government, we announced $48.25 million in bushfire recovery package assistance for the North Coast, the Mid North Coast and the Northern Tablelands. This package includes $15,000 recovery grants for small businesses and primary producers and an $18.25 million community recovery fund to fund community projects that stimulate the economy, build resilience and provide much needed mental health support as well.
In Queensland we're providing disaster recovery assistance, under the DRFA, in seven local government areas. This includes support for people suffering personal hardship to help with their immediate emergency needs, as well as things like concessional interest rate loans and freight subsidies for primary producers. We've also activated the disaster recovery payment, the AGDRP, and the Disaster Recovery Allowance, the DRA, for people affected by the Queensland fires. This is supported and administered by the Queensland government with whom we continue to work extremely closely.
I can report that every agency of the Commonwealth stands ready to help and has wherever they can. Across government the necessary plans and responses have been activated. The ATO has activated their community disaster rapid response group to support impacted taxpayers and communities. Taxpayers affected by the fires don't need to worry about their tax affairs. First things first, let's get them back on their feet. The Department of Health has been working with pharmacists regarding the supply of medicines to affected communities. The full resources of our defence forces have been available to assist when and where it has been requested. The Minister for Defence has directed and authorised all local base commanders to provide immediate assistance where it is required.
The work undertaken across Australia in recent weeks has been the result of painstaking preparation. I shudder to think of what might have occurred had we all not prepared accordingly. In a continent as big as ours it is not a question of if a national disaster hits but when, and fire particularly so, as has long been the case. Since the aftermath of Black Saturday, Commonwealth, state and territory governments have actively maintained a level of national preparedness that should reassure all Australians. Our preparedness for national disaster includes a $130.5 million investment by the Commonwealth over five years to reduce the risk and impact of disasters on Australians. As part of this work, $104 million is being distributed to states and territories under the new national partnership agreement on disaster risk reduction for investment initiatives that reduce disaster risk at the state and local levels.
As well, we have developed closely with state, territory and local governments a national Disaster Preparedness Framework to ensure we are positioned to effectively prepare for and manage these severe and catastrophic disasters. This framework is about a new national disaster capability so that people have access to the best information and guidance needed to make informed decisions, and I've seen this at work. I've seen this at work over these most challenging last few months.
Our support of the National Aerial Firefighting Centre, an annual investment of $15 million, has provided highly specialised firefighting aircraft that is available to states and territories. In December last year, foreseeing that we would be seeing longer fire seasons, we added another $11 million on top of our annual investment. We've also invested in Emergency Alert, supporting the national telephone based warning system, and we invested over $6 million in the next generation of Australian fire danger rating systems to deliver more accurate and local risk messaging. Again, I've seen it in action.
Our efforts are all about working in partnership with the states and territories, particularly the fire and emergency service professionals. As the providers of police and emergency services, the states and territories take the lead, and we back them in on their capabilities. Of course all work in such dynamic environments can be improved, but I am incredibly proud of the progress and the effort that has been put in right across the country and led so ably by our state governments—preparing for the worst, wherever and whenever it may be, and called into action when it is required.
At times like this we need to remind ourselves of those fundamental truths, that while properties are lost, it's the lives of our families and our loved ones who ultimately matter the most. I am in awe of our countrymen and women who have all stepped up in this very recent time, as they always do: firefighters, volunteers, servicemen and women, community members and neighbours, as well as the businesses who enable those who need to volunteer to go to the aid of their community, and I particularly say thank you to them. Everyone has been playing their part. It has been a time when we've seen our nation's best at their best. We're prepared and we will continue to act.
I know, more broadly, there are debates about other issues, and they rightly have a place for debate in this country. They're important issues, but our focus now is on those directly affected by these fires on the ground, and they will continue to be our focus. That's where our effort will remain, and we thank all of those who have come to their aid.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (16:50): Between this time last year and this time this year, a lot's happened. Of course, we had the general election, and the people of Australia had their opportunity to make the most important decision they make every three years, in terms of who comes into this place and represents them and forms government. Once again, this year, they exercised their judgement. All of us who were returned to this place came back with a great sense of humility and gratefulness for the opportunity we have to serve in this place—first and foremost, as the member for our electorates. Whether in my own in Southern Sydney, the electorate of Cook—taking in the southern parts of St George and Sutherland shire—or elsewhere around this country, our first opportunity, our first privilege, our first duty is to all of those in our electorates, and we say a very grateful thanks to all of them for returning us to this place to represent them and do our very, very best. Since that general election, the government has been hard at work, as I've mentioned in various responses and statements in this place and others, and I don't intend to go over those matters, because this afternoon is about something very different.
I did, however, want to acknowledge the great challenges that Australians have faced, particularly natural disasters. The year began with the devastating bushfires in Tasmania and Victoria, and it went through to the unprecedented flooding in North Queensland. None of us can—and I certainly can't—get out of our heads the image that was displayed of that railway line up in North Queensland, where we saw the water, over a 48-hour period, deluge that part of our continent. But in what must have felt like a heartbeat, in the space of just 24 hours, those wonderful Australians went from the relief and joy of seeing rain fall to tears and devastation as they saw generations of their efforts literally washed away. Of all the things that have happened this year, and there have been so many—we've walked onto firegrounds and sat with those who have been affected by these terrible fires across the year—it is very hard for me to get out of my mind being up there in North Queensland with those families. We have them still in our thoughts and in our actions today, and we continue to stand with them as they rebuild. In the great natural disasters that we see in this country we always see the greatness of Australians—their resilience, their tenacity, their care and their love for each other. At the worst of times, we see the best of Australians, and we saw that in North Queensland.
We have seen one of the worst droughts on record, impacting some 40,000 farming families in rural districts across the country. This fire season alone, six Australians have already, tragically, lost their lives to fires that have torn through millions of hectares across four states and claimed hundreds of homes. These events remind us that, while 'the lucky country' remains the lucky country, it's no passive moniker. It is one that is built and earned by the strength, character and resilience of our fellow Australians. Our first defence in everything is the strength and character of our people, our brave and selfless firefighters, our emergency services personnel. Indeed, today is International Volunteer Day. We reflect on those and we thank them very much for their wonderful service to our country.
We think of our service men and women, who also turned up in support of their fellow Australians through all of these disasters, and our communities: the businesses who let their staff go and volunteer. For a business owner in a regional area of the country, in a rural area of the country, it's tough enough, but they're the ones also who have to carry the burden, carry the weight and enable their staff to go and be there for their community, and they are equal in their service for providing for that. We have seen neighbours coming together—strangers coming together and acting as neighbours—and now they count each other as friends, as they've come through fire and flood and drought. Everyone has played their part.
As well, with Christmas almost upon us, we remember those who, for whatever reason, are doing it tough. The Leader of the Opposition and I were at the Kmart Salvos event just outside my office recently, and the Leader of the Opposition, rightly, referred to those who are going through terribly difficult times for economic reasons, or those who are affected by homelessness, or those who are affected by domestic violence. Any number of reasons will mean that, as we go into this Christmas season, once again, there are many Australians for whom this will be a very difficult time. Again, it'll be those fellow Australians who reach out to them and seek to provide them with support as they work through their terrible difficulties.
There'll be those who'll be alone or will be bereaved. There'll be those for whom there will be a missing place at the table, and that will be tough. They will reflect on wonderful memories, hopefully, of those times that they were able to share together. That's what families and friends do: they help each other deal with the challenges of life. There will be those who will be confined to hospital, those struggling on farms, those who battle difficulties that are insurmountable, it would seem. I ask every one of us—and it's an appeal I make to all of us—to look out for those who are less fortunate and to look out for one another, particularly over this summer season, and to keep safe on the roads, to exercise patience and care. You don't need to get there as quickly as you often think you do. We can get very busy at these times, and we know what can occur on our roads and the terrible tragedies that can unfold.
So, I would ask everyone, as we go about what hopefully is a very happy time and one of reunion with many family and friends, that we all make sure that we turn up safely and enjoy that experience. To Lifeline and all our other great services and volunteers who know they'll be reaching out on Christmas Day, because they do it every year: thank you for serving up that Christmas cheer. Thank you also, from all Australians, to the surf lifesavers who'll be on our beaches—looking after not just Australians but also the many visitors who'll be here and are often put at so much risk, unaware and unfamiliar with the dangers that can be in our waters—and to doctors, nurses, the ambos and the emergency and essential services workers who will give up their family time on Christmas Day and beyond to ensure that the rest of us can have a happy and safe holiday period.
In particular, as we come together with family, let us also reflect with gratitude on the serving men and women of our defence forces—some 1,500—who are around the world serving in so many different capacities, separated from their loved ones by the call of duty and because of their passion and love for their nation, whether at sea, in the air or on land, in Afghanistan, the Middle East or the many missions in other parts of the world, or keeping our borders safe closer to home, and those serving in our diplomatic service. We thank them, and we wish them a very merry Christmas.
We stand by our veterans community, also, remembering the depth of their sacrifice and responding to it with respect and strong and ongoing support. It is also fitting at this time of year to extend to the Leader of the Opposition and his family my very best wishes for Christmas and the holiday season, whether he'll be watching re-runs of old footy games and things like that—who knows, but I do hope he has a wonderful Christmas and holiday period with his family and a bit of time of rest. We'll all be back here again next year and ready to serve our constituents and play and perform the important roles that we do in this place. So, I hope he has a great break. I also want to acknowledge his predecessor, the previous Leader of the Opposition, the member for Maribyrnong, who served in that role. I wish him, Chloe and all of their family a very happy Christmas and a safe and pleasant new year. Menzies would often say of Curtin and Chifley, 'opponents but not enemies', and I believe this is true. That is the spirit in which these messages are sent. To all the members of the opposition: I wish you all the best for a happy and successful break.
To my own team: when you leave this place and go home to your families, you can be immensely proud of everything that you've achieved this year. You have my grateful thanks. When I took on the role of leadership of the parliamentary Liberal Party and then, together with the Deputy Prime Minister, stood before you, I said, 'You've asked me to lead and I've asked you to follow,' and you've paid me the greatest honour in your decision to follow. Together we have been able to achieve something quite extraordinary, but, as I said on election night, the victory was not ours; the victory was of those Australians who put their great faith in us. My proudest moment, though, was the day after, because it meant we got to get on with the job, and that's what we'll continue to do.
I also particularly want to extend my best wishes and appreciation to my Deputy Prime Minister and my coalition partner, Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack, and his wife, Catherine. They are great friends, and he's not a bad cricketer either—based on his own report! It has been a true joy to be able to lead a government together with a man as decent as Michael, and I wish him and Catherine well. They have been together for such a long time and they're such an example to us all. Indeed, as I look forward to my 30th wedding anniversary in January, I think you and Catherine have been such a wonderful blessing. You are on 33 years, so I don't know if we'll ever catch you, but we'll get close every year!
To my tremendous deputy, Josh Frydenberg, deputy leader of the parliamentary Liberal Party and Treasurer: thank you very much, Josh. Bringing down a budget—your first budget—is a very significant thing to do. For all of those who have had the great privilege of standing at this dispatch box to set out the expenditures of the government, its fiscal settings and the things you're able to achieve through strong financial management, it is a great honour. For Josh—the member for Kooyong, I should say, but with some indulgence from you, Mr Speaker. For the Treasurer to be able to come and to do that this year and do it in such fine style, I know he is looking forward to the next one more, having achieved a first surplus and able to announce another one. I know you'll do a tremendous job.
To the deputy leader of the National Party, Senator Bridget McKenzie—
Mr Frydenberg interjecting—
Mr Morrison: There he is. His ears were burning!
To the deputy leader of the National Party, Senator McKenzie: I thank you also, Bridget, for the tremendous guidance and support you have given to our leadership team, your passionate support for regional Australia and for ensuring we are always very familiar with the challenges that are being faced in rural and regional Australia.
To our newly minted Leader of the House: thank you for saying yes when I asked you to take this job. There he is. We honoured the previous Leader of the House—largely at his own direction!—when we put his picture up on the wall. I haven't checked to see if he is still standing there in front of it admiring it, but he certainly did for some time the other night! And so he should, because he was an adornment to this House. For the new Leader of the House, I also want to thank Christian for the enormous workload he takes on as our Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations. That of itself is an extraordinarily large task and, for backing that up with the incredible work that is required to move the government's business through this place and to ensure we can continue to deliver for Australians, I thank him very much for his great service both to our government and to our parties.
I also thank, of course, our leadership team in the Senate, Senator Cormann and Senator Birmingham. Senator Cormann has got quite a high strike rate when it comes to ensuring the passage of the government's legislation, and I thank him for the way that he's engaged with crossbench members and wish all of them also the very best, as I do the crossbench members here, for the Christmas season. I thank them for their dedication.
To my own team: I thank my chief of staff, John Kunkel. Thank you for your support, John, and the great work that is done by you. Thank you for your leadership of all of my team, which is so important to the running of the government. I want to thank all the hardworking and committed staff of coalition members, and we had the opportunity to thank them all last night. But can I also say to the opposition members and all of their staff that I wish them, also, all the best for Christmas and the holiday period.
Can I thank the Chief Government Whip and the deputy whips for ensuring we stay on track, but not just for that. I'm sure the Leader of the Opposition would know, from the role of their own whip, that they play such an important part and work closely together between opposition and government to ensure not just the smooth running of this place but the pastoral care that is provided to members of this parliament on both sides of this House. I want to thank the whips and their deputies, both from the government side and from the opposition side, for the great work they do.
To the Clerk of the House: congratulations on your appointment. It's wonderful to see our first female clerk here—not just that, but someone of immense capability. We loved those earrings yesterday, and these ones are just as good; they're right in the Christmas spirit! We wish you, your family, the Deputy Clerk and all the clerks' assistants who support them well. To the Serjeant-at-Arms, James Catchpole, our thanks also go to you. From my own department, thank you to David Belgrove, Anne O'Connor and Sue Klammer who work in the legislative team and who have been a great help to me and my staff.
To the House Parliamentary Liaison Officer, Charlie Higgins, and the rest of the team in the Table Office and the First Parliamentary Counsel, Peter Quiggin PSM and his team, our deep thanks. I'd like to make special mention of Debbie Arnold, who is leaving us as the Senate Parliamentary Liaison Officer and has been instrumental in helping my staff and me to program the government's agenda in the other place.
Other long-serving staff who retired this year, as we noted, are: David Elder, the former Clerk here for 38 years; Trish Bicket from the Table Office, 34 years; Laura Gillies, 34 years; James Rees, 28 years; Onu Palm, 23 years; and Anthony Overs, 17 years. It is clearly a vocation, and one taken very seriously by those who serve this parliament, and we thank you.
Thanks also to all the attendants in this place. To Luch and the whole mob: thank you very, very much. You're always a great encouragement and have been over many years. Whichever side of the House you sit on, there's always the great warm smile and friendly attendance that we get from you. We also thank, of course, all the Federal Police, security, those in catering, Library, Hansard and support staff who make the institution run so smoothly. Mr Speaker, we thank them, through you, for their great work.
In last year's valedictory, I mentioned Luzia, Ana and Maria, who are the three cleaners from my own office who have been working in this building for a very long time. They really do have a way of just lighting us all up. Ana and Maria are sisters. At this time last year, it was very tough. They had just lost their mum. But recently we were able to share together a much brighter moment—a wonderful morning tea celebration for Luzia's 30th anniversary of service in this building to many Prime Ministers over a long period of time. I know she would have been held in as much affection by my predecessors as by me and my own team. It was lovely to meet Luzia's husband, Marcelo, their children, Marian, Lucia and Isobel, and their grandchildren as well. It was a wonderful day. Next year we will be celebrating Ana's 30th anniversary milestone as well. She's a wonderful personality. She's the only person in the world who I understand called Mr Howard 'Pumpkin'. I want to, again, congratulate all of them and thank them.
On a sadder note, this year was a year we lost two of our nation's finest leaders and statesmen. It was a privilege to join with the Monash Foundation in honouring the scholarships that were awarded in their honour. To the late Bob Hawke and to the late Tim Fischer, and to all of their families: we want to acknowledge your great service to our country. Our country is so much better for the extraordinary contribution that they were able to deliver in their service, and they have set a standard for us all to seek to attain. Their passing reminds us of what politics is truly all about—serving honourably and courageously the Australian people.
Finally to you, Mr Speaker, Pam and all the family: have a wonderful Christmas. You continue to serve us and keep this show on the road in this parliament with great dignity, and you do it with a wit and a candour and an affection for which I think people around the country have got to know you well over many years now in this role. There have been many great Speakers, Mr Speaker, and I have no doubt you are one of them. I think, over the course of your time as Speaker, you will certainly stand out amongst them, if not above them all. It's a great privilege every time I see you in that chair, because I was so pleased to support you going into that chair and you have not let this House down on one occasion—not on one occasion. We thank you very much for all the work you do to maintain the spirit of this House and its important work.
Along with all of those good wishes, Mr Speaker, of course, it has been an adventurous year, it has been a dramatic year, it has been a year of a general election, it has been a year of achievements, it has been a year of disappointments for some, but it has been a year in which the great Australian spirit has showcased itself again: to itself and to the world. This really is the greatest country in the world in which to live, and whatever difficulties are before us or whatever challenges are in front of us, the one thing we can always say with a full heart is: it's great to be an Australian. Merry Christmas, everyone.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much. It's wonderful to be here. Earlier today I was with the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of this land to show my respects, along with Jenny and my family, and to reflect on 60,000 years and more of Indigenous custodianship of this wonderful land. And so I want to begin tonight by acknowledging all of our Indigenous peoples. They have cared for this land before anyone else. I pay our respects to them all and I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people in particular, elders past and present and the future. I also acknowledge our veterans and our serving men and women of our defence forces and I say thank you for your service.&nbsp;
Normally at this event, we look to our nominees as reminders of lives of service over self, generosity over selfishness and a willingness to show courage in the face of adversity. But tonight we need no reminder. Because beyond these walls to the south, to the north, to the east and the west of our great continent, thousands of volunteers are fighting fires and reminding us what it means to be a citizen of this great nation. They, like the nominees here tonight, are demonstrating to us that our national story is one of great achievements, but also of pain, of effort, sweat. There is prosperity and there is struggle and it is a story of a people grappling with the most tenacious yet most beautiful continent on earth.
Through this long summer we have seen the unquenchable spirit of Australians. Australians rallying to each other, be they family, friends or indeed strangers. A summer of countless good deeds, great sacrifice and yes, terrible loss. Some known, some not known, but all profound. Thousands of firefighters, including those who will never return home. 3,000 army reservists who took up the call, packed their kit and left their homes. Communities, church groups, service groups who man shelters, make meals, lend a hand. Vets, wildlife workers who tended our gorgeous wildlife. And the kids of this country who gave away their pocket money to help the fireys.&nbsp;
These are the acts that touched us as a nation. The pharmacist in Malua Bay who stayed open so people could continue to get their scripts despite losing his own home. The Army of Angels truck convoy made up of farmers, mechanics, tree loppers, beekeepers, delivering essential supplies across Victoria. The all-Indigenous, all-female firefighting crew at East Gippsland. It wasn't the first time. They previously fought the Black Saturday bushfires all those years ago. And one of their vehicles is a piece of artwork that's simply called ‘Working Together’. That is a motto for our times.
These are the stories of who we are, of what makes Australians Australian. And that is also what we celebrate tonight as we gather to honour and to name our Australian of the Year and the many other recognitions tonight. But I'm sure, having met with them today, that all of our nominees would agree with me tonight to share that time with all of those who have so selflessly served during this past year.
So tonight I say to all the heroes, not just to the bushfires, but the floods of a year ago and our terrible drought that has ravaged our country - you are all Australians of the year. Once again, this year's nominees embody a good and generous and courageous group of people who I have had the privilege to meet. You've explored new ideas, you've broken new ground, you've inspired, you’ve led and you've lived out the best of Australia's values.
So just let me congratulate you on behalf of Jenny and I and to thank everyone nominated tonight and their family and their friends whose support they have received over so many years. You've done tremendous work. You've helped make Australia an even better place and we're so proud of you all. Thank you for everything you've done for Australia.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (12:02): I move:
That the House:
(1) acknowledge the devastation across our nation occasioned by the bushfire season including the loss of 33 lives, the destruction of over 3,000 homes, the unimaginable loss of so much wildlife and the devastating impact on regional economies across Australia;
(2) extend its deepest sympathies to families who have lost loved ones and to those who have suffered injuries or loss;
(3) place on record its gratitude for the service of David Moresi, Geoffrey Keaton, Andrew O'Dwyer, Samuel McPaul, Bill Slade, Mat Kavanagh, Ian McBeth, Paul Hudson and Rick DeMorgan Jr, fire-fighters who lost their lives during the fires and extends its deepest condolences to their families;
(4) recognise the contribution of thousands of volunteer and career fire-fighters and the dedication of emergency services personnel across Australia;
(5) honour the contribution of 6,500 Australian Defence Force personnel, including 3,000 ADF reservists, and the work of Emergency Management Australia throughout the summer;
(6) recognise the generosity of individuals, families, schools, churches and religious groups, service clubs and businesses from across Australia and elsewhere in the world during the evacuations and following the fires;
(7) express its gratitude to Australia's friends, allies and neighbours who provided or offered support;
(8) recognise the unceasing efforts and close cooperation between state and local governments, demonstrating the strength of our Federation;
(9) commit itself to learning any lessons from this fire season; and
(10) pledge the full support of the Australian Parliament to assist affected areas to recover and rebuild.
We welcome the families of those who were lost who are here with us today.
In past times when Australia has been tested by fire, we have given the fires a name based on the name of a day or a locality: Black Thursday, in 1851; Black Friday, in 1939; Ash Wednesday, in 1983; the Canberra bushfires of 2003; and Black Saturday, in 2009. Just saying these words brings back such chilling memories. This year we are faced with, and we are still facing, a terrible season of fire, national in scale: fires that reached our highest mountain range and our longest beaches; fires that consumed forests, grasslands, farms, suburbs and villages; fires that jumped rivers and highways; fires where days became night and the night sky turned red; and fires that raged into the heavens as clouds of fire, with it all a merciless smoke that lingered across our cities—fires that still burn. The smoke from burned bushland that left an oppressive tightening in our chest told us that all was not right.
This is the 'black summer' of 2019-20 that has proven our national character and our resolve. It is a national trauma, best described by Indigenous leaders, who love our land so much, as a grief for the victims, a heartache for our wildlife and a broken heart for the scouring of our land. These fires are yet to end and danger is still before us in many, many places. Today we gather to mourn, honour, reflect and begin to learn from the 'black summer' that continues and to give thanks for the selflessness, the courage, the sacrifice and the generosity that met these fires time and again, and continues to.
Many of the stories of our 'black summer' we will never know. Some will become known and others have already been taken to our hearts as Australians. Across Australia we witnessed unparalleled firefighting and relief efforts. Thousands upon thousands have stood together to fight fires and protect communities. While our hearts are heavy for the loss of 33 people and the destruction of over 3,000 homes, we know our emergency services, ADF personnel and firefighters have undertaken a mighty effort to save so many more homes, so many more communities and so many more lives.
Along with the loss and, at times, seeming failure, there has been perseverance, courage and a willingness to give all to prevail. None have given more than the nine firefighters we lost. I again extend my welcome today to the many family members of our lost firefighters who are with us today. I also welcome the ambassador of the United States, Ambassador Culvahouse, who stands here in the stead of the three American families who also gave and lost so much.
Every one of these firefighters was loved. All were brave and had lives that meant so much to those around them. At the funeral of Geoffrey Keaton, there was a coffee mug—a mug no different to those most of the dads here have surely seen at some time—placed on his coffin. It had the words, 'Daddy, I love you to the moon and back.' Geoff's son, Harvey, was 19 months old when he lost his father. Geoff's fiancee, Jess, held their son as they mourned his loss together with his family.
Geoff died alongside his fellow volunteer Andrew O'Dwyer, from the Horsley Park brigade—an amazing group of people—fighting the Green Wattle Creek fire. Geoff and Andrew were mates, together with their captain, Darren, who has honoured them so many times now. Some even referred to them as brothers—new dads, two together with their children born days apart. Andrew's daughter, Charlotte, almost two, was also at his funeral—where Jenny and I joined them—innocently unaware of her horrible and terrible loss. Charlotte was wearing a little white dress. She had pigtails that only her mother, Melissa, could have lovingly made and on top of the pigtails she put on her father's white firefighting helmet. Like Geoff, Andrew loved what he did, with the brigade captain, Darren Nations, saying his love of the fire brigade was as thick as the blood that ran through his veins. Like Geoff and Jess, Andrew and Melissa shared a life together of such promise that is so sadly now a memory.
We lost David Moresi fighting a fire in East Gippsland. He was a husband, a father and a grandfather. He had been supervising the creation of vital firebreaks and died in a vehicle rollover. He was a bushman. He loved to shoot, fish and hunt. He had planned on Boxing Day to travel to the Philippines to help build a school there. He had already supported the building of schools in Thailand.
We lost Sam McPaul. He was just 28, the world at his feet, married to Megan for just a year and a half, expecting their first child. The son of a loving single mum, Chris, for whom Sam was her entire world. There will come a day when that young boy or girl will imagine what their father was like and will ask questions, and, when that day comes, we want that precious child to know their dad was even better than they could have ever imagined. He was the best of us.
Mat Kavanagh was a young father of two children—six-year-old Ruben and four-year-old Kate—and a devoted husband who loved his fly-fishing and who had been a member of Forest Fire Management Victoria for 10 years. On the day of the accident he had been extinguishing untended campfires. His older brother Mike said his family had lost the most special person in the world.
Bill Slade was just as loved and his wife, Carol, daughter, Stephanie, and son, Ethan, know how much he was loved. Bill had worked in land and fire management for 40 years and was about to retire. It was said there was no-one more experienced and no-one as fit as well. He even fought the Ash Wednesday fires in 1993. He was described as a true gentleman with the kindest and gentlest of souls. I spoke to Ethan and Stephanie. They could not have been more proud nor more devastated by their loss.
When we thought we couldn't hurt any more, we lost three men who had travelled half a world to protect us. We honour our American friends. We have no greater friend than the United States. Captain Ian McBeth, First Officer Paul Hudson and Flight Engineer Rick DeMorgan Jr were lost when their C-130 Hercules aircraft crashed near Peak View. Captain McBeth, an experienced firefighting pilot, is survived by his wife and three children. He had served in Iraq and Afghanistan and was a member of the Montana Air National Guard. His daughter, training to be a pilot, said she wanted everyone to know he was just a wonderful person. First Officer Hudson had served in the Marine Corps for 20 years, including as a C-130 pilot. He was from Buckeye, Arizona and is survived by his wife, Noreen. Across Arizona, they lowered flags in his honour. And Flight Engineer DeMorgan has served in the US Air Force, with 18 years as a flight engineer on the C-130. It was said his passions were flying and his children.
On Australia Day, I announced the National Emergency Medal would be declared for the 'black summer' of 2019-20 for these fires. The New South Wales Rural Fire Service and Forest Fire Management Victoria have advised that, once the bushfire response is complete and eligibility criteria for the medal have been set, all nine of these firefighters who lost their lives will be nominated to be posthumously awarded the National Emergency Medal. In addition, the government has reconsidered the criteria of eligibility for the national medal. This is Australia's most awarded civilian medal, with more than 237,000 medals awarded since its inception. It recognises the long and diligent service by members of eligible Australian government and community organisations that risk their lives or safety to protect and assist the community. It is awarded after 15 years of service.
It has not been awarded posthumously to long-term members of eligible organisations who have lost their lives in the line of duty. I am also pleased to announce that Her Majesty has agreed to amend the regulations for the national medal to be awarded posthumously. This change will allow the national medal to be awarded to those who died in the service of their duty and who would have reached 15 years service if not for their death. This amendment will be retrospective to the creation of the medal in 1975, meaning that others who have died in the service of others will now be eligible.
We have witnessed the most remarkable actions through these fires by our volunteers and our defence forces in recent months: tens of thousands of volunteers—all of them doing things that were extraordinary, although they would consider themselves ordinary. They were joined by 6½ thousand Defence Force personnel, including 3,000 reservists who were compulsorily called out. So much of it was difficult and dangerous work: ordinary people, extraordinary actions. One New South Wales firey, Alex Newcombe, from up near Blackheath, returned to the fireground just 12 weeks after a kidney transplant. His doctors weren't pleased! But, as Alex said: 'It's just what we do. We get stuck in.' His kidney donor was none other than his wife, Kate, a fellow firefighter in the same brigade. Alex had been a volunteer for 20 years, and on 21 December his truck was overrun by flames. The truck had run out of water, meaning it couldn't activate the sprinkler system. After all he'd been through, it was touch and go. He drove his crew to safety. That's the story of this summer: remarkable Australians standing by each other, struggling, persevering and taking the wins where they could find them.
And it wasn't just firefighters. Behind our fire crews have been caterers, logistics officers, radio operators, fire control centres and a support apparatus that did not sleep. Our communities were backed up by volunteers at evacuation centres and by service groups, such as the CWA, Rotary and Lions, and wildlife groups, such as WIRES. And there were the charities: the Salvos, St Vinnies and so many more. Some of it was organised, some of it not. Together, these efforts resulted in the most tremendous outpouring of generosity our country has seen: big businesses, small businesses, superstars, mums and dads all giving what they could.
That was the wonder of this summer: tens of thousands of volunteers fighting fires and then joined by 25 million of their countrymen and women supporting them—trusting each other and backing each other. Twenty-five million acts of kindness, all of them reminding us about the country we love. More than money, it spoke of our resolve—a reminder that what unites us as Australians is always more enduring and lasting than what divides us. With every action was a reminder of who we are—like the owners of the Indian restaurant in Gippsland that I referred to on Australia Day, who cooked thousands of free meals of curry and rice. There was the chemist at Malua Bay who, despite their own home burning down and not having an electronic payment system, kept the pharmacy open to get the medicines through. These businesses include the ones up at Yeppoon, which saw a survivor and took no payment for clothes or meals. And there were the wildlife volunteers, one of whom even gave the shirt off her own back while looking for koalas, kangaroos, wallabies and wombats to tend and protect.
There were the men from the Islamic community in Auburn who drove for six hours to Willawarrin, with 30 kilograms of sausages, to cook a barbecue for a devastated community. That's faith. There were the convoys of trucks that took supplies through to communities that needed them and an army of angels that loaded 150 trucks of supplies and got them to Buchan and Omeo. Tradies knocked on doors and, at no charge, climbed on roofs and cleared the gutters of local homes, and there were families who opened up their own homes to strangers. Then there were the children: cake stalls, lemonade stalls and giving away their pocket money and their Christmas money. The kids of this country give us every reason to hope.
The generosity of the rest of the world was also so humbling: 70 nations offered us assistance. Over 300 firefighters were sent from the United States, Canada and New Zealand, to whom we are so grateful. We also had offers of assistance from the UAE, which is greatly appreciated. There was military assistance from New Zealand, the United States, Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea, Singapore and Japan, and from our wonderful family in PNG and Fiji. When the 54 engineers from the Republic of Fiji Military Forces arrived in Melbourne they placed their hands over their hearts and sang a hymn, 'Angels Watching over Me'—and they have been—to us. Our Pacific family has been so incredibly generous. Our neighbours, such as Vanuatu, Tuvalu and Solomon Islands, have given generously from not much—reminding me of the widow's mite—to our bushfire relief. In PNG's second-largest city, Lae, the young people began a wheelbarrow push, collecting donations and giving them to our consulate. Having stepped up for our Pacific family, we are now being so blessed by seeing our closest neighbours step up for us. We are so grateful to our Pacific family.
The actions of every level of government have been exemplary. I pay tribute to our premiers and to their agencies and local governments, who have all been doing exceptional work. I acknowledge Commissioner Fitzsimmons, who is here today—an amazing job, Shane.
In our own ranks I want to acknowledge those wonderful workers the electorate staff, the members here—not just the members that sit on this side but all members in this and the other place—and their teams, who have worked under extraordinary pressure. As members of this place we are all so proud of our colleagues and what they have done during this time, and those who serve with them.
Across government there have been tremendous efforts. I want to acknowledge the outstanding contribution of Emergency Management Australia and its director-general, Rob Cameron, who is here with us today. I also pay tribute to the contribution of our Australian defence forces. Six and a half thousand personnel have been providing support in the field, at sea, in the air and from defence bases in fire affected communities going back to September of last year, and continue out there today. That includes reservists, the first compulsory call-out of reserves in our history for these purposes. The compulsory call-out will end this Friday. The ADF task force, led by Major General Jake Ellwood, have been undertaking vital on-the-ground tasks like delivering emergency food and water, evacuating stranded people, reopening roads, restoring services, clearing debris, building fences and burying dead animals. This reflects the transition of ADF support from assisting to save lives and properties to relief and recovery operations. Their sheer presence presented such encouragement and boosted morale when Australians, so devastated, could look up and see them there and know they were supported. They will continue to provide that support wherever it's needed, for as long as it's needed, with the full-time forces and, now, those volunteer reservists.
The recovery operations require a whole-of-government response, and that is why we established the National Bushfire Recovery Agency under the leadership of former AFP commissioner Andrew Colvin. It is overseeing a national bushfire recovery fund, which will support all recovery efforts across Australia over the next two years and for as long as it takes. We've allocated an initial $2 billion to fund this agency to ensure families, farmers, business owners and communities hit by these fires get the support they need as they recover, working closely with our colleagues and state and territory governments. Already the government has made major commitments, providing funding to clean-up operations, tourism support, wildlife recovery, local government assistance, small-business reconstruction, primary producers, farmers, graziers and families, as well as vital mental health support. In addition to that, over $100 million has already been provided in emergency payments.
However, today is not the day to speak in detail of these initiatives. Today is the day for memorial and commemoration. We know that recovery takes time, and we're all here for the long haul. Following a national disaster of this magnitude we must also heed the lessons. These fires have been fuelled by one of the worst droughts on record, changes in our climate and a build-up in fuel, amongst other factors. Our summers are getting longer, drier and hotter. That's what climate change does, and that requires a new responsiveness, resilience and a reinvigorated focus on adaptation. Today I've written to the premiers and chief minister to seek their feedback on the draft terms of reference for a royal commission, which I've flagged now for several weeks, along the terms that I've outlined in public. The royal commission will be led by former Chief of the Defence Force Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin AC and will shine a light on what needs to be done to make our country safer and our communities more resilient. We owe it to those we have lost, we owe it to those who have fought these fires, we owe it to our children and the land itself to learn from the lessons that are necessary.
Over a century ago, Henry Lawson wrote a poem about a bushfire in a place called Dingo Scrubs:
It is daylight again, and the fire is past, and the black scrub silent and grim,
Except for the blaze of an old dead tree, or the crash of a falling limb.

In his reminiscence, Lawson writes about three men who wipe away tears of smoke and put themselves in harm's way to save a family. When the fire is past, he writes of the men:
When they're wanted again in the Dingo Scrubs, they'll be there to do the work.

And that's what we'll all do here in this House and across Australia. To do the work; to do the work of recovery; to build back better; to do the work of learning; to do the work of repairing shattered hearts, broken communities: that is what we owe our country. That is what we owe each other. Australians are overcomers. Despite the scale of this disaster and the tragedies, Australia is not and will never be overwhelmed. As we face the challenges that remain active, as we confront and face the devastating drought compounded in so many places by these fires, as we confront and contain the challenge of the virus, indeed, that threatens the world, Australians will not be overwhelmed. We will overcome, as our national anthem encourages us, with courage all. Let us proclaim advance Australia fair.
So I conclude in memorial. I conclude in thanks. I conclude in honour to those we have lost, and the deepest of our sympathies and condolences to you. We simply hope and pray that, as we've gathered here today to acknowledge your great loss and the heroes you have lost, this will make your journey just that little bit easier.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (11:37): Mr Speaker, today we welcome the President of the Republic of Indonesia, His Excellency Joko Widodo. President Widodo, it is an honour and a privilege to have you here amongst us as a true friend. Selamat datang! And, President Widodo, we are welcoming not only you and your delegation at this time in this country, because at present we welcome 40 members of the Indonesian National Armed Forces, including military engineers and medical staff, who are currently assisting with bushfire relief and recovery in New South Wales, and today they're working on floods. We thank you, Mr President, we thank the people of Indonesia and we thank the Republic of Indonesia. Like a true friend, as you are, you have lent a great hand, and we are a grateful nation.
President Widodo, you join us here in the home of our democracy as the leader of our most important neighbour and as a dear, dear friend. Shortly after becoming Prime Minister—on my first overseas visit, in fact—I found myself at a school in Bogul, surrounded by young Indonesian students, brimming with promise—singing, in fact. So, I decided to tell them a story, as we often do we when visit our schools. I told them the story of a man I was on my way to meet that day; a man who had come from modest and humble beginnings; a man who had worked hard to put himself through university, who'd studied forestry and then set up a business and did what others thought he couldn't or perhaps shouldn't; a man who, as we say here in Australia, had a go. And then I asked the students, 'Do you know who I'm talking about?' and they didn't know, so I pointed across the room to a photo that hung on the wall, and it was your portrait. It was your story I told, which they knew as Bapak Jokowi. It was a story that showed we can make our own futures, and that is as true in Indonesia as it is here in this country. 'He's like you,' I told the students.
President Widodo, you have many admirers here in this chamber and that fill the galleries here today. We have watched and seen your great leadership in your country and throughout the region, and we know it and we trust it. Thanks to your leadership, Indonesia today is an even more dynamic and more successful country, to the great benefit of your people. Your commitment to deepening our two nations' partnership and strengthening our shared region in the Indo-Pacific is honoured here today. And I like to think we are countries that can cheer each other on. We can cheer on our successes together and, as Australia has appreciated in recent months, stand together in the so-many difficult times, as Australia will always with Indonesia, as you face other difficult times.
Many years ago, it was another generation of Australian leaders who championed and supported Indonesian independence—so much so that President Sukarno asked Australia to represent Indonesia in the UN discussions—a generation that dreamed and hoped for what we could achieve together. Our countries are living out that hope today. Of course, as our modern relationship has matured, there have been many times when we haven't agreed. That's only normal in the relationships between friends, where you have to deal with a multitude of challenges. But respect underpins the trust that we have formed.
Our countries work hard to understand where there are differences, rather than focus on them. We listen to each other, we learn from each other and, importantly, we are honest with each other. In doing so, we have discovered, as Prime Minister Menzies said during his first visit to Indonesia in 1959, that we have 10 times as much in common as we have in difference. And that is ever so today. Today, Australia and Indonesia have built the trust that underpins only the truest of friendships. Trust allows us to work through the differences that neighbours sometimes face. For Australia, we see Indonesia's success as something to be celebrated. We count Indonesia amongst our most important partners and it has now become, indeed, a convention that the first visit of any Prime Minister is to Jakarta.
There are many challenges in the Indo-Pacific region: the strategic competition, maintaining international rules and norms and a resurgence of terrorism and violent extremism, all of which we must face together because these are not challenges any of us can face alone. We need partners. We need our friends. As the Indonesian saying goes: berat sama dipikul, ringan sama dijinjing—heavy when shouldered alone, light if carried together.
Australia and Indonesia understand this well and we have worked together closely over many years on defence and counterterrorism issues; on maritime security, combatting smugglers and illegal fishing along our maritime border. Together, Australia and Indonesia are motivated by our shared concerns for our region and our shared vision for an open, prosperous Indo-Pacific underpinned by strong institutions, rules and norms. By continuing to work together, we can build the region's resilience and make our people safer and our economy stronger. Our ambitious comprehensive strategic partnership, which was finalised 18 months ago, gives us a framework for even closer ties. We now have a plan of action to take the next steps in our relationship. From trade and investment to defence, counterterrorism, maritime security, ocean sustainability and education, to name only some, and even today we add energy and the future of fuel sources for our nations to this long list. But that is only where our ambition begins. We know there is more to be done, especially on the economic front.
Indonesia is one of Australia's nearest northern neighbours, a growing trillion-dollar economy and the fourth most populous nation, but only our 13th-largest trading partner. Australia is Indonesia's 13th-largest too. There is enormous untapped potential for both nations, which we have recognised, and we are determined to unlock this through the IA-CEPA. And I want to acknowledge today the presence of former Prime Minister Mr Malcolm Turnbull, who did so much work to bring this to reality. Once in force, this modern, transformative agreement will do more than make trade easier; it will open the door to new economic opportunities and forge more partnerships between our businesses, farmers, investors, tech entrepreneurs, researchers and scientists.
One area where IA-CEPA can facilitate closer economic engagement is, of course, in education. Our educational connections already run deep, with 16,000 young Indonesian leaders studying in Australia every year, and I am delighted that the first university in the world to establish a branch campus in Indonesia will be Australia's Monash University. Monash Indonesia—what a combination, those two names!—will contribute powerfully to Indonesia's economic, social and technological development. It will deliver master's, PhD and professional training programs, and partner with Indonesia's leading national, private and Islamic universities to establish deep research links with Indonesian businesses. Our countries, economies and people are being drawn closer. That is something we have encouraged, with the New Colombo Plan, the BRIDGE program and interfaith exchanges also, something I know that President Widodo and I are both keen to promote.
Mr President, this 'black summer' the Australian and Indonesia people have suffered traumatic climatic events, with bushfires here in Australia and floods in Indonesia. Fire and flood—nature can be so indiscriminate. Sixty-one people died in new-year floods that hit Jakarta and the West Java and Banten provinces, with the most ferocious rain resulting in flash flooding and landslides. Despite their own struggles and amidst their own suffering, Indonesians remembered Australia and reached out to us also, kindness upon kindness. In Bali—a place that has become, for Australians, a home away from home—there were dozens of fundraisers to assist our fire efforts. For two days, 1,250 local taxi drivers from the Blue Bird Group made donations from every taxi trip booked in Bali. In Makassar, a group of Indonesians who had attended Australian universities raised funds for the Red Cross. In their words, 'We felt we had to do something to help.' And last week, in Surabaya, a six-year-old girl organised a school fundraiser; she wanted to help our koalas.
We're seeing the same generosity from the Indonesian community here in Australia too. In Darwin, a food bazaar event was organised by the local community group and supported by the Indonesian consulate. There was bakso, tahu isi and bakwan—and I apologise for my pronunciation—all on offer. One of the men behind the event, Dominic Witono, said that what he and his community had raised wasn't the biggest sum. But to that I would say: it was the bigness of his heart that mattered. These actions, and so many more, speak of the wonderful Indonesian character. These acts of kindness make me confident about Australia and Indonesia's future, President Widodo, as does your presence here today and your friendship. On behalf of this parliament and the Australian people, I welcome you again, and we look forward to your address. Terima kasih. Thank you, my friend.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (11:01): by leave—I present a copy of the&nbsp;Closing&nbsp;the&nbsp;gapreport&nbsp;2020.
When we meet in this place, we are on Ngunawal land, and I give my thanks and pay my respects to our Ngunawal elders past, present and, importantly, emerging, for our future. I honour all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here in this House and right across our great continent. I also acknowledge, as I always do, our service men and women and our veterans and particularly acknowledge our Indigenous service men and women and our Indigenous veterans, as we did just last week at the Australian War Memorial—service that, for so long, was not acknowledged, but who served not for recognition but because of their faith in who we could become as a country and as a people. We are still on that journey. And I thank them on behalf of a grateful nation for their service.
I also acknowledge and honour our Indigenous leaders who are also the democratically elected representatives of the Australian people: the member for Hasluck, the Hon. Ken Wyatt, our very first Aboriginal Minister for Indigenous Australians; the member for Barton, the Hon. Linda Burney; Senator Patrick Dodson; Senator Malarndirri McCarthy and Senator Jacqui Lambie. I also welcome convenor, Pat Turner, and all members of the Coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peak Organisations. Welcome, Pat. I thank you for your partnership, for your strength and your leadership.
For 12 years, I have sat in this chamber and listened to Closing the Gap speeches. It's a tale of hope, frustration and disappointment—a tale of good intentions and, indeed, good faith. But the results are not good enough. This is, sadly, still true.
Last year I opened this address with what I believe is a national truth and a national shame—that our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in Australia today do not have the same opportunities as all other children growing up in Australia. They never have in Australia. Never. This is the ultimate test of our efforts—that every Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander boy and girl can grow up in this country with the same opportunities and expectations as any other Australian boy and girl.
Over decades our top-down government-knows-best approach has not delivered the improvements we all yearn for. When it comes to the welfare and advancement of our Indigenous peoples, I don't doubt the good hearts and the goodwill of those in this chamber and those who have served here, including former Prime Minister Rudd, who began this process with the national apology, indeed, the day before I gave my first speech in this place 12 years ago. The national apology was an important milestone, but it did not pretend to be the solution. It was important for many reasons, but, for me, it was most important because it was important to our First Australians. It mattered to them, and so it mattered to me.
Despite our best intentions, Closing the Gap, as an initiative, fell victim to the same type of thinking that has hampered our efforts in the past. We seem to think that somehow if our aspirations were high enough the rest would just take care of itself. This is not a challenge of aspiration. It's not a contest of earnestness. It's not about who cares more. It's not about symbolism. There's been no shortage of money or will. The Productivity Commission estimates that in 2015-16 total Indigenous-specific expenditure of all levels of government was $6 billion, and the share of mainstream programs that all Australians share was a further $27.4 billion. Over the forward estimates we are providing $5.2 billion for our Indigenous Advancement Strategy, $4.1 billion for targeted efforts to improve Indigenous health as well as significant payments to the states and territories for Indigenous-specific programs.
Closing the Gap is a very practical challenge and a very difficult one. Getting people into jobs so they can lift up their eyes from seeing hopelessness and see a future that they can direct, and ensuring young children are healthy, in school and well-educated to realise their potential—that is how generational change occurs. And by ensuring that Indigenous Australians are safe in their homes and in their communities, where they can have the same expectations of the rule of law to go about their own lives unviolated as any other Australian in any other part of the country.
Having watched and listened, we are now making the change to how we go about this task. It's not a judgement of our past efforts, but is an honest and humble learning. Despite the best intentions—investments and new programs and bipartisan goodwill—Closing the Gap has never really been a partnership with Indigenous people. We perpetuated an ingrained way of thinking, passed down over two centuries and more, and it was the belief that we knew better than our Indigenous peoples. We don't. We also thought we understood their problems better than they did. We don't. They live them. We must see the gap we wish to close, not from our viewpoint, but from the viewpoint of Indigenous Australians before we can hope to close it and make a real difference, and that is the change we are now making, together with Indigenous Australians through this process.
We all have in our own way sought to grapple with the consequences of 2¼ centuries of Indigenous disempowerment. What I know is that to rob a person of their right to take responsibility for themselves, to strip them of responsibility and capability to direct their own futures, to make them dependent, is to deny them their liberty, and slowly that person will wither before your eyes. That's what we did to our First Nations peoples, and, mostly, we didn't even know we were doing it. We thought we were helping when we replaced independence with welfare. This must change. We must restore the right to take responsibility, the right to make decisions, the right to step up, the opportunity to own and create Australians' own futures. It must be accompanied by a willingness to push decisions down to the people who are closest to them—where the problems are and where the consequences of decisions are experienced. That is what we must do.
On the afternoon before Australia Day my family and I once again visited a group of Ngunawal elders, this time down by the lake, for a water blessing. It was hot, and there was smoke from the bushfires in the air. I was grateful for the generosity and grace displayed by the Ngunawal people in hosting a Prime Minister and his family at a poignant time when they reflect on their own long history since time immemorial. Yet, on that afternoon, my Ngunawal friends were more concerned about what they called my 'sorry business', my sorry business time, and the recent passing of my father. They were concerned for my girls and their loss. They had words and space for grief, and we sat together. I want to thank Aunty Agnes Shea for her hospitality and her kind words. Be it grief; the protection of our lands against bushfire; an understanding of our native ecosystems; or the intergenerational responsibilities to the land and to each other; there is so much we learn from Indigenous communities and peoples.
So I ask: what have we been too proud to learn? What must we learn so that we can grow together? Our new approach to closing the gap provides some of the answers to this question. It is an approach that is built on partnership; on giving back responsibility; of listening; of empowering; of government providing the capabilities so that Indigenous Australians can make their best choices; of all governments accepting their own accountabilities; and of owning up to a path that, despite the very best of intentions of all governments, hasn't worked.
Today I make the final report of an old approach as well as the first report of a new era. Here, then, are the results against the targets set since 2008. Two of the seven targets are on track to be met this year and in 2025. We are on track to halve the gap in year 12 attainment. That is a tremendous achievement. What that means now and in the future is more Indigenous doctors, nurses, teachers, tradies, police officers, engineers, scientists, mathematicians, farmers, IT specialists, musicians, artists, and CEOs and business leaders—excelling in every field of endeavour, lifting our communities. Indeed, this is the biggest improvement over the past decade. The proportion of Indigenous Australians reaching this milestone has jumped more than 20 per cent in 12 years. The biggest leap forward has been in our major cities, where 85 per cent of Indigenous 20- to 24-year-olds have attained year 12 or equivalent.
We're already doing more to close that gap. In last year's statement I announced $200 million in extra support for Indigenous students through the Indigenous Youth Education Package. Already, funding agreements for 30 projects valued at $190 million are in place. This year the package will assist over 20,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students to stay engaged in secondary school through mentoring, cultural and other supports. We're also working in partnership with local communities in remote and very remote communities to identify community projects that encourage school attendance. These projects are being developed.
This year we are also on track to have 95 per cent of Indigenous four-year-olds enrolled in early childhood education by 2025. The preschool years are so important in preparing kids for their school journey and beyond, and we're seeing more Indigenous kids getting that advantage. In 2018, the figure was 86 per cent, an almost 10 percentage point rise on 2016 and well ahead of where we needed to be to hit that target in five years time. So, at both ends of the school spectrum, we have made great strides in getting more kids into school and through school.
Nothing should diminish how significant these gains are. However, the four expiring targets that were supposed to be met by 2018 were not met: halving the gap in child mortality; closing the gap in school attendance; halving the gap in child literacy and numeracy; halving the gap in employment. The final target, closing the gap in life expectancy within a generation, is not on track to be met by 2031. This is a stark and sobering report that I have tabled. I welcome the gains. I honour the hard work across every front. We must be careful not to speak of our First Australians as a broken people, because they are not. So many of our First Australians are out there, making their way despite the disadvantages that they have faced and overcome: setting goals, making choices, living their lives and bravely showing the way to others.
But I don't shy away from the failures. I see the shortcomings. The targets that were set for Indigenous Australians, not by Indigenous Australians, do not celebrate the strengths, achievements and aspirations of Indigenous people. They don't tell you what's happening on the ground or stirring under it. They don't tell you how realistic or achievable these targets were in the first place. They reinforce the language of failing and falling short and they also mask the real progress that has been made. We must be careful not to adopt a negative mindset, because on most measures we have made progress.
I am saddened that we have not met the target for child mortality, but I draw hope and resolve from the fact that we are making progress in tackling the risk factors. More Indigenous mothers are attending antenatal care in the first trimester and more are going to at least five antenatal sessions. Fewer Indigenous mothers are smoking during pregnancy. We know that if we can shift these risk factors we can keep more Indigenous babies and children alive. We may not be on track to fully close the life expectancy gap in a generation—always an ambitious target—but mortality rates have improved by almost 10 per cent. This is mostly because we've made progress in tackling the leading cause of death, the big circulatory diseases like heart disease and stroke. This is progress. But, as I said, we have not made as much progress as we should have by now.
There remains much to do. We will do it differently: by working together; by moving from a fixation with what is going wrong to a focus on strength; by going from good intentions and sky-high aspirations to local practical action that's driven by local leaders and local needs, with clear accountability and responsibility, with a clear line of sight to the community. We're acting on a commitment by all levels of government to work together; for federal, state, territory and local governments to work together—not just the Indigenous portfolios but whole governments at every point of contact, because every minister in my government is a minister for Indigenous Australians and the Minister for Indigenous Australians is the first amongst equals in this cause—most importantly, for governments to work with local communities in partnership with the coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peaks—known as the Coalition of Peaks—and with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. We are making that commitment real.
That is what our Closing The Gap refresh is all about. It is what all governments agreed to at COAG a little over a year ago. It is what we agreed to in March last year, in our unprecedented partnership agreement on closing the gap between the Commonwealth, state and territory governments, the Coalition of Peaks and the Australian Local Government Association. It's what Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have been saying for a long time. They want a partnership where we listen, work together and decide together how future policies are developed, especially at a regional and local level, a partnership that respects their expertise and acknowledges their place as the First Nations people of this continent.
So we're bringing more people into the process. We're finalising a new national agreement on closing the gap, a formal agreement between COAG and the Coalition of Peaks. We expect this to be considered in April during joint council in Western Australia. Just last month, the peaks and I sat around the cabinet table and talked about how we're making this commitment real. Even meeting together like that, I'm advised—the ministers and me, along with the heads of 14 community controlled organisations representing almost 50 different community controlled organisations—was unprecedented. It was historic. But it shouldn't have been. This partnership is generations overdue.
At that meeting, I listened. The Indigenous leaders were telling us where the gaps are, where the needs are, where the strengths are, the success stories, the empowering stories, the stories of hope. Our shared priorities are clear: expanding the opportunities for shared decision-making; building the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community controlled services sector; and making sure all mainstream agencies provide high-quality services to meet the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. In days that some in this chamber will remember, the government had absolute control over Aboriginal people's lives: where they could live, where they could travel, who they could marry. Government files held details—often brutal in their brevity—that the people themselves were not allowed to know. I have one such file here with me from the Department of Native Welfare. File 1690/68: a file of the native welfare department. The file is for a boy, a teenager. In this file there are notes about funding for school uniforms. There is a memo to the Commissioner of Native Welfare about whether the boy should be provided pocket money of 75c a week. It was bureaucrats making decisions for what they paternally called 'a good type of lad'.
Think about a life where even the most basic decision-making is stripped away from you—by governments thinking they know better. Fortunately, that boy was bigger than the times, and I'm honoured that he now sits behind me as the Minister for Indigenous Australians. He knows that responsibility and empowerment are freedom. He is one of almost 800,000 Indigenous Australians—in the west, in the east, in Tasmania and in the Top End.
As I have stated, it is time we define the gap that we want to close from the viewpoint of our Indigenous Australians. They are the Australians who should be setting these goals. A vital part of empowering Indigenous communities is giving them the data and information to inform their decision-making. That's why we've just committed $1.5 million to an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander-led data project. It's about supporting local decision-making. It's about supporting the Coalition of Peaks in partnership with the Indigenous Data Network at the University of Melbourne to develop regional profiles for Closing the Gap targets. It will mean having richer and more localised data to inform programs designed by and for local communities. It's about commitment of states and territories, all governments, to report publicly on Closing the Gap into the future. These new arrangements underpin the future of Closing the Gap.
One of the things we've learned from the last 12 years is that the way we deliver services matters as much as what's delivered. That's why we changed the funding model for the Indigenous Australians' Health Program. The new design is focused on delivering primary health care that's appropriate to the unique languages, cultures and circumstances of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. I'm very hopeful that a new approach that's more locally led and more collaborative will take us much further down than the top-down, one-size-fits-all, government-led approach ever could.
We know that when Indigenous people have a say in the design of programs, policies and services, the outcomes are better—and lives are changed. For a young mother, it's the difference between antenatal care that's too far away or not culturally competent and getting the care she needs from a local Indigenous service. For a young child, it's the difference between getting a patchy education and getting the right support to stay in school. For a jobseeker, it's the difference between giving up on getting a job and finding a service provider that won't give up on them. For an older person with a chronic health problem, it's the difference between missing treatment and turning up to a friendly face and a familiar touch and getting the care they need in the way they need it. That is our goal: services that make a meaningful difference.
Last year I said we must make an impact on one really important area, and that was education. Get the education right and the skills, jobs, security, health, prosperity and longevity all follow. And it's the area where, as I've already noted, we've been seeing the most encouraging signs. Think about those four-year-olds just starting early childhood education this year—on the very threshold of a whole life of learning. In 2020 the government has committed almost half a billion dollars to preschool education so that every Australian child can have access to quality early childhood programs in the year before school. That includes every Indigenous child.
One program in particular is having an impact on helping those kids get that good start. The Connected Beginnings Program is in 15 Indigenous communities across Australia. In Alice Springs it's seen more kids actually enrolling in preschool, shifting from around half to three-quarters. In the Jordan River community more Indigenous kids are participating in child care and play groups and more are getting referrals to the health and specialist services they need. In Doomadgee teachers are seeing year 1 students who are now much better prepared for school. Together we need to accelerate our efforts in these early years to make sure that every Indigenous child across our country grows up safe, resilient and ready to thrive throughout life. That is why I've asked the Minister for Indigenous Australians to lead the development of a national Indigenous early childhood strategy this year, to design a new way of working together to achieve our shared goal; to prioritise these actions, that matter most to parents and carers, the ones who live the experience; to partner with experts, families, frontline services and communities; and to have a more coordinated effort across the Commonwealth and with our state and territory colleagues.
We are also seeing great connectedness between our universities and our young Indigenous students. For school-leavers in regional areas, it's sometimes hard to see where the path leads next. It's harder to go on to further study if that means uprooting from everything you know and trust. That's why regional university centres are so important. They help Indigenous students in regional places take on certificates and degrees through any Australian tertiary institution they choose. In the Northern Territory, the Wuyagiba Bush Hub saw nine students successfully complete their university preparation course this year. Five of them have been offered places at Macquarie University and four at the territory's Bachelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education. In 2020 the bush hub is expanding its applications so that more Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students can study on country. It's run by a Wuyagiba Bush Hub Aboriginal Corporation—I apologise if my pronunciations are not accurate. Together with a local elder and an academic from Macquarie, it's a real success story.
Then there's the Indigenous Student Success Program, giving nearly 20,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students access to scholarships, tutoring, mentoring and other cultural support to help them succeed at university. With the support of this program, Griffith University in Queensland has helped more than 300 students get degrees in the last couple of years. It also supports about 160 regional and remote students to succeed. We know that whatever we can do to get more kids in school, finishing school and going on to further study, all helps to set them on a path for a better life.
That path must lead to a job. One of the success stories of recent years has been the government's Indigenous Procurement Policy. This policy is about encouraging Indigenous entrepreneurship and job-producing businesses. In 2018-19, Commonwealth portfolios and their major suppliers awarded contracts to 775 Indigenous businesses, with a total value of $754 million. Since July 2015 the Indigenous Procurement Policy has seen $2.69 billion in contracts awarded to 1,842 Indigenous businesses. This means more jobs, rising incomes and greater economic security for Indigenous communities. From 1 July this year we'll introduce a target of three per cent of the value of Commonwealth contracts to be awarded to Indigenous businesses. This will add to the existing target of three per cent of Commonwealth contracts that go to Indigenous businesses. This is consistent with our belief that strong local economies always underpin healthy communities. It is economic opportunity and a culture of responsibility and empowerment that provide the foundation for the transformation of local communities.
Sadly, in recent years Indigenous youth suicide has taken so many young lives. Indigenous young people are almost four times more likely than their non-Indigenous peers to take their own lives. Tackling suicide, all suicides, is a national priority. In tackling this national priority, we're using targeted strategies. We've unveiled Australia's largest ever youth mental health and suicide prevention package. Two of the 12 trials being funded are for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people specifically. In the last budget we committed $4.5 million for Indigenous leaders to work on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander suicide prevention plan, a plan that recognises the value of community and provides services that are culturally safe and accessible and are well connected to each other and the broader community. Out of that came a body called Gayaa Dhuwi—proud spirit—that will support Indigenous leadership in suicide prevention.
We're also working alongside community members and frontline services who serve their community selflessly with strong and open hearts—rangers and community night patrols, Indigenous liaison officers and Indigenous doctors and nurses. In the last three years, nearly 5,000 people in more than 180 regional and remote communities have completed mental health first aid training, a program we expanded in the last budget. As well, 89 local people were supported to become accredited instructors so they can deliver that training. We are making progress: with solutions that empower and that are local and developed in partnership with Indigenous communities.
Finally, I want to be clear: as Prime Minister, I respect the honest yearn for constitutional recognition. In 2018 the Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples delivered a bipartisan report. Our government adopted the four bipartisan recommendations in the report—in particular, recommendation 1:
In order to design a voice that best meets the needs and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, the Committee recommends a process of co-design between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and government be initiated in communities across Australia to design a voice that can help deliver practical outcomes for that community.

This is our government's policy.
It is clear from the committee's report that more work needs to be done on a voice proposal. The government has always supported giving Indigenous people more of a say at the local level. We support the process of co-design of the voice because, if we are going to change the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples on the ground, we need their buy-in on the matters and policies that affect them. The committee did not make recommendations as to the legal form of the voice—constitutional or legislation. It recommended considering this matter after the process of co-design is completed, and that is what we are doing. We support finalising co-design first.
We also support recommendations about truth-telling, Australians are interested in having a fuller understanding of their history—the history, traditions and culture of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and also the history of contact between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people.
Well over half a century ago, Bill Wentworth, a man called by some an 'incorrigible backbencher', began to build the case for a national institute to capture Indigenous languages, art and culture, which he feared would be lost for all time. Ultimately, that vision would become AIATSIS. His belief was that a loss of Indigenous culture was a loss to us all because Indigenous culture embodied our shared humanity. In time, Bill Wentworth would become our first Minister for Aboriginal Affairs. He had a belief that, as Australians began to understand and embrace Indigenous culture and our Indigenous people, it would transform the way Indigenous people see themselves—and, not only that: it would transform the way we see ourselves, as a people who share this continent. This goes to the heart of who we are.
In partnership with Indigenous Australians, with respect for their wisdom and capabilities and with appreciation for their grace towards their fellow Australians, we are beginning this next chapter in closing the gap—to see the gap, to see the challenges, to see the opportunities, to understand the hope, to see the way through Indigenous eyes. It's a chapter which allows us to believe in a day when the Indigenous children of this land have the same opportunities as every other Australian child.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Speaker, when we meet in this place, we are on Ngunnawal country.
I give my thanks and pay my respects to our Ngunnawal elders, past, present and importantly emerging for our future.
I honour all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here in this House, and right across our great continent.
I also acknowledge our service men and women, our veterans, and particularly acknowledge our Indigenous servicemen and women, and our Indigenous veterans - as we did just last week at the Australian War Memorial.&nbsp;
Service that for so long was not acknowledged, but who served not for recognition, but because of their faith in who we could become as a country and as a people. We are still on that journey and I thank them on behalf of a grateful nation for their service.
I also acknowledge and honour our Indigenous leaders who are also the democratically elected representatives of the people:
The Member for Hasluck, the Honourable Ken Wyatt — our very first Aboriginal Minister for Indigenous Australians.
The Member for Barton, the Honourable Linda Burney.
Senator Patrick Dodson, Senator Malarndirri McCarthy, and Senator Jacqui Lambie.
I also welcome Convenor Pat Turner, and all members of the Coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peak Organisations. I thank you for your partnership, your strength,&nbsp; and your leadership.&nbsp;
Mr Speaker, for 12 years, I have sat in this chamber and listened to Closing the Gap speeches.
It’s a tale of hope, frustration and disappointment.
A tale of good intentions. Indeed good faith.
But the results are not good enough.
This is sadly still true.
Last year, I opened this address with what I believe is a national truth and a national shame: that our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in Australia today do not have the same opportunities as all other children growing up in Australia.
They never have in Australia. Never.&nbsp;
This is the ultimate test of our efforts. That every Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander boy or girl, can grow up in this country, with the same opportunities and expectations as any other Australian boy and girl.
Over decades, our top down, government knows best approach has not delivered the improvements we all yearn for.&nbsp;&nbsp;
When it comes to the welfare and advancement of our Indigenous peoples, I don’t doubt the good hearts and the goodwill of those in this chamber and those who have served here, including former Prime Minister Rudd who began this process with the National Apology, indeed the day before I gave my first speech in this place 12 years ago.&nbsp;
The National Apology was an important milestone, but it did not pretend to be the solution.&nbsp;
It was important for many reasons Mr Speaker, but for me, it was most important to me, was that it was most important to our First Australians. It mattered to them, and so it mattered to me.&nbsp;
Despite our best intentions, Closing the Gap, as an initiative fell victim to the same type of thinking that has hampered our efforts in the past.&nbsp;
We seemed to think that somehow if our aspirations were high enough, the rest would just take care of itself.&nbsp;
This is not a challenge of aspiration. It is not a contest of earnestness. It is not about who cares more. It is not about symbolism.
There has been no shortage of money or will. The Productivity Commission estimates that in 2015-16, total indigenous specific expenditure of all levels of government was $6 billion. And the share of mainstream programs that all Australians share was a further $27.4 billion.
Over the forward estimates, we are providing $5.2 billion for our Indigenous Advancement Strategy, $4.1 billion for targeted efforts to improve Indigenous Health as well as significant payments to the states and territories for Indigenous specific programs.
Closing the gap is a very practical challenge, and a very difficult one. Getting people into jobs so they can lift up their eyes from seeing hopelessness and see a future that they can direct.
Ensuring young children are healthy, in school and well educated to realise their potential. That is how generational change occurs.
Ensuring that indigenous Australians are safe in their homes and in their communities. Where they can have the same expectations of the rule of law, to go about their own lives unviolated,&nbsp; as any other Australian in any other part of the country.
Having watched and listened, we are now making the change to how we go about this task. It’s not a judgement of our past efforts, but an honest and humble learning.
Despite the best of intentions; investments in new programs; and bi-partisan goodwill, Closing the Gap has never really been a partnership with Indigenous people.
We perpetuated an ingrained way of thinking,&nbsp; passed down over two centuries and more, and it was the belief that we knew better than our Indigenous peoples.
We don’t.
We also thought we understood their problems better than they did. We don’t. They live them.
We must see the gap we wish to close, not from our viewpoint, but from the viewpoint of indigenous Australians before we can hope to close it, and make a real difference.&nbsp;
And that is the change we are now making, together with indigenous Australians through this process.
We all have, in our own way, sought to grapple with the consequences of two and a quarter centuries of Indigenous disempowerment.
What I know is that to rob a person of their right to take responsibility for themselves; to strip them of responsibility and capability to direct their own futures; to make them dependent - this is to deny them of their liberty - and slowly that person will wither before your eyes.
That’s what we did to our First Nations people - and mostly, we didn't even know we were doing it.
We thought we were helping when we replaced independence with welfare.
This must change.
We must restore the right to take responsibility.&nbsp;
The right to make decisions.
The right to step up.
The opportunity to own and create Australian’s own futures.
It must be accompanied by a willingness to push decisions down to the people who are closest to them. Where the problems are, and where the consequences of decisions are experienced.
That is what we must do.&nbsp;
On the afternoon before Australia Day, my family and I once again visited a group of Ngunnawal elders, this time down by the lake for a water blessing.
It was hot, there was smoke from the bushfires in the air. I was grateful for the generosity and grace displayed by the Ngunnawal people to host a Prime Minister and his family at a poignant time when they reflect on their own long history since time immemorial.
Yet on that afternoon, my Ngunnawal friends were more concerned about what they called my Sorry Business Time and the recent passing of my father. They were concerned for my girls and their loss.&nbsp;
They had words and space for grief - and we sat together. I want to thank Aunty Agnes Shea for her hospitality and kind words.
Be it grief; the protection of our lands against bushfire; an understanding of our native ecosystems; or the inter-generational responsibilities to the land and to each other; there is so much we learn from Indigenous communities and peoples.
So I ask: what have we been too proud to learn? What must we learn so that we can grow together?
Our new approach to Closing the Gap provides some of the answers to this question.
An approach that is built on partnership. On giving back responsibility.&nbsp;
An approach of listening.
Of empowering.&nbsp;
Of government providing the capabilities, so that Indigenous Australians can make their best choices.
Of all governments accepting their own accountabilities.
And of owning up to a path, that despite the very best of intentions of all Governments, hasn't worked.
Mr Speaker, today I make the final report on an old approach, as well as the first report of a new era.
Here, then, are the results against the targets set since 2008.&nbsp;
Two of the seven targets are on track to be met this year, and in 2025.
We are on track to halve the gap in Year 12 attainment and that is a tremendous achievement.
What that means now, and in the future, is more Indigenous doctors, nurses, teachers, tradies, police officers, engineers, scientists, mathematicians, farmers, IT specialists, musicians, artists and CEOs and business leaders.
Excelling in every field of endeavour.
Lifting our communities.
Indeed, this is the biggest improvement over the past decade.
The proportion of Indigenous Australians reaching this milestone has jumped more than 20 per cent in 12 years.
The biggest leap forward has been in our major cities, where 85 per cent of Indigenous 20-24 year olds have attained year 12 or equivalent.
We’re already doing more to close that gap.&nbsp;
In last year’s statement, I announced $200 million in extra support for Indigenous students through the Indigenous Youth Education Package.
Already, funding agreements for 30 projects valued at $190 million are in place.
This year, the package will assist over 20,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students stay engaged in secondary school through mentoring, cultural or other supports.
We are also working in partnership with local communities in remote and very remote communities to identify community projects that encourage school attendance. These projects are being developed&nbsp;
This year also, we are on track to have 95 per cent of Indigenous four-year-olds enrolled in early childhood education by 2025.
The preschool years are so important in preparing kids for their school journey and beyond. And we are seeing more Indigenous kids getting that advantage.
In 2018, the figure was 86 per cent — an almost 10 percentage point rise on 2016, and well ahead of where we needed to be to hit that target in five years’ time.
So at both ends of the school spectrum, we have made great strides in getting more kids into school and through school.
Nothing should diminish how significant these gains are.
However, the four expiring targets that were supposed to be met by 2018 were not met.
Halving the gap in child mortality.
Closing the gap in school attendance.
Halving the gap in child literacy and numeracy.
Halving the gap in employment.
The final target — closing the gap in life expectancy within a generation — is not on track to be met by 2031.
This is a stark and sobering report that I have tabled.
I welcome the gains, I honour the hard work across every front.&nbsp;
We must be careful not to speak of our First Australians as a broken people. Because they are not.
So many of our first Australians, are out there making their way, despite the disadvantages they have faced and overcome. Setting goals, making choices, living their lives, and showing bravely the way to others.
But I don’t shy away from the failures.
I see the shortcomings.
The targets that were set for Indigenous Australians, not by Indigenous Australians, do not celebrate the strengths, achievements and aspirations of Indigenous people.
They don’t tell you what’s happening on the ground, or stirring under it.
They don’t tell you how realistic or achievable these targets were in the first place.
They reinforce the language of failing and falling short.
And they also mask the real progress that has been made.
We must be careful not to adopt a negative mindset.
Because on most measures, we have made progress.
I am saddened that we have not met the target for child mortality. But I draw hope and resolve from the fact that we are making progress in tackling the risk factors.
More Indigenous mothers are attending antenatal care in the first trimester and more are going to at least five antenatal sessions.
Fewer Indigenous mothers are smoking during pregnancy.
We know that if we can shift these risk factors, we can keep more Indigenous babies and children alive.
We may not be on track to fully close the life expectancy gap in a generation – always an ambitious target – but mortality rates have improved by almost 10 per cent.
This is mostly because we’ve made progress in tackling the leading cause of death: the big circulatory diseases like heart disease and stroke.
This is progress.&nbsp;
But, as I said, we have not made as much progress as we should have by now.
There remains much to do.
And we will do it differently.
By working together.
By moving from a fixation with what is going wrong to a focus on strength.
By going from good intentions and sky-high aspirations, to local, practical action that’s driven by local leaders and local needs.
With clear accountability and responsibility.
With a clear line of sight to the community.
And we’re acting on a commitment — by all levels of government — to work together.
For federal, state, territory and local governments to work together.
Not just the Indigenous portfolios but whole governments, at every point of contact.
Mr Speaker, every Minister in my Government is a Minister for Indigenous Australians. And the Minister for Indigenous Australians is the first amongst equals in this cause.
More importantly, for governments to work with local communities.
In partnership with the Coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peaks – known as the Coalition of Peaks, and with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.&nbsp;
We’re making that commitment real.
This is what our Closing the Gap refresh is all about.
It’s what all governments agreed to at COAG a little over a year ago.
It’s what we agreed to in March last year, in our unprecedented Partnership Agreement on Closing the Gap between the Commonwealth, state and territory governments, the Coalition of Peaks, and the Australian Local Government Association.
It’s what Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have been saying for a long time.
They want a partnership where we listen, work together and decide together how future policies are developed — especially at a regional and local level.
A partnership that respects their expertise, and acknowledges their place as the First Nations people of this continent.
So we’re bringing more people into the process.
We are finalising a new National Agreement on Closing the Gap, a&nbsp; formal agreement between COAG and the Coalition of Peaks. We expect this to be considered in April during Joint Council in Western Australia.
Just last month, the Peaks and I sat around the Cabinet Table and talked about how we’re making this commitment real.
Even meeting together like that, I’m advised – the Ministers and me, along with the heads of 14 community-controlled organisations, representing almost 50 different community-controlled organisations &nbsp; – was unprecedented.
It was historic - but it shouldn't have been.
This partnership is generations overdue.
At that meeting, I listened.
The Indigenous leaders were telling us where the gaps are, where the needs are, where the strengths are.
The success stories.
The empowering stories.
The stories of hope.
And our shared priorities are clear:
·&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; expanding the opportunities for shared decision-making
·&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; building the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled services sector
·&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; making sure all mainstream agencies provide high quality services to meet the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Mr Speaker, in days that some in this chamber will remember, the Government had absolute control over Aboriginal people’s lives: where they could live, where they could travel, who they could marry.
Government files held details — often brutal in their brevity — that the people themselves were not allowed to know.
Mr Speaker, I have one such file with me.&nbsp;
A file of the Native Welfare Department. File 1690/68.
The file is for a boy. A teenager.
In this file are notes about funding for school uniforms.
And there is a memo to the Commissioner of Native Welfare about whether the boy should be provided pocket money of 75 cents a week.
75 cents a week.
Bureaucrats making decisions for what they paternally called ‘a good type of lad’.
Think about a life where even the most basic decision making is stripped away from you - by governments thinking they know better.
Fortunately, that boy was bigger than the times, and I’m honoured that he now sits behind me as the Minister for Indigenous Australians.
He knows that responsibility and empowerment is freedom.
He is one of almost 800,000 Indigenous Australians — in the West, in the East, from Tasmania to the top end.
As I have stated, it is time we defined the gap we want to close from the viewpoint of our Indigenous Australians. They are the Australians who should be setting these goals.&nbsp;
Mr Speaker, a vital part of empowering Indigenous communities, is giving them the data and information to inform their decision making.
That’s why we’ve just committed $1.5 million to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander-led data project.
It’s about supporting local decision-making, and it’s supporting the Coalition of Peaks in partnership with the Indigenous Data Network at the University of Melbourne, to develop regional profiles for Closing the Gap targets.
It will mean having richer and more localised data to inform programs designed by and for local communities.
And a commitment of states and territories, all governments, to report publicly on Closing the Gap into the future.
These new arrangements underpin the future of Closing the Gap.
One of the things we’ve learned from the last 12 years is that the way we deliver services matters as much as what’s delivered.
That’s why we changed the funding model for the Indigenous Australians Health Program.
The new design is focused on delivering primary health care that’s appropriate to the unique languages and cultures and circumstances of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
I’m very hopeful that a new approach that’s more locally-led and more collaborative will take us much further than the top-down, one-size-fits-all, government-led approach ever could.
We know that when Indigenous people have a say in the design of programs, policies and services, the outcomes are better - and lives are changed.
For a young mother, it’s the difference between antenatal care that’s too far away or not culturally competent, and getting the care she needs from a local Indigenous service.
For a young child, it’s the difference between getting a patchy education and getting the right support to stay in school.
For a jobseeker, it’s the difference between giving up on getting a job, and finding a service provider that won’t give up on them.&nbsp;&nbsp;
For an older person with a chronic health problem, it’s the difference between missing treatment, and turning up to a friendly face and a familiar touch, getting the care they need in the way they need it.
That is our goal. Services that make a meaningful difference.
Last year, I said that we must make an impact on one really important area: and that’s in education.
You get the education right - skills, jobs, security, health, prosperity, and longevity all follow.
And it’s the area where, as I already noted, we’ve been seeing the most encouraging signs.
Think about those four-year-olds just starting early childhood education this year. On the very threshold of a whole life of learning.
In 2020, the Government has committed almost half a billion dollars to preschool education, so that every Australian child can have access to a quality early childhood programs in the year before school.
That includes every Indigenous child.
One program in particular is having an impact on helping those kids get that good start.
The Connected Beginnings program is in 15 Indigenous communities across Australia.
In Alice Springs, it’s seen more kids actually enrolling in preschool – shifting from around half to three quarters.
In the Jordan River community, more Indigenous kids are participating in childcare and playgroups, and more are getting referrals to the health and specialist services they need.
In Doomadgee, teachers are seeing Year 1 students who are now much better prepared for school.
Together, we need to accelerate our efforts in these early years to make sure every Indigenous child across our country grows up safe, resilient and ready to thrive throughout life.
That is why I’ve asked the Minister for Indigenous Australians to lead the development of a national Indigenous early childhood strategy this year. To design a new way of working together to achieve our shared goal.
To prioritise these actions that matter most to parents and carers – the ones who live the experience.
To partner with experts, families, frontline services and communities.
And to have a more coordinated effort across the Commonwealth and with our state and territory colleagues.
Mr Speaker, we are also seeing great connectedness between our universities and young Indigenous students.
For school-leavers in regional areas, it’s sometimes harder to see where the path leads next.
It’s harder to go on to further study if that means uprooting everything you know and trust.
That’s why Regional University Centres are so important.
They help Indigenous students in regional places take on certificates and degrees through any Australian tertiary institution they choose.
In the Northern Territory, the Wuyagiba Bush Hub saw nine students successfully complete their university preparation course last year.
Five of them have been offered places at Macquarie Uni, and four at the Territory’s Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education.
In 2020, the Bush Hub is expanding its offerings so more Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island students can study on-country.
It’s run by the Wuyagiba Bush Hub Aboriginal Corporation, and I apologise if my pronunciation is inaccurate, together with a local elder and an academic from Macquarie. It’s a real success story.
Then there’s the Indigenous Student Success Program, giving nearly 20,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students access to scholarships, tutoring, mentoring and other cultural support to help them succeed at university.
With the support of this program, Griffith University in Queensland has helped more than 300 students get degrees in the last couple of years, and also supports about 160 regional and remote students to succeed.
We know that whatever we can do to get more kids in school, finishing school, and going on to further study – it all helps to set them on the path to a better life.
That path must lead to a job.&nbsp;
One of the success stories of recent years has been the Government’s Indigenous Procurement Policy. This policy is about encouraging Indigenous entrepreneurship, and job producing businesses.
In 2018-19, Commonwealth portfolios and their major suppliers awarded contracts to 775 Indigenous businesses with a total value of $754 million dollars.
Since July 2015, the Indigenous Procurement Policy has seen $2.69 billion in contracts awarded to 1,842 Indigenous businesses.
This means more jobs, rising incomes and greater economic security for Indigenous communities.&nbsp;
From 1 July this year, we will introduce a target of three per cent of the value of Commonwealth contracts to be awarded to Indigenous businesses. This will add to the existing target of three per cent of the number of Commonwealth contracts that go to Indigenous businesses.
This is consistent with our belief that strong local economies always underpin local healthy communities.&nbsp;
It is economic opportunity and a culture of responsibility and empowerment that provide the foundation for the transformation of local communities.
Mr Speaker, sadly, in recent years, Indigenous youth suicide has taken so many young lives.
Indigenous young people are almost four times more likely than their non-Indigenous peers to take their own lives.
Tackling suicide - all suicides - is a national priority.
In tackling this national priority, we are using targeted strategies.
We have unveiled Australia’s largest ever Youth Mental Health and Suicide Prevention package.
Two of the 12 trials being funded are for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people specifically.
In the last Budget, we committed $4.5 million for Indigenous leaders to work on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Suicide Prevention Plan.
A plan that recognises the value of community and provides services that are culturally safe and accessible, and are well connected to each other and the broader community.
Out of that came a body called Gayaa Dhuwi – “Proud of Spirit” – that will support Indigenous leadership in suicide prevention.
We are also working alongside community members in front-line services, who serve their communities selflessly, with strong and open hearts.
Rangers and Community Night Patrols.
Indigenous liaison officers.
Indigenous doctors and nurses.
In the last three years, nearly 5,000 people in more than 180 regional and remote communities have completed Mental Health First Aid training, a program we expanded in the last Budget.
As well, 89 local people were supported to become accredited instructors so they can deliver that training.
We are making progress with solutions that empower, that are local and developed in partnership with Indigenous communities.
Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to be clear, as Prime Minister I respect their honest yearn for Constitutional Recognition.
In 2018, the Joint Select Committee into Constitutional Recognition relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples delivered a bipartisan report.&nbsp;
Our Government adopted the four bi-partisan recommendations in this report.&nbsp;
In particular, JSCCR Recommendation 1.&nbsp;
In order to design a voice that best meets the needs and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, the Committee recommends a process of co-design between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and government be initiated in communities across Australia to design a voice that can help deliver practical outcomes for that community.&nbsp;
This is our Government’s policy.
It is clear from the Committee’s report that more work needs to be done on a voice proposal.
The Government has always supported giving Indigenous people more of a say at the local level.
We support the process of co-design of the voice because if we are going to change the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples on the ground, we need their buy-in to the matters and policies that affect them.
The Committee did not make recommendations as to the legal form of the Voice, constitutional or legislation.
It recommended considering this matter after the process of co-design is complete and that’s what we are doing. We support finalising co-design first.
We also support recommendations about truth telling.
Australians are interested in having a fuller understanding of their history. Both the history, traditions and also the culture of course of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and also contact between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people.
Mr Speaker, well over half a century ago, Bill Wentworth, a man called by some&nbsp; an ‘incorrigible backbencher’ began to build the case for a national institute to capture Indigenous languages, art and culture, which he feared would be lost for all time. Ultimately that vision would become AIATSIS.
His belief was that a loss of Indigenous culture was a loss to us all, because Indigenous culture embodied our shared humanity.&nbsp;
In time, Bill Wentworth would become our first Minister for Aboriginal Affairs.&nbsp;
He had a belief that as Australians began to understand and embrace Indigenous culture and our Indigenous people, then we transform the way Indigenous people see themselves - and not only that, it transforms the way we see ourselves as a people who share this continent.&nbsp;
This goes to the heart of who we are.
In partnership with Indigenous Australians; with respect for their wisdom and capabilities; and appreciation for their grace towards their fellow Australians, we are beginning this next chapter in Closing the Gap.
To see the gap, to see the challenges, to see the opportunities, to understand the hope, to see the way, through Indigenous eyes.
A chapter which allows us to believe in a day when the Indigenous children of this land have the same opportunities as every other Australian child.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much, Janelle. It's great to see everybody here this morning and it's great to be here at the UN Women Australia Parliamentary Breakfast in honour of International Women's Day on March 8. Can I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, the Ngunnawal people and their elders past and present and, of course, emerging. The day before Australia Day, as I mentioned yesterday, we went down to the water's edge here in Canberra and were met there by the elders and Ngunnawal women who spent time with me and my family. I want to thank them again for the lessons we learned on that day and their great grace and kindness to me and my family.
I also want to acknowledge many veterans who are here today, serving men and women in our defence forces, and I want to say thank you for your service. And I want to say thank you to the tremendous service that women are playing in our defence forces. I'm sure the Chief of Defence Force who is here with me today would agree. Just seeing them out in the field, in operations all across the world and the tremendous work that women in our defence forces have done, particularly in recent months as part of Operation Bushfire Assist, they've done a tremendous job. And Angus, please pass on our great thanks to all of them.
To my many parliamentary colleagues who are here with us today, and, of course, including the Minister for Women, Marise Payne. She also happens to be the Minister for Foreign Affairs and she does a great job with both of those. And Marise, it's great to be here with you this morning and together with the leader of the opposition, Anthony Albanese and the shadow minister Julie Collins is here with us as well. Wonderful to have you here. There are so many of my female parliamentary colleagues from across the aisle and within the government and it's great to see so many of my female cabinet ministers who are here today along to be here to support this important event.
The story of Australia is, as much as anything, it's a story of strong women in our country. Courageous, trailblazing women. Women committed to their rightful equal place in society and prepared to stand up for that. Women who lead, as I said on the Australia Day weekend, I spoke about the all-Indigenous, all-women Lake Tyers Fire Brigade, led by a team of Gunaikurnai women in East Gippsland. Their brigade vehicle bonnet featured a colourful artwork entitled ‘Working Together’. And it strikes me that working together speaks directly to the generation equality theme of this year's International Women's Day. It sums up the efforts that you're all making and the government is making, along with the change-makers of all ages, all genders, all generations, to build a strong and powered future for Australian women and girls. This is what I believe. When women and girls have freedom of choice and opportunity, when they receive the same merits for their hard work and ingenuity as men and boys.
Recently at a memorial service I was at, my brother was talking about the day when my mum came home and she said she just got a job. And she said to my dad, ‘I'm going to get men's wages’. Now, this was a long time ago. This was several decades ago. And for my brother at that time, the idea that men and women, as a young boy, got paid differently&nbsp; - he didn't understand it. And he talked to my mum about it and she recounted the story to me just the other week at my dad’s memorial service. A lot has happened since then. A lot's changed since then. And this is an issue that's been around a long time. When both men and women are on an equal footing as decision makers, when that happens, not just the individuals, but whole communities benefit. Societies are more cohesive, respectful, cooperative and peaceful. Economies are more productive, diverse and enlightened. Prosperity is lifted.
Here in Australia, there's much progress to celebrate in this year of generational equality. Under our government, we’ve created more than 1.5 million jobs through the hard work of Australians each and every day, the majority of which have actually been taken up by women. It's what a strong economy delivers, the jobs that create the choice and the opportunities for women to utilise their talents and skills and achieve their goals and for them to prosper. Women's workforce participation is at a record high of just over 61 per cent, and that gender pay gap is now at a record low of 14 per cent. And we've got a lot more work to do, though. We’ve achieved equal numbers in the number of women and men in the Australian Senate for the first time in history. And I'm very pleased to say we’ve moved within a hair's breadth of equal representation of Australian Government boards. As of June 30 last year, women held 47.9 per cent of these positions. That's an all-time high. This is now the highest percentage of women in government boards since public reporting began in 2009. Our women's economic security statement, which we introduced in 2018, will continue to concentrate us on the issues we need to keep working on. Backing women to start their own businesses, increasing flexibility through paid parental leave, supporting entrepreneurship opportunities for women and STEM programs for girls. My daughter told me this morning she gets her bunsen burner licence today and so perhaps a great career in science is about to start on this historic day.
We've also turned our attention to the changes and challenges of returning to the workforce after timeout for caring for family and children. We've committed $75 million over four years to our mid-career checkpoint, helping up to 40,000 people who've taken time out of their career to care for their family with tailored career advice, coaching and training. Many women, in particular, take a career break to start a family or care for older family members and are looking for that bit of extra help as they re-enter the workforce. The skills and experience gained in those unpaid family roles is regularly and often not properly acknowledged. This pilot will start with a thousand participants across the states, New South Wales and Queensland, from the 3rd of April of this year before the full rollout begins in July. It's two-tiered, designed to help those who are stepping back into the workforce, as well as supporting the career advancement of those who have already returned. In other words, stepping up their careers. So whether you’re stepping in back in or you're stepping up after time out of the workforce, as a carer we want to give you every persistence to make that transition. Because it's a good thing for yourself, your families, for our nation.
And yet there remains no greater imperative than the safety of women and children. We've made the largest ever Commonwealth investment of $340 million to support the Fourth Action Plan of the national plan to reduce violence against women and their children. Now, this was an initiative started by the previous government. This is an initiative that has shared commitment across this Parliament. The action plan process on the national plan to reduce violence against women and their children is one of the most important initiatives that we as a Parliament together have been journeying on now for many years together. And that must continue to be the case, because when it comes to violence against women, there can only one acceptable outcome, and that is for it to stop.
I want to thank the UN Women Australia for hosting this breakfast today and for your dedication to eradicating gender inequality in all of its forms. I've been so pleased to see the work that UN Women has been doing particularly within our Pacific family and with the support of DFAT. And I want to thank you, Frances, too for the great job you doing there with all our people at DFAT supporting this great work. Projects like Markets for Change in Fiji, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu are helping make markets safer for the members, the vast majority of whom are women based in rural areas. They often travel long distances to sell their produce and crafts, which means they need secure accommodation. They need toilets, they need clean drinking water at these markets. These are very practical things. Making a living and participating in your local economy shouldn't come at the price of your health and your safety. So thank you to UN Women for working with the Australian Government to support that project, as well as the many others, including Safe Cities in Port Moresby and the Pacific Partnership to End Violence Against Women and Girls.
Back home, I want to assure you all today that as a government we will continue to create, prioritise and back pathways towards a safe, secure and fair and equal status for women in our economy and our society. It’s our stance. It's my commitment. I want to thank you very much for your attention today, and I wish you a great International Women's Day next month. Thank you.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:00): I have consulted with the Leader of the Opposition through our offices today. As the member for Barton just spoke in this place of these terrible murderous events, the sad truth is they are not isolated incidents; they have happened on so many occasions. In taking this indulgence today, as we reflect in particular on the terrible crime that was committed against Hannah Clarke and her children, Aaliyah, Laianah and Trey, we also speak of the terrible murders of so many others—mothers and children. Murder: that's what it is—murder that again, last Thursday, shocked our country. When Jenny and I spoke about it, we just couldn't get our heads around it, as I'm sure is the case for every parent. It doesn't matter whether you're a parent or not, you can't imagine it. It is just too horrible to contemplate. The act itself, and that someone could perpetrate that act, particularly as a father, is incomprehensible. It's an act of such depravity that it only makes you ask: 'How does such evil happen on our land?'
To the Clarke family, all of us here extend our sympathies and our love. But I must wonder if that could ever be enough to cover the profound grief. They have shown incredible resilience and character in the worst of all possible circumstances. As best we can, we also send the country's love to you. In your grief, you have every right to be angry—furious—because everything we've done across this country to protect women and children didn't protect Hannah and her children from this evil. I believe state and territory and national governments, our agencies and, importantly, the judiciary—all of us—must reflect again on these terrible murders. We must reflect on how and where the system failed Hannah and her children, as it has failed so many others. It's so frustrating. It's so devastating.
Whilst this was the action of a depraved and evil man, we know enough of the circumstances leading up to the murders to know this should not have happened. There will rightly be an inquest in Queensland. I commend the Queensland government for taking that action, as they should. It will speak the truth, I have no doubt, as so many others have spoken the truth. And we already know this: Hannah deserved to feel safe and to be safe and to watch her joyous and wonderful children grow up; and Aaliyah, Laianah and Trey deserved to have a childhood that was innocent and to have lives that were long and joyous.
For all of us in this chamber, the words 'family violence' just jar. One can say those two words together; they should never be together; they have nothing to do with each other—quite the opposite, because our families should be the safest places in all of the world, particularly for our kids. But, sadly, all too often, they are not. We know that, as hard as it is to believe. One woman is killed every nine days by a partner or a former partner. One in six Australian women have experienced physical or sexual violence by a current or former partner since the age of 15. We know these figures. We've spoken these figures I don't know how many times in this place. Regardless of who has sat on this side of the chamber or on that side of the chamber, we know these figures—or on this side of the chamber or on that side of the chamber in every state parliament in this country. Every two minutes somewhere in the country police are called out to a domestic violence incident. As members, we know that the Commonwealth, states and territories do work closely on tackling violence against women and children, and we must continue to do this together.
This has been, I think, one of the shining lights of bipartisanship in this chamber, and in so many chambers around our country. I acknowledge the work, as I have done and others have done, on the establishment of the first action plan under the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children from 2010 to 2022, which was commenced under the Rudd and Gillard governments. That was a great initiative. Now, as part of the fourth action plan, that spirit continues, that partnership continues—a partnership that exists not just across this aisle, which is closed by our commitment to addressing this, but between the state and territory governments and the Commonwealth as well. A record $340 million has been provided under this plan for frontline services to protect and support women and children. In total, since 2013, some $840 million has been committed to addressing domestic and family violence to carry on the work that was initiated by the previous Labor government.
In August last year, COAG agreed to the fourth action plan. In November, we released the national implementation plan. It includes funding for prevention strategies and frontline services, including for groups which needed additional support, for safe spaces, as well as for 1800RESPECT. That 1800RESPECT line is open 24 hours to support people impacted by sexual assault, domestic or family violence and abuse. When COAG comes together in a few weeks time, this will once again be on our agenda.
This is a time for us all to reflect, but to reflect together. There are never any excuses—there are none—or justifications for the evil that Hannah and her children experienced. Never. Not under any circumstances. With the states and territories, and together as a parliament, we will continue to work together to translate these words, which I'm sure the Leader of the Opposition will also state with the same passion, into actions and changes that make a real difference for women and children.
This violent crime, this murder, sought to deny a woman her voice and her future. Let me read one of Hannah's last Instagram posts, which expressed a hope. She wrote:
I am a Strong Woman—

no doubt she was—
I don't sit around feeling sorry for myself, nor will I ever let anyone mistreat me again … I am a survivor not a victim. I am in control of my life and there is nothing I can't achieve. My girls will grow up being strong women who understand their worth.

This hope was crushed when Hannah and her children were murdered.
We must work together, as we have been, for as long as it takes to restore that hope to those that we know, right now, today in this country, are living in exactly the same danger as Hannah and her children.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you for that introduction and welcome everybody here today.
Can I particularly start by acknowledging the Ngunnawal people on whose land we meet, and we are reminded in this very special place on Ngunnawal land today and can I acknowledge elders past, present, and those importantly, who are emerging in the future and thank you very much for the acknowledgement and welcome to country today.
Can I also acknowledge any service men and women who are here with us today, and veterans, and just simply thank you on behalf of a grateful nation for your service.
But to the kids who are joining us, where’s Molly? Can you put up your hand Molly? She’s a champion as all these kids are champions. And it was her advocacy work up there in north Queensland that Warren Entsch some time ago brought to my attention, all the girls and boys that we’ve got here are champions of this issue and I want to thank you very much for joining us here today and being part, because it’s all about your future, and the Australia and the world we want you to grow up in that is the focus of all of our efforts today.
To the scientists that are here today, to those in industry who are here today, to the community leaders who are here today, to the investors who are here today, to everyone who is here today, you’ve come here today because you are part of the solution we’re working on together.
And can I particularly acknowledge all of my colleagues who are here today, there are too many to mention, but particularly Sussan Ley the Minister for Environment, together with the Assistant Minister Trevor Evans, who are leading our initiatives.
I’ve lived pretty much all of my life by the sea.
By the beach, and my electorate today in the Southern part of Sydney where my family and I have lived for all of my kid’s life, until very recently, we’ve always grown up by the sea. And my first awareness of issues regarding the environment were about the quality of our oceans.
And when I was a kid, and you went to the beach after school, down at Bronte, it wasn’t always the surf report you have to be mindful of, you had to be aware of the waste report back in those days. And I won’t tell the kids what we had to avoid when we were in the surf after school.
But that was a problem. And it was a really big problem.&nbsp;
But it's a problem that engineers, and scientists, and governments, and industry, worked together on to come up with a solution, and deep ocean outpours were developed and today when you go and swim at our beaches they are some of the cleanest of any you’ll see in the world today, particularly our metropolitan beaches.
And so I’ve always been a passionate believer that you don’t come to conferences like this to spend all your time analysing and celebrating the problem, we know there’s a problem, what we have to focus on are the practical solutions.
And what I particularly, why I’m particularly drawn to this agenda more than most is, it’s those who are involved in this are very focused on the practical things that can be done. And Ian Kiernan, the late Ian Kiernan was a great example of that.
He was all focus on the answer, and the practical things that each and every one of us could be engaged in.
Each and every one of us could play a part in.
Because we all have a responsibility. We all have responsibility.
Can I also acknowledge here today, because it’s a problem that we need to solve not just here in Australia but particularly around our region, can I acknowledge the Director-General of the Secretariat of Pacific Regional Environment programme, Kosi Latu, who has travelled to be here with us from Samoa. And it’s wonderful to have you here with us today.
I am particularly aware, and conscious of the challenge this present in the Pacific Island communities amongst our pacific family.&nbsp;
And there it’s not just an issue of the waste itself but how that impacts on people's health in Pacific Islands, how it impacts on their livelihoods in pacific Island communities, and so this is a very existential challenge for the people of the pacific, that is part of our pacific step up. It represents a big component of where we’re seeking to play a role to support our pacific family.
At the heart of what I believe - be it the economy, our defence, our education, the state of our cities, or the health of the environment - is that we have a responsibility to leave our children better than what we inherited.
There’s a the pact between the generations, honouring our past and our traditions as we have with the Ngunnawal elders, but also striving to leave the next generation something more than we ourselves have enjoyed.
It’s a standard. And implicit in that standard is a determination to not diminish what we have ourselves have been granted by careful stewardship of others.
Our Indigenous communities understand this through 60,000 years or more of environmental stewardship, gifting to us the quality that we have before us today.
We have to see this land the same way - and our misuse of plastics is a scarring on our land, and a scarring on our oceans.
For something that does so much good, as we were hearing just before. It does not always do that good.
Plastics, they are remarkable:
They keep our food fresh.&nbsp;
It is vital for our medicines, our health system.&nbsp;
It is lightweight, it's inexpensive and it’s part of our everyday lives.&nbsp;
But therein lies the problem.
Plastic that is designed effectively, used correctly, recycled reliably, and remanufactured creatively can stay in the economy almost indefinitely with little environmental impact.
But too often plastic products are not designed to be re-used or to be recycled.&nbsp;
They are not collected carefully, or are difficult to sort and process commercially. Or the market doesn’t support remanufacturing into valued products.
And that’s what we have to change.
The change we need is so substantial that the only way forward is in partnership - working with our neighbours; in our region, state, territory and local governments; industry - manufacturers, supermarkets, customers; waste operators; everybody, communities included.
Today I want to clearly outline the three pillars of our plan as to how we believe this can be addressed as a government.
Firstly, it’s our waste, it’s our responsibility. Taking responsibility for our plastic waste.
Expanding industry capability, secondly.
And thirdly, encouraging demand for recycled products.
It’s about making Australia a world leader in how we manage our waste and recycling.
Firstly on the issue of taking responsibility.&nbsp;
Every year we export some 1.4 million tonnes of waste plastic, paper, glass and tyres.
Some of this material has been sorted, processed and will go on to form a valuable input to a commodity supply chain overseas, that’s true.
But much of it is of low value and destined to find its way into the environment through waterways, or into our oceans.
Waste sent to developing countries, usually by developed countries, for recycling is often dumped in poor villages, picked through by those living in poverty and the remainder burned or washed into rivers and then out to sea.
Every year, 8 million tonnes of plastics ends up in our oceans.
And developing countries are sick and tired of having to deal with developed countries’ waste. And so they should be, and that’s why we’re acting.
In the Pacific alone, there is an island of floating plastic waste which is nearly three times the size of France.&nbsp;
Now when someone first told me that, I found that hard to believe. I actually wanted to see a picture. And you hear lots of factoids in this job and people present numbers to you all the time, and that one sounded pretty far-fetched. But I’ve seen it. I’ve seen the images of this and it’s true, it’s there.&nbsp;
And it’s an indictment on all of us.
The vast bulk of this is estimated to have come from 8 rivers in the East Asian region.
Our Pacific family has not caused this problem, but they have to deal with the impacts of it on their fisheries, on their wildlife and islands.
We are choking our oceans.
Scientists estimate that in just 30 years’ time the weight of plastics in our oceans will exceed the weight of fish in our oceans.
Just think about that for a second.
Taking responsibility means recognising the problems we are contributing to - and it also means keeping faith with the Australian people who recycle because it is the right thing to do.&nbsp;
When we take the time and effort to sort, clean and dispose of something in the recycling bin, well it’s pretty reasonable that we think that it will be recycled.
Only 21 per cent of plastic waste we put in our yellow bin for recycling is actually recycled.
We’re getting ripped off.
There’s a promise that is sort of implicit - you’ve got the bin, you put it in there, and you expect the right thing to be done with it.
And it’s important that when we have programmes in place that deal with that material, that that promise is honoured. Otherwise people will give up on it. And they’ll stop doing it. And the problem will get worse.
Australians don’t expect their waste to be exported to someone’s village or waterway where kids can’t then swim in the rivers, or swim in their own beaches, that’s not right.
Scientists estimate that in just 30 years time as I’ve said, there is this terrible, terrible situation we will face when it comes to the weight of plastics in our ocean.
In two weeks I will meet with state and territory leaders at COAG to finalise the details of a ban on the export of waste plastic, paper, glass and tyres.&nbsp;
Which we announced, I announced when we were up in North Queensland- up in Cairns at the COAG meeting being held there last year.
I’m not talking about banning exports of value-added recyclable materials, I have to stress.
Where our materials can actually go into production chains, in other places, whether that be in New Zealand or in other parts of the world, that’s fine, that’s practical, that’s part of the solution.
I’m talking about the materials that end up doing so much harm to the environment.
Australians are doing the right thing and we can only keep faith with them by transforming our waste and recycling markets.
Which leads me to the second pillar - which is industry uplift.
Only last week, Infrastructure Australia listed National Waste and Recycling Management as one of five new national High Priority Initiatives, and I agree with them.
The state of our recycling and remanufacturing facilities, as well as the economics behind our collection systems, are under severe strain.&nbsp;
We need to invest in this industry - invest in the technological innovation that maximises the value of the recycled product and minimises the costs as well.
The Australian Council of Recycling observed that only 8 per cent of the $2.6 billion collected by states and territories through waste levies has been reinvested in recycling infrastructure and technology.
People are putting and paying fees on waste management levies that isn’t finding it’s way into recycling infrastructure and technology. And that has to change.
I will have more to say on this closer to the up-coming Budget, but the Commonwealth stands ready to work with the states, to co-invest in these critical infrastructure facilities, and with industry.&nbsp;
We are working with state and territory governments to identify and unlock the critical upgrades that will lead to a step-change in their recycling capacity. And we will invest in these facilities with governments and with industry on a 1 to 1 to 1 basis.
Equal partners to build that capability which is essential to actually drive change.
Investing in the sector isn’t just good for the environment, it's incredibly good for our economy as well.
The waste sector in Australia employs around 50,000 people and generates around $15 billion every year.
For every 10,000 tonnes of waste sent to landfill, 2.8 direct jobs are created. But if we recycle the same waste, as mentioned before, 9.2 direct jobs are created.
According to the Australian Council of Recycling, recycling more domestically could create more than 5,000 new jobs.
The global recycled plastics market is expected to grow at 7.9 per cent annually over the next decade, they are phenomenal figures, and be worth almost $67 billion in 2025.
Industry is not blind to the incredible potential here.
And neither is our Government.
Last month, waste management group Cleanaway, packaging maker Pact, and beverages giant Asahi announced they were building a new plastics recycling facility in Albury, in the Minister for Environment’s seat.
This facility will turn 900 million used bottles - or 28,000 tonnes of plastic - into new bottles every year.
Now I’m excited about that at a whole range of levels. But one is an important economic driver in rural and regional parts of the country as well.
These facilities can be in regional towns, and create regional jobs. It doesn’t just have to be in the big cities.
Diverting waste from landfill also, and creating 30 new jobs in regional Australia.
Coca-Cola Amatil is exploring options with waste management company Veolia for a recycled plastic processing plant in Australia. Meaning our plastic bottles could be processed here, instead of being shipped overseas for processing and then returned.
Again, more jobs, less waste.
And as we know, the long-term sustainability of any industry is found in demand.
Which leads to that third pillar: which is about building demand for recycled plastics.
We know that banning the export of waste plastics will keep more of the raw stock here for use, and lifting industry capacity will increase our ability to use these materials constructively.
But to make the system really hum, we need to build the market.
Through months of consultation with industry, customers, retailers and brand-owners, the one issue everyone comes back to is the need to increase demand for recycled products.
Different countries have tried this in different ways but, true to our principles, my Government will not take a top-down, tax and punish approach to this.
We think Australians will respond to better incentives.&nbsp;
And we want to encourage and incentivise the best.&nbsp;
We want to support recycled products to compete in the market.&nbsp;
We want to see industry step up and be part of the solution which they want to do also.
And government must be part of that as well.
That’s why I am pleased to announce the first of a number of measures my Government will take to build demand for these recycled products.
We will be strengthening the Commonwealth Procurement Guidelines to make sure every procurement undertaken by a Commonwealth agency considers environmental sustainability and the use of recycled content as a factor in determining value for money.
We’ve used Commonwealth procurement policy to energise our Indigenous businesses and we’ve had tremendous success - in a couple of weeks time, I’ll be up in Townsville where we’ll be opening the new stadium in Townsville.
They were setting records on indigenous businesses and indigenous employment in the construction of that facility, and I’m sure JT is pretty happy about that as well.
And we’re having success by using the way the Commonwealth spends money to actually support those changes which means businesses can then invest in the technology and the processing and the systems that they have, to respond to that demand.
In any market, you increase demand and the industry will respond.
And respond it ways you never imagined.
Last year, I visited a recycling facility in Western Sydney that turns recycled plastic into asphalt.
A one kilometre, two-lane stretch uses up to half a million plastic bags.
Less waste. More jobs.
Across Australia we are seeing tremendous innovation - recycled fence posts; crash barriers and noise walls built from recycled materials; and so much more.
These are all things that governments actually get involved in buying and procuring which can underwrite, effectively, the market.
Sydney-based technology company Licella is an example of what is possible.
It has developed chemical recycling technology that converts end-of-life plastics into waxes, diesel and new plastics.
Last month, it announced a partnership with an American bioplastic manufacturer to commercialise this technology.
Mildura-based company Integrated Recycling is also innovating.
It’s produced picnic tables, bollards and gardening products — all from recycled plastic. And now it’s making railway sleepers for Victoria’s rail network.
These are all examples of home-grown ingenuity which we can be really proud to export.
And a key part of the work that we do with our partners all around the world, and Karen Andrews as the Minister for Industry, Science, and Technology will know, that the work we’re seeking to do, and the United States, and other places as part of our partnerships is getting our scientists together and not just the scientists that work for big public institutions like the CSIRO, but the scientists who work for companies, and getting them to work together. To work out how they can develop more of these products and do so in a way where people will buy them and when that happens you’re really starting to move.
Meaningful change will be multifaceted, and there is much to do.
Of course it will require education; changes in behaviour, but most importantly, a willingness by all of us to step up.
Molly stepped up.
We’re stepping up.
Everybody who’s come here today wants to step up.&nbsp;
And I think that’s absolutely brilliant and I’m sure as we continue to focus on the practical things that we need to change, the practical things that enable us to move forward on what is one of the biggest challenges that we’re facing environmentally, particularly in our part of the world.
We are a continent surrounded by the ocean. Our waterways are our lifeblood. And the same is true for our pacific family and as you move up through the Asia-Pacific region, this is such a big issue for our part of the world and for our future, and for the kids who are here with us today.&nbsp;
I’m so pleased to see them here as part of what’s happening here today along with the scientists and all the others who are joining us here.
I want to thank you for making the effort to be here, and I’m looking forward to what some of the outcomes will be from you today, and I wish you well for all your discussions.
And I want to conclude again by thanking Minister Ley and Assistant Minister Evans for the way they’ve been driving this agenda, together with the Department of Agriculture, Water, and the Environment, to ensure that we are doing the practical things that are necessary to drive the change that we all want to see.&nbsp;
Thank you all very much for your attention, I wish you all the best for this Summit today.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much Stutch, and welcome everybody. Can I first also thank you also for those comments, Ken. Can I also acknowledge the Gadigal people of the Eora nation and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging. And I also want to acknowledge, as I always do, if there are service men and women here and any veterans who are here today, and simply say thank you for your service.
To Stutch, thank you again, for the invitation to be here again this year and the Australian Financial Review for bringing together this group at a very important time in our country.
In 2016, I said this – I was Treasurer at the time – I said, “we must take action to strengthen our economic resilience to deal with the shocks that will inevitably come - to get debt under control by returning the Budget to balance, through disciplined expenditure restraint, and a tax system that supports growth and provides sustainable revenues.”
Since I said that, the final Budget outcome in the past three Budgets exceeded the Budget Estimate on the night by a cumulative total of $37 billion. Year on year, bettering the mark that we set in each Budget.
Last year, the Budget was restored to balance. And now here we are. What we spoke of has now come before us. This is what I was talking about. This time we are in right now, was what I was talking about back in 2016.
We confront today a new, complex, hydra-headed and rapidly-evolving challenge. The coronavirus, COVID-19.
And while we all know we’re not immune, so far, as a nation, we have been able to get ahead of this. But to stay ahead, we must work together and continue to take decisive and timely action.
This is one of those national interest moments.
Whatever you thought 2020 was going to be about. Think again.&nbsp;
We now have one goal, together, this year - to protect the health, the wellbeing and livelihoods of Australians through this global crisis, and to ensure that when the recovery comes, and it will, we are well positioned to bounce back strongly on the other side.
All Australians have a role to play, in Australia successfully moving through this crisis.
Large businesses, in particular, have a huge role to play. And I particularly want to commend Qantas, who I was with yesterday, who have already played an important role in those three flights that they were able to put on. I was down at their headquarters yesterday thanking all of those staff and the Qantas team and all of those from DFAT and others who were involved in those operations. And credit where it’s due, I want to thank the banks in order: Westpac, Commonwealth, NAB and ANZ, for passing through the 25 basis points in response to my call the other week.
We need your perseverance, your planning, your enterprise. We need your common sense, we need your calm, we need your commitment. But we need your patriotism, as well.
We need you to support your workers, by keeping them employed. Hold onto your people, because you will need them on the bounce back on the other side. Wherever possible, support them - full-time, part-time, casual, including with paid leave if they need to take time off during the course of the virus.
We need you to support your small business suppliers by paying them promptly. Pay your suppliers not just in time, but ahead of time, especially now.
You know what, you want to know what you can do to keep Australians in jobs? Keep businesses in business? And support Australia through this crisis?
If you are a large business, go back to your office today, pay your supplier invoices and commit to pay them even faster for the next six months.
That is what sticking together looks like.
How you support your customers, your suppliers, your employees during the next six months and potentially beyond, will say more about your company, your corporate values and the integrity of your brand, than anything else you’ve likely done as an organisation.
We also need your investment, looking ahead to the opportunities that are on the other side. Take the opportunity to invest in the skills of your workforce or in the capital projects that will provide the pathway for a new season of growth that will be there.
As the Fin Review has stated on more than one occasion, this is a ‘team Australia’ moment.
The Government will soon announce our economic stimulus package geared to the unique nature of the challenge we face in the wake of the COVID-19 health crisis.
And what I want to do today is outline the dimensions of this challenge, the principles that are informing our response, and why Australia is strongly positioned, not just the Government, more so than virtually any country in the world today – not just to ride out this crisis, but to emerge stronger and more productive on the other side.&nbsp;
Australia’s economy ended 2019 solidly in the face of a difficult global economy and domestic challenges, not least being the devastating drought that the country has been in through for many years now. And there’s been no greater sight that I’ve seen more recently than where we’ve seen that rain falling.
Employment was growing strongly, more than twice the OECD average and faster than any of the G7 advanced economies.
Tax cuts for individuals, small and medium sized business, as promised, infrastructure spending, including the bringing forward last year of some $4.2 billion of projects into the forwards, low interest rates, strong trade and external performances - including three historic quarters of current account surpluses, rising house prices after a stagnant market for some years. These were all supporting the pick-up in growth that was borne out in last week’s National Accounts. Up to 2.2 per cent in the December quarter through-the-year, up from 1.8 per cent in September.
Internationally, the US and China has inked a phase one trade deal. Very welcome. The prospects for an orderly Brexit has risen, and there were early positive signs of manufacturing activity and trade improvements.
In short, we were heading into 2020 with growing domestic and international momentum out of last year.
The Reserve Bank had drawn the same conclusion, as many commentators have. The turning point had been reached, the Governor said, advising Cabinet early this year that 2020 was set up to be a much stronger year.
The mid-year economic and financial statement, released in early December, confirmed that the budget was back in balance and heading for a clear surplus in 2019-20.
This was not achieved through reckless forecasts of US$180 a tonne for iron ore, indeed the MYEFO assumptions were even more conservative at the time of December last year than we even had in the Budget. No, this was done through careful stewardship that saw Budget Estimates bettered by tens of billions year after year after year.
After seven years, the structural integrity of the Budget had been restored and Government was once again living within its means, as we promised. Expenditure was under control, at less than 2 per cent growth per year, and the revenues needed to guarantee the essential services that Australians rely on, were being produced by our economy, not through higher taxes.
This could not have been achieved at a more important time for our country.
Within a month of that mid-year statement, the bushfire crisis intensified and COVID-19 struck.
Occurring simultaneously, they have dramatically impacted Australia’s economy and finances. In the March quarter alone Treasury estimates around a 0.7 percentage point hit to growth.
In response to the bushfires, the Commonwealth committed an additional $2 billion to support individuals, small business, primary producers, tourism operators and communities most affected.
That $2 billion was initial and additional over two years and was in addition to the national disaster recovery assistance that flows and will continue to flow from pre-existing disaster funding arrangements.
Already $360 million has been paid out by the Federal Government to support bushfire-affected communities in just the past couple of months. More than $200 million of that has come from the $500 million that was profiled to be spent from the $2 billion National Bushfire Recovery Fund by the end of June. There’s no suggestion that the $2 billion was going to be spent in two months. It was intended to be there over two years. To actually be there, not just for the response, but for the recovery.
And just as the intensity of the bushfires started to abate, and parts of the country that have been in drought for many years and finally saw decent rains, the coronavirus hit.
The first cases of pneumonia thought to have been connected with the coronavirus were detected in Wuhan, China, in late December.
Cases of the coronavirus, officially named as COVID-19 by the World Health Organization on 11 February, started spreading throughout China and across the world.
And as of this morning, there are 113,210 cases of COVID-19 globally, across 108 countries, more than 3,975 lives lost, including 3 in Australia. Those lives lost, to date, are larger than SARS and MERS put together by multiple. So, it clearly is a global health crisis.
Australia moved quickly, and we got ahead of the rest of the world. Our swift and decisive action to initiate travel restrictions on the basis of expert medical advice has helped to first contain and now slow the spread of the virus in Australia.
And these timely measures have bought us time to prepare for the anticipated next phase of community transmission that we have now entered.
For the first time ever, we activated the Emergency Response Plan for Communicable Diseases Incidents of National Significance.
We have also fast tracked the Australian Health Sector Emergency Response Plan to prepare ourselves to respond to a more rapid spreading of COVID-19 within Australia, and that is a phase we are now looking into.
We have prepared the National Medical Stockpile, and the Commonwealth has committed to a 50-50 shared health funding deal with the states and territories to address additional costs incurred by state and territory health services as a result of the diagnosis and treatment of patients with, or suspected of having, COVID-19. Our initial estimate, is together, that’s at least $1 billion.
Last Thursday, the Government stood up the National Coordination Mechanism within the Department of Home Affairs to support pandemic preparedness beyond the health system. And this body will coordinate activities across the Commonwealth, state and territory governments, beyond the health response, as well as industry to ensure a consistent national approach is taken to provide essential services across a range of critical sectors and supply chains.
And this morning, the Attorney General and Minister for Industrial Relations, Christian Porter, is holding a joint industry-trade union roundtable focusing on workforce and industrial relations implications of the coronavirus.
And Wednesday, the Minister for Industry, Science and Technology, Karen Andrews, will hold an industry roundtable on emerging supply chain impacts as a result of the coronavirus.
So the response is whole-of-government. It’s at all levels of government. COAG will meet later this week. Our early intervention to contain the virus, has so far, enabled Australians to go about their everyday lives, and continues to be our goal.&nbsp;
COVID-19 is a global health crisis, but it will also have very real and very significant economic impacts, potentially greater than the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), especially for Australia. The epicentre of this crisis, as opposed to that one, is much closer to home. The GFC impacts were centred on the North Atlantic, and back then China was in a position to cushion the blow for Australia.
The initial outbreak of COVID-19 in China saw consumers stay away from shops, and many workers stay away from work, and that continues.
Manufacturing output in China fell sharply in February as the [inaudible] showed, with the official measure plunging to the lowest level on record.
Relative to SARS in 2013, China is substantially larger and more interconnected with the global economy including to Australia, magnifying the reverberations throughout the world.
An early sign of the hit to our economy was the sharp fall in demand for our rock lobsters, which make up about half the value of Australia’s seafood exports.
Our tourism sector, in which many businesses were already reeling from the bushfires, has been hit hard by the collapse in travel with broader fears of contagion sharply curtailing global tourism.
Our education sector is also obviously being significantly affected. Over 100,000 Chinese international students were not in Australia when the travel ban was actioned. This is not just about the fee revenue for universities and colleges, but even more significantly, the second round impacts for the local economy.
The consequences for other countries are just as significant, given the integral role China plays as a source of final demand for goods and services and as part of the global supply chain.
As I said, that spread now goes well beyond mainland China to over 100 countries.
The OECD released updated forecasts last week and downgraded their expectations for global growth and across all major economies.
Australia of course, was not excluded, but got favourable mention, and you saw both the Reserve Bank and Treasury release estimates last week of the significant direct impact of COVID-19 on growth, particularly in the March quarter.
Now as they do in times like these, and we’ve seen this obviously in the last 24 hours in particular, financial markets have sought to move to respond and seek to seek to reprice the risk that they’re seeing. This is giving rise to particularly sharp movements in global equity and financial markets, off record highs, sure.
But the impact on investors and retirees and no doubt the sovereign wealth fund Peter, which is so ably managed - the Chair is with us today. It’s real. Uncertainty has led to volatility in financial markets, however Australia’s financial markets continue to operate effectively and the Reserve Bank Governor has noted the RBA will ensure the Australian financial system has sufficient liquidity.
There is the potential for heightened risk aversion to flow over into reduced business and consumer spending, reduced demand across our economy.
These effects would be greater if coronavirus were to have a significant impact on the health of our workforce, which is what we need to plan for. And that’s something we’re working very hard to prevent at the moment.
Now this all means that the challenge we confront today is very different in nature, as I’ve argued, to the Global Financial Crisis.
The financial crisis started with excessive risk taking in the financial sector and involved the collapse of financial institutions, the disruption of credit, the impairment of balance sheets and a prolonged recovery.
The situation we face today is a health crisis that has moved quickly to weaken demand, disrupt supply chains, crunch cash flows, especially for small and medium sized businesses and especially in those sectors and locations most exposed and hardest hit. However, we must remind ourselves that the problem is temporal not structural. It’s about a biological contagion, not a financial one.
In our response, we must be careful to solve this problem, the one we’re facing now. Not the last one. And we need to solve it for Australia, for our circumstances, and not appropriate the diagnosis for other economies elsewhere in the world. We need our response, here in Australia.
We also need to learn from the mistakes made from the Global Financial Crisis – especially when it comes to a clear fiscal exit strategy.
The range of possible economic outcomes will depend on the spread, severity and duration of this health crisis and its interaction with demand-side and supply-side effects. Now that means, to fix our problem, our health response must be the primary response.
From a health perspective, our focus is to slow the spread of the virus, and to resource and manage scaled-up demand on our health system, and I’ll have more to say about that this week also. And more broadly, to coordinate the efforts to maintain continuity of services and supplies and to minimise civil disruption.
Let me turn now to our fiscal response.
As we finalise the Government’s fiscal response in coming days, and the Treasurer would have otherwise been here, but he was with Treasury officials until late last night as we continue to work through these issues. Our objective is this, keep people in jobs, keep businesses in business, and ensure we bounce back stronger on the other side.
It’s about supporting community confidence, employment and business continuity. This means boosting domestic consumption, reducing cash flow pressures for the most vulnerable businesses, and supporting new investments to lift productivity.
Now there’s seven principles that will guide our response, and the first of those is that measures must be proportionate to the degree of economic shock and the impact on the economy.
Secondly, they need to be timely and scalable, so they can be adjusted appropriately as the health and economic effects evolve. This a dynamic situation we’re in.
Third, the response needs to be targeted to address the specific issues we are confronting, supporting those most affected, and delivered where it will be most effective. We must not waste taxpayers’ resources.
Fourth, the response needs to be aligned with the many other arms of policy and activity, in particular monetary policy, and with the responses of other governments, particularly at a state and territory level. The Government is working closely, as you have seen with the Reserve Bank, the Governor and his team. And as you know the Bank moved last week to cut the official cash rate by 25 basis points. Now all of the four major banks and many other financial institutions have passed this through in full, and I acknowledge and commend them for that again today.
Fifth, we must use existing delivery mechanisms, wherever possible. That’s where it goes pear-shaped, if you get that design wrong, as we learned from the last stimulus. We saw those mistakes of trying to rush a range of new programs in response to the GFC. This is why we’ve been moving swiftly, but patiently, to ensure that the response that we announce can address these issues.
Sixthly, the measures must be temporary and accompanied by a fiscal exit strategy. We cannot bake into the bottom-line, this response for years to come, holding the Budget under water.
And finally, we must favour measures that will lift productivity. To enable the Australian economy to sustain an even stronger growth trajectory than we were on prior to the crisis.
By following these principles, we believe we will protect the structural integrity of the Budget and we will maximise the impact of our measures to protect the livelihoods of Australians and our economy during this difficult period. And in doing so we will prevent the need for future governments to spend the better part of a decade restoring the fiscal position and even longer paying back the debt.
When the economy bounces back, our plan is that the Budget bounces back as well. The stronger the recovery, the stronger the economy, the stronger the Budget.
Now, Australians have good reason to be confident that we are one of the best prepared in the world to mitigate both the health and economic impacts of COVID-19.
Australia has a world-class health system – our hospitals, doctors and nurses, laboratories, medical researchers are amongst the best in the world. The Doherty Institute down there in Melbourne, a classic example. Attracting funds from philanthropists, like Jack Ma and others, to find the vaccine. World-class. And they’re able to scale-up their response and certainly will be with the support we’re providing.
We also have a remarkable history in this country of economic resilience. And we need to return to those values. This is due in no small measure to the strength of our institutions and our policy frameworks, including an independent, credible central bank and a flexible exchange rate. As I mentioned, monetary policy is working in concert with fiscal policy to support the economy. Our banks are well capitalised and awash with ample liquidity, and our financial system is resilient. We have been working on that as well.
Not only are banks well-placed to lend at low rates, our businesses also have strong balance sheets, providing a strong foundation for investment. It’s not just the Government’s restored balance sheet, which will support us through this crisis, it is the stronger balance sheet of businesses, of banks, and indeed households.
Our exchange rate is also playing its usual shock-absorbing role in the face of an external shock, providing a welcome boost for our exporters. And household balance sheets have also strengthened, as I just mentioned in recent years with mortgage holders now on average around two and half years ahead of their mortgages, based on offset account and redraw facility balances.
A strong fiscal position has also been core to our ability to respond to shocks like these. Our debt to GDP is one of the lowest in the developed world, and that didn’t happen by accident. Over several years, we have taken the hard decisions needed to rebuild our fiscal strength, and in doing so, in the face of also coming off the back of the mining and investment boom that ripped $80 billion out of investment in our economy, retaining our AAA credit rating.
We didn’t rebuild our fiscal strength by increasing taxes or cutting essential services. Instead, we went on path of strengthening the Budget by restraining growth in recurrent expenditure and growing the economy.
We resisted repeated calls for cash splurges as part of an unwavering plan to rebuild our fiscal buffers so we could respond when it is truly needed, which is now. That time is now. This is the time we have been preparing for.
While much has changed in the last few months, though I want to give this assurance to Australians, as I close. We do face some tough and uncertain times ahead. We will get through this. And we will get through this together. But let me also assure Australians, there is plenty that won’t change over the next year, over the next three months, over the next six months and beyond, under our Government.
Our guarantee of funding for the essential services that Australians rely on, including record schools and hospital funding, that remains.
We will continue to announce new PBS listings for life-saving and life-changing medicines.
We will continue to make it quicker for people to enter the NDIS Scheme or to have their plans reviewed. You know some 50,000 people have come onto the NDIS since the last election alone, until the end of the year I understand.
We will continue to roll out our $100 billion infrastructure plan, including the bring forward, that we acted on last year, to bring forward some $4.2 billion worth of projects forward, so they can be hitting the ground right now, with additional investment that we worked through with the states last year.&nbsp;&nbsp;
We will continue strengthening our defence force in line with our commitment to return defence spending to 2 per cent of GDP, and that will be achieved next Budget year. That is also providing important opportunities for investment and growth, and indeed stimulus in many parts of the country.
We will continue to look for practical actions to curb the suicide rate with our towards zero plan. A core objective of our Government, particularly amongst our veterans, amongst young people, amongst Indigenous Australians.
We will continue to work with the states to progress the Fourth Action Plan and our record $360 million to reduce violence against women and children.
We will continue to help communities rebuild from the devastating drought, and to deliver the much needed support in response to the bushfire crisis of our black summer.
We will press on with the vital work of closing the gap for Indigenous Australians.
We will continue to ensure the tax system rewards hard work, fair go for those who have a go, supports investment and doesn’t hold our businesses back.
And we will set Australia up for an energy future with a real plan that supports jobs and industry - one that is reliable, affordable and sustainable. A plan based on technology, not taxation and ‘never-never’ targets.
We will continue to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions to meet our international commitments without increasing taxes, or electricity prices, or compromising the jobs of rural and regional Australians.
We will do our bit to get rid of the plastics in our oceans, not just on our coasts, but throughout our part of the world, and take care of our own waste.
We will enable Australians to grasp the opportunities of the digital economy and to extend our competitive edge in new technologies and industries. Whether it’s the space industry down in South Australia and across the country, whether it’s in cyber security, or in medical technologies, and of course fintech.
We will continue to open international markets and advocate for the benefits of open global markets and the rules-based trading system, and the reform of that.
We will continue to lower regulatory barriers to investment, through the work that Ben Morton’s doing, with our renewed deregulation push.
And we will progress practical and sensible reforms of the industrial relations system, not driven by ideology, but driven by common sense, to ensure the system remains fit for purpose and supports a strong economy.
And we’re serious about reforming the VET system, so we can ensure Australians are trained with the skills businesses need, so those Australians can get a job and the business can get ahead.
And we will ensure our universities collaborate with business to undertake research that grows our economy.
These remain the plans that will continue to guide our Government into the future, so that Australia rebounds quickly and emerges stronger from today’s challenges.
So, of course, we’re not immune to the coronavirus, but I want to assure the Australians that we are taking every step to protect their health, to protect their livelihoods, and to protect our economy, to ensure that we bounce back even stronger on the other side.
Now is the time when we do need to pull together. And I have every confidence that we will. That’s what Australians do.
Our planning, our preparations, are well advanced. Our action is there to see.
Our institutions are strong. Our people are strong. Our Budget is balanced.
Most importantly, we face this challenge with the greatest asset, which remains undiminished – that is the common-sense resilience and ingenuity of the Australian people.
Australia will pass this test, and it will pass it strongly. And we will be stronger on the other side.
Thank you very much for your attention.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (10:12): We gather today at a time of great challenge for our nation and, indeed, the world. We are a strong nation and a strong people, but in the months ahead this will put us all to the test, as at no time like this since the Second World War. But together, Australia, we are up to this challenge.
The coronavirus that is sweeping the world will continue to change the way we live, but we must not allow it to change who we are as Australians. I know—we all know—that Australians are very concerned at this difficult time. It is the understandable fear of the unknown, and there is much that is not known about the coronavirus, but we must not let that fear overtake us. We must focus instead on what we do know, what we can control.
We know who we are as a people and the legacy and inspiration that has been given to us from those who have come before us and shown us the way through challenges and tests just like this. So we summon the spirit of the Anzacs, of our Great Depression generation, of those who built the Snowy, of those who won the great peace of the Second World War and defended Australia. That is our legacy that we draw on at this time.
We also know the actions that we can take—the care, compassion and respect we must show from one to another. Whilst some must self-isolate—and they must—and we all must keep a healthy social distance between us, it is important that we do all we can to ensure in the difficult months ahead that no Australian goes through this alone. The responsibility we know we must take for our own actions and our own behaviours—the tests, hardships and sacrifices that will be placed on all of us, on our national character—will undoubtedly break our hearts on many occasions in the months ahead. But we must resolve today as Australians to come together and to pledge to each other across our nation that this coronavirus will not break our Australian spirit.
So, together, and with the rest of the world, we face this unprecedented challenge, a once-in-100-years event, a global health pandemic that has fast become an economic crisis the likes of which we have not seen since the Great Depression. Life is changing in Australia for every Australian. Life is going to continue to change. For many—young and old—2020 will be the toughest year of our lives. Meeting this challenge is bigger than any Australian. It's obviously bigger than politics. It's bigger than any of us who are in this chamber. Prime ministers, leaders of the opposition, ministers, shadow ministers and members of parliament—it is bigger than all us. It is bigger than premiers, chief ministers, captains of industry, leaders of union movements. It is bigger than all of us. I want to thank all of those who have come to this great challenge with such a unity of spirit. It requires every single Australian to do their duty as public citizens.
Again, in that spirit, I want to thank, in particular, the nation's premiers and chief ministers for coming together to form Australia's first ever national cabinet, a cabinet of all Australian governments: five Labor leaders, four coalition leaders. I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the cooperation he and his colleagues have afforded us here in this parliament as we battle this dual health and economic crisis. Today, we have some very important work to do to cushion the blow on Australians from the economic whirlwind that is being reaped by this coronavirus. In the months ahead, we will face more issues that none of us even now can imagine. Our job as the Australian government is to work night and day to ensure our great country, our beloved Australia, gets to the other side and emerges stronger, safer and united.
It is our advice that Australians will be living with this virus for at least the next six months. It could be longer. There is no three- or four-week shutdown that makes it all go away. There is no short-term solution to this. We have to steel ourselves for the next six months and work together to slow the spread in order to save lives, to protect the elderly and vulnerable Australians, because they are counting on us. Every extra bit of time we save allows us to better prepare for the challenges that are ahead.
Last night, all the states and territories, through the national cabinet, agreed to an even more stringent set of social distancing rules that will change further how we all live our lives. There will be no more going to the pub after work. There will be no more going to the gym in the morning. There will be no more sitting down for brunch at a cafe. These changes are vital to slow the spread of this virus to save lives.
As the virus spreads, and it will, governments around Australia will not be complacent and may need, and are likely to need, to impose further restrictions on our daily lives. Wherever possible, we will seek to do that to ensure a consistency of approach between all states and territories. It will be absolutely vital that every Australian respects and follows the healthy social distancing measures that all Australian governments have implemented in order to flatten this curve and to save lives. Limits on outdoor and indoor mass gatherings, keeping non-essential indoor gatherings to less than one person per four square metres—wherever possible, keeping 1½ metres between yourself and others—avoiding all non-essential travel and even simply following good hygiene is essential to slowing this virus. Washing your hands thoroughly, coughing and sneezing into your elbow, not touching your face are all practical measures that we can all observe to save lives. I will say this: while you may not be able to go to church, the synagogue, the temple or the mosque, I most certainly call on all people of faith in our nation to pray. I can assure you, my prayer knees are getting a good work out.
As Australia works to flatten the curve and slow this virus, we also face an immense economic challenge. Across Australia today, many thousands of Australians will lose their jobs. They are lining up at Centrelink offices as we speak—something unimaginable at this scale only weeks ago. Many have lost their jobs, and we know many more will. This is the biggest economic shock our nation has faced in generations. Australia, a long and open trading nation, is now closed off, largely, from the world. Internal border restrictions not seen since before Federation are now in place.
Yesterday, the Treasurer and I announced an economic support package, a safety net package, unprecedented in our nation's history in its scale and coverage. Measures announced to date total some, together with the Reserve Bank, $189 billion in economic support, around 10 per cent of the size of our economy. The measures we have announced are focusing on those who are on the frontline, those who will be feeling the first blows of the economic impact of the coronavirus as it wreaks its havoc. So we'll supercharge our safety net—doubling, effectively, the jobseeker payment and allowing Australians to draw on those resources they have put aside for such a time as this—to support the most vulnerable with additional payments to pensioners and carers and the disabled, to provide a lifeline to small and medium-sized businesses. We will be working together with the banks—and I thank them also—to keep those businesses afloat wherever possible, to keep as many employees as they can, but with the pledge in our support to them that when we pass this virus, those businesses that have had to stand people down will stand them back up again on the other side. This will give them that assurance, give them that encouragement, as they have to stand staff down, commit to do all they can on the other side to stand them back up again. This is the unwritten contract that is being undertaken between Australian employees and employers as we speak, to provide also a legal shield to protect both businesses from closures and individuals, to preserve our economy and to boost our recovery on the other side.
To those who have lost their jobs already and will, to those whose incomes are collapsing, to those who are barely holding their businesses together or who have already seen their dream taken from them by this virus, this is devastating and this is heartbreaking. And we will do all we can in this place as a parliament and all we can as a government to help see you through. We will be doing everything we can to protect those most vulnerable to the impacts of this crisis and to preserve the businesses that employ them. There will be more support to come, and it will keep coming for as long as this challenge is before this nation. Even more importantly, when this passes, we will be there to ensure that Australians get back on their feet, that the businesses rebuild, that our economy resurges and that we go on in the great national story of this amazing nation, Australia.
In conclusion, the more Australians work together, the more we share the sacrifice and the burden, the more we do the right thing, the more lives and the more livelihoods we will save. And when the virus passes—and it will—we will be stronger on the other side. This will be a test of all Australians. It is a test of our nation—of our spirit. There are some who believe liberal democracies and free societies cannot cope with these sorts of challenges. We will prove them wrong here in Australia. Today we are saying that we both can do this and will do this, and we will do this together. May God bless us all—all Australians—at this most difficult time.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison: (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (10:10): We gather again today in unusual circumstances, during extreme times, to consider extraordinary responses to the twin crises our nation faces—to our nation's health and to our economy. What we do today is what governments have always done in such circumstances, where our nation is under threat, and it is what previous generations have done before us.
Today we act to protect Australia's sovereignty. When Australian lives and livelihoods are threatened, when they are under attack, our nation's sovereignty is put at risk and we must respond—as a government, as a parliament and as a nation together: nurses, teachers, drivers, cleaners, doctors, police and paramedics; factory workers, engineers and bankers; grocers, miners, farmers, pastors, priests and imams; politicians, union officials and even lawyers; and mums, dads, grandparents, kids and families—all of us. Our sovereignty is measured in our capacity and freedom to live our lives as we choose in a free, open and democratic society.
We are not a coerced society. We act through our agreement and our wilful support of the national interest and through our many institutions, including this parliament and the many other parliaments around this country. We will not surrender this. Our sovereignty is enabled by having a vibrant market economy that underpins our standard of living, that gives all Australians the opportunity to fulfil their potential—to have a go and to get ago. We will not surrender this. Our sovereignty is demonstrated by the quality of life we afford Australians, with world-class health, education and disability and aged care and a social safety net that guarantees the essentials that Australians rely on. We will not surrender this. Above all, our sovereignty is sustained by what we believe as Australians, what we value and hold most dear: our principles, our way of life and our way of doing things. We will never surrender this.
So make no mistake: today is not about ideologies. We checked those in at the door. Today is about defending and protecting Australia's national sovereignty. It will be a fight; it will be a fight we will win. But it won't be a fight without cost or without loss. Protecting our sovereignty has always come at great cost, regardless of what form that threat takes, and today will be no different. So today we will agree to pay that price through the important measures we will legislate. But today, as a government, I want to commit to all Australians, as Prime Minister, that once we have overcome these threats—and we will—we will rebuild and we will restore whatever the battle ahead takes from us.
As a nation we are working together nationally, especially through the national cabinet. I wish to again place on record my thanks to all our premiers and chief ministers. We have come together to lead together in a new way through these crises. I thank all of my ministers, who I lead together with the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer. We are, all together as ministers, ably advised by our experts and officials in the Australian Public Service. I particularly want to acknowledge Professor Brendan Murphy and his team.
I thank all of my colleagues on the government benches for their input and leadership in their communities, as I do all members of this House and the other place. I thank the opposition leader and his parliamentary team and all of our staffs.
I extend my thanks to the many businesses, large and small; to the unions; to the banks; to the media; to the not-for-profit organisations and welfare and charitable groups; to Indigenous leaders; to the churches and other faith groups for their prayers, for their support and the many efforts that they are making. Together we have now established the key baseline supports and protections that have bought us much-needed time in these crises, to get us through—and I will speak of those actions today—but there is a long way to go in this fight. This has been our road in. We will now lead the country on the road through and then the road out and beyond.
It has been 16 days since this House last met. As of this morning, 5,956 Australians have contracted the coronavirus. Thankfully, 2,547 have recovered, while 294 are hospitalised, 92 are in intensive care and 36 are on respirators. Sadly, there have been almost 50 deaths in Australia. Tens of thousands more have died across the world. One of those was the member for Cooper's father-in-law. On behalf of the government and the parliament, I extend our deepest sympathies to the member for Cooper and her family.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!
Mr Morrison: They are with all who have lost loved ones in recent times, here and overseas, and are fearful of that event occurring in the future. And, as a nation, we especially send our best wishes to our good friend the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Boris Johnson. Get well soon, Boris. We need you.
Honourable members:&nbsp;Hear, hear!
Mr Morrison: When the House last met, new cases were growing at more than 20 per cent a day. In recent days, it has averaged two per cent a day. This is very encouraging. We are flattening the curve. We are buying ourselves precious time in this fight. I want to thank the overwhelming majority of Australians for doing the right thing. You are saving lives; you are saving livelihoods. But we have to keep up our efforts. Progress can be easily undone, as we have seen in other places around the world. We are only a few days away from Easter, a time that should give us great hope. The message is clear, though: stay home, don't travel, don't go away. We can't let up now.
I've said many times we are facing twin crises: the health crisis and an economic one. We must deal with them simultaneously and in real time, and so often they work against each other. But that is the balance we must achieve. Since the parliament last met, we have taken many actions on many fronts. People coming back from overseas now have to self-isolate for 14 days in a designated facility. The national cabinet has further tightened restrictions on public gatherings, and these are taking some time to get used to. We've expanded the coronavirus testing criteria to include people with fever or acute respiratory infection and under key categories. Australians should be very proud that we have one of the most comprehensive testing regimes in the world. We have one of the highest rates of testing in the world. Today some 313,000 tests for the virus have been conducted across Australia. This is more than double the number since we last met. I commend the Minister for Health on his efforts in this respect.
Since the parliament last met, we have strengthened the preparedness of our hospitals and are working with the states to triple our ICU capacity. We've changed medical indemnity rules to encourage retired health workers to return to practice. We're supporting up to 20,000 registered nurses to get online training to better prepare them to deliver care in high-dependency and intensive care units. We have finalised a historic partnership with private hospitals, ensuring that over 30,000 hospital beds and 105,000 skilled workers are mobilised to work in conjunction with the public hospital sector. The government will guarantee the viability of all 657 private and not-for-profit hospitals across Australia through these challenging times, because we need them.
To preserve critical resources, we've acted to suspend all non-urgent elective surgery. Of course, we know many Australians still need to see their doctor during this time—and they should—and need to get the medicines they depend on for their health. So we've expanded Medicare subsidised telehealth services and we've given extra incentives for GPs and other health practitioners so that their practices can stay open for face-to-face services where needed. We know Indigenous Australians are at great risk from COVID-19, and we are making $123 million available for targeted measures to assist Indigenous communities and businesses. We're supporting those Australians with a disability through the efforts of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We've taken action against those who would seek to profiteer from the health crisis by buying goods like face masks, hand sanitisers and medicines and reselling them at big mark-ups or exporting them in bulk overseas. It's not on. These products should be for Australians first and foremost. We've invested an initial $74 million for mental health support. And, to counter the great risk from domestic violence, we have committed an additional $150 million to support Australians experiencing domestic, family and sexual violence. While we have continued to build our national medical stockpile all this time, over 30 million masks have arrived in just recent days, with great help from groups like the Minderoo Foundation, with more than 500 million masks on order and domestic production also underway.
Our government has moved decisively to address the economic storm that also confronts us. This is the greatest economic crisis to afflict the world in many generations. We have responded with the biggest economic lifeline in Australia's history, which we will consider today. I want to thank the Treasurer for his leadership as these measures have been brought together—working together, I should say also, with the treasurers of the states and territories around the country on so many other measures. So far, more than 200,000 additional jobseeker claims have been finalised over the past few weeks, with the COVID-19 supplement doubling our safety net support. Thousands of extra workers have been recruited into the public cause to ensure we can move through the claims still outstanding as quickly as possible.
Today, we will put before the parliament our JobKeeper package. JobKeeper will keep Australians in jobs and it will keep the businesses that employ those Australians in business, both now and into the future. The $130 billion economic lifeline will provide payments of $1,500 per fortnight to an estimated six million eligible workers through their employer. As of yesterday afternoon, over 700,000 businesses have registered for this support, and this number continues to grow. This payment is the equivalent of around 70 per cent of the national median wage. For workers in accommodation, hospitality and retail services—some of the most affected by this economic crisis—it equates to a full median replacement wage. We also have extended the partner pay income test for those on jobseeker; the partner test has been changed from around $48,000 to just over $79,000.
As well, we want those working with children, and particularly our essential workers, to have confidence in their childcare arrangements. The government is providing business continuity payments to support childcare services to stay open. This means around one million Australian families will be able to receive free child care. The investment complements the more than $1 billion the government expects the sector to receive through the JobKeeper payment.
Managing our workforce is a critical part of keeping the economy going. We have announced changes to temporary visa holders, including for international students, temporary skilled visa holders and working holiday-makers. We are also relaxing the visa conditions for our Seasonal Worker Program and the Pacific Labour Scheme so that participants can stay for up to one more year. This is essential for our agriculture sector, which, for the first time in a long time, is seeing rain. These extensions are subject, of course, to labour market testing, allowing local jobseekers, Australians, the opportunity for work.
The government knows many Australian businesses are under pressure, and we won't allow a fire sale of Australian businesses to foreign interests. The Treasurer has announced temporary changes to the foreign investment review framework to protect Australia's national interest. This means all proposed foreign investments will now require approval, regardless of the value or nature of the foreign investor.
With businesses and families under stress, the national cabinet has agreed to a moratorium on evictions over the next six months for commercial and residential tenancies in financial distress. Yesterday, the national cabinet agreed that states and territories would implement, legislate and regulate a mandatory code of conduct for commercial tenancies, which includes retail, office and industrial properties. The code sets out the good faith leasing principles for these tenancies. It means that businesses will be able to emerge on the other side and start trading again, not weighed down by disabling debts that would otherwise keep their doors closed forever.
We are all in this together. I know that some families, coming into this health and economic crisis, were already doing it incredibly tough. That's why we are providing an additional $200 million to help vulnerable Australians pay bills and pay for food, clothing and petrol. Additionally, we are providing almost $60 million to assist older Australians with food and other essential items. To mobilise the full resources and talent of the private sector behind our national mission, we have established the National COVID-19 Coordination Commission under the leadership of Nev Power. I thank all of those commissioners for their service. This is about government and the private sector working together to solve problems for our nation. All the measures I have detailed today are measures that we have announced in recent weeks, since we last met.
We have a long way to go. Through the actions we have taken to date, we have bought Australia valuable time to chart a way out over the next six months. But there are no guarantees, and it could well take far longer. Our country will look different on the other side, but Australians will always be Australians. We have navigated the road in, and we can now see some encouraging signs. We do stand in a place today far better than most nations around the world because of the efforts of all Australians. We've been flattening the curve, buying more time—time other countries haven't had; and we have seen the devastating effects on those nations and their people—preparing our health system for the challenges to come, putting in place the big economic lifeline and the buffers for Australians in what, for so many, will be their toughest ever year, 2020. We are charting the road through. We are all in. Our institutions are strong. Our people are strong. Australia is strong and will continue to be strong. We will respond to this challenge. We are up for the fight. We will pay the price needed to protect our sovereignty, and we will chart our way out. We will get through this together, Australia.


Prime Minister
Mr Morrison (Cook—Prime Minister and Minister for the Public Service) (14:01): on indulgence—When we all heard of the deaths of Leading Senior Constable Lynette Taylor, Senior Constable Kevin King, Constable Glen Humphris and Constable Joshua Prestney in Melbourne last month it sent a shudder, I'm sure, through all of us. We all felt it—not only Victorians but every Australian—because we know those who wear that police uniform, wherever they do it anywhere in the country, stand between us and the harm that can befall any of us. Families of those police officers who serve understand this only too well.
A loss during a time when we're all feeling vulnerable at this point is felt more sharply. They were four police officers doing their duty: keeping the peace, enforcing the law, upholding the community's trust and keeping us safe. In normal times, after such a terrible event and such an awful loss, a city would stop and a state would pause. Today, representing a nation, we do that on behalf of all Australians. These times demand that we don't assemble; they require us to grieve apart, as so many Australians have had to do in recent months. It's one of the hardest things, I have no doubt, during this time of the COVID-19 restrictions. But Australians and Victorians did and still honour Lynette, Kevin, Glen and Joshua. Blue ribbons were placed on front doors, flowers were laid at police stations and 142,000 people left tributes on a memorial page. Melbourne's landmarks shone blue while fire stations across Victoria sounded their sirens, four blasts for four fallen and brave officers. And on their last journeys home, people stood on the sides of roads, officers stood to attention on overpasses and cars pulled over because heroes were passing.
Today, for a few moments here in our nation's parliament, we pause as well to remember Leading Senior Constable Lynette Taylor. She served for 31 years with Victoria Police. She was mother to Nathan and Alexander who, while grieving her loss, must be so proud of her service. Lynette and her husband, Stuart, were building a home down the coast, looking out to Bass Strait. That's where they were going to retire.
Five days before the tragedy, Lynette pulled over an unregistered driver. The driver had forgotten to pay, because she was moving house during this difficult time. She was flustered and distressed. The driver said Lynette was kind, professional and empathetic. After a breath test was administered, Lynette gently said, 'Can you go home and pay for it?'
We remember also Senior Constable Kevin King, who had been with Victoria Police for just six years. He was a father to William, James and Henry. He and his wife, Sharron, had been together for 35 years. Kevin was, in his family's words, 'a big softie who would do anything for absolutely anyone'. And I can think of no better vocation and occupation than what he chose, to be a police officer, to fulfil that promise. He loved the Richmond Tigers, as some in this place do also. And he loved his guitar. He loved to strum in the sun. He turned 50 in February. Sharron and the boys gave him a long-awaited guitar amplifier, even though they feared the family room would be turned into a music studio.
Constable Glen Humphris moved to Victoria to begin his policing career only in 2019. He was doing his probationary training at the time of this terrible incident. Glen was originally from the Central Coast of New South Wales and he had later moved to Newcastle. He loved the outdoors, triathlons, running, cycling and camping. He met his partner, Todd, four years ago. Their first date was on a 30-kilometre bike ride. He moved to Melbourne to support Todd, who was taking up a role with Defence. They were a service family, Victoria Police and our Australian Defence Force, protecting Australia and protecting Australians. Todd accompanied Glen's casket on the long journey back to the Hunter, travelling along the Hume under escort. The cavalcade stopped at the Murray for a repatriation ceremony, where the care of Glen was passed over from the Victoria Police to the New South Wales Police Force, a reminder that there is only one police family in Australia.
And we remember Constable Joshua Prestney, who was 28. He also loved music and had studied a bachelor of creative industries in Melbourne. He liked playing the guitar, but, after seeing how much his brother, First Constable Alex Prestney, loved being a policeman, Josh changed direction. He joined Victoria Police last May and was handed his badge by his brother when he graduated in December. How proud his brother must have been. Those same hands would clutch a flag-draped coffin six months later. The day of the crash was only Josh's second in the highway patrol—so much ahead of him. To his family and his partner, Stacey, he was creative, he was insightful, he was a loving and genuine soul. His parents said of Josh and Stacey:
They were perfect for one another and had made plans for their future together.

And of their own grief Josh's parents simply said, 'We are broken.' So today we are broken with you.
When my father passed away earlier this year, the member for Fowler, Chris Hayes, also the son of a police officer, graciously sent me a copy of the 'Police ode', and I have taken great comfort from it and I hope it will create the same sense for those who have lost their loved ones. It reads thus:
As the sun surely sets:
dawn will see it arise,
for service, above self,
demands its own prize.
You have fought the good fight:
life's race has been run,
and peace, your reward,
for eternity begun.
And we that are left,
shall never forget.
Rest in peace friend and colleague,
for the sun has now set.
We will remember.
We will remember.
Hasten the dawn.

May our brave and dedicated officers rest in peace. We owe them more than we can speak of. And may their families draw great comfort from their country's love.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, Linda, and thank you all for joining us here today.
Can I particularly commence by acknowledging the Ngunnawal people, their elders past and present, and of course leaders emerging for the future.
And as is always my practice, and particularly on occasions such as today, can I acknowledge any veterans who are here in the room with us today and serving members of our defence forces, of which there are many, and to simply say on behalf of an incredibly grateful nation, once again thank you for your service.
Can I also, of course, acknowledge my many Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues who are here with us today and I will speak of Linda in just a moment.
But to ministers Hawke and Price who are here with us, doing such a tremendous job in critical areas of our defence operations and in defence engagement, both in the building of that capability through Minister Price, and rolling out the enormous commitments and the industry capability that is essential to achieve what we're speaking of today.
But also to Minister Hawke who has been leading our approach in the Pacific Step Up, bringing together not just the defence components of that, but the international development components of that and bringing that into one strategic initiative that has seen our standing amongst our Pacific family rise to whole new levels that is so essential to what I am setting out today.
Senator Molan is here, of course, who has been a long-time friend and a consularery on many matters regarding defence, border protection and many other things, Jim, and it's good to see you here today and thank you for being here.
Can I also acknowledge the Chief of Defence Force General Campbell and Secretary Moriarty and all of the defence leadership that is here today. Your skill, your experience, your integrity is so written into these documents and gives Minister Reynolds and I and the entire Cabinet and the National Security Committee of Cabinet great confidence in the advice that we receive.
And that when we make decisions, we are making them on the best possible advice and experience. And the leadership that you're showing across the services, together with your service chiefs represented here today, is exemplary.
It really is a strong period for our defence forces under your leadership.
That, of course, leads me to Minister Reynolds.
Not only a serving reservist herself with deep engagement in matters of defence over her professional life, but she has brought a clarity to this portfolio. She has brought an accountable to this portfolio which is absolutely essential.
As Linda and I just this morning, or last night, again reflecting on the depth of what is in these documents. There is, of course, the many more apparent elements of the strategy that we're outlining today - the hardware, the equipment, all of these sorts of things, and, of course, that draws significant public attention.
But at the end of the day, that's not what makes it work. What makes it work are the people who drive it and the accountabilities that are placed upon the plans that we see here today. And that is what Linda, in particular, has driven so far in her time as Minister.
There is an accountability to these plans that she insists on, as I know the service chiefs and others are very well aware of, and the Secretary, and that gives me a lot of confidence because the investments we're making here today and for the longer term require the accountability of implementation.
It's significant and so I commend you, Linda, for the terrific job you have had in bringing this all together as part of my team and I also thank the many members of the National Security Committee of Cabinet as well who have been integrally involved in the development of this.
And it goes without saying that we all pass on our thanks to the Finance Minister and the Treasurer who have had a keen interest in what we have been working on for now for some time.
So it is an honour to be here today. It is a pivotal day for Australia and for our defence forces.
It is an honour to be here at ADFA to launch the Australian Government’s 2020 Defence Strategic Update and the 2024 Structure Plan, these two very important documents that will guide our nation through one of the most challenging times we have known since the 1930s and the early 1940s.
A plan for Australia's future in the most important area of a Federal Government's responsibility.
The cadets of the Australian Defence Force Academy who would normally sit in this lecture theatre today will be asked to confront many of the challenges that are set out here throughout the course of their careers.
But more than that, to live up to the ideals and traditions of the ADF serving and protecting Australia.
And at times, that work will be in accordance with plans already developed and it will be also at other times responding quickly to the unexpected.
Our times are a testament to that challenge.
This year, the ADF has provided crucial support to Australians during our Black Summer bushfires.
And now a response to a once-in-a-Century pandemic.
Senator Seselja, who is also here with us today, has been very familiar seeing that support here in his own home territory, here in the ACT and so often in his other responsibilities.
At the height of the operation Bushfire Assist, led by Major General Justin - Jake, as he's known - Elwood, 6,500 ADF personnel provided support to state and territory fire and emergency services across our nation.
It was a proud time for our defence forces and in particular the unprecedented compulsory callout of 3,000 ADF Reservists, who are proud at the best of times, but to be able to be serving as reservists in their own country at a time of great need, so many of them that I was able to meet around the country felt a great pride in being able to deliver that service.
And I thank their employers once again for supporting them in their efforts.
Then we went through, when we thought life was going to return to normal as the fires receded, of course it didn't.
The COVID-19 pandemic hit and once again the ADF has responded with Operation COVID-19 Assist.
At its peak, it has involved around 2,200 personnel across Australia.
In April, there was an outbreak of coronavirus in the north-west regional hospital in Burnie, an outbreak that included staff across the hospital.
The ADF responded with a 50-person deployment to assist the hospital.
For two weeks the ADF's medical professionals treated and supported more than 400 locals who entered the hospital's doors.
This support was not just practical, but it was a great confidence-booster at a time of great anxiety in north western Tasmania.
Premier Gutwein, to this day, continues to offer his thanks to the tremendous support provided by the ADF.
Meanwhile, in Shepparton, engineer and maintenance specialists from the Army Logistical Training Centre and the Joint Logistics Unit worked on lifting vital PPE capacity at the Med-Con plant and thanks to them, Med-Con surgical face mask production has an output capacity of 200 million masks per year.
From contract tracing to quarantine support and isolation checking, the ADF has demonstrated again its capability, professionalism and adaptability.
Lieutenant General John Frewen and the COVID-19 Task Force, I want to thank you very much for your calm and methodical way of getting the job done, yet again.
And the jobs continue with more than 200 personnel right now in Victoria and others standing by ready, if needed, to go and assist with the current outbreak.
And if we need reminding, 2020 has demonstrated in no uncertain terms that the challenges and threats we face as a nation are constantly evolving.
The enduring responsibility of Government, though, is timeless - to protect Australia's national interest, our sovereignty, our values and the security of the Australian people.
This responsibility requires sustained commitment, focus, application.
It requires strong economic management to support the necessary investment and it demands tough and difficult choices.
As the Australian Strategic Policy Institute noted in the 2012-13 Defence Budget Brief, just prior to our Government's 2013 election, the Defence Budget had fallen to 1.56 per cent of GDP.
That was the lowest level since 1938.
Now, to illustrate the real-world implications of this, there were no major domestic naval shipbuilding projects commissioned in the six years that followed the end of the Howard Government in 2007 and the decisions they made to acquire the Hobart-class air warfare destroyers and the Canberra-class LHDs.
I want to assure the men and women of the ADF, who inherit a proud tradition and carry it, that our Government, my Government, will not repeat those mistakes of the past.
We will ensure, together, that you are always properly supported as you face the challenges of today tomorrow, and you carry out the decisions that we make, that you undertake on our behalf and on behalf of the Australian people.
Despite the many pressures on the Budget - and, of course, during this COVID-19 recession, they have only accelerated - I reaffirm today that our Government's commitment is to properly fund Defence with the certainty of a new 10-year funding model that goes beyond our achievement of reaching two-percent of our economy of GDP this year.
This simple truth is this: even as we stare down the COVID pandemic at home, we need to also prepare for a post-COVID world that is poorer, that is more dangerous, and that is more disorderly.
We have been a favoured isle, with many natural advantages for many decades, but we have not seen the conflation of global, economic and strategic uncertainty now being experienced here in Australia in our region since the existential threat we faced when the global and regional order collapsed in the 1930s and 1940s.
That is a sobering thought, and it's something I have reflected on quite a lot lately, as we've considered the dire economic circumstances we face.
That period of the 1930s has been something I have been revisiting on a very regular basis, and when you connect both the economic challenges and the global uncertainty, it can be very haunting.
But not overwhelming.
It requires a response.
Now, we must face that reality, understanding that we have moved into a new and less benign strategic area, one in which the institutions of patterns of cooperation that have benefited our prosperity and security for decades, are now under increasing - and I would suggest almost irreversible - strain.
The Indo-Pacific is the epicentre of rising strategic competition.
Our region will not only shape our future, increasingly though, it is the focus of the dominant global contest of our age.
This is the setting for it.
Tensions over territorial claims are rising across the Indo-Pacific region, as we have seen recently on the disputed border between India and China, and the South China Sea, and the East China Sea.
The risk of miscalculation and even conflict is heightening.
Regional military modernisation is occurring at an unprecedented rate.
Capabilities and reach are expanding.
Previous assumptions of enduring advantage and technological edge are no longer constants and cannot be relied upon.
Coercive activities are rife.
Disinformation and foreign interference have been enabled and accelerated by new and emerging technologies.
And, of course, terrorism hasn't gone away and the evil ideologies that underpin it and they remain a tenacious threat.
State sovereignty is under pressure, as are rules and norms and the stability that these provide.
Relations between China and the United States are fractious at best, as they compete for political, economic and technological supremacy.
But it's important to acknowledge that they are not the only actors of consequence.
The rest of the world, and Australia, are not just bystanders to this.
It's not just China and the United States that will determine whether our region stays on path for free and open trade, investment and cooperation that has underpinned stability and prosperity, the people-to-people relationships that bind our region together.
Japan, India, the Republic of Korea, the countries of South-East Asia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam and the Pacific all have agency, choices to make, parts to play and of course, so does Australia.
There is a new dynamic of strategic competition and the largely benign security environment, as I've noted, that Australia has enjoyed, basically from the fall of the Berlin Wall to the global financial crisis, that's gone.
Since the Government's 2016 Defence White Paper was released, we have witnessed an acceleration of the strategic trends that were already underway.
The pandemic has accelerated and accentuated many of those trends, and that is why today I'm launching the 2020 Defence Strategic Update.
It represents a significant pivot.
It outlines the shifts and challenges I've foreshadowed and mentioned.
It makes clear the strategic environment we face and this clarity will guide Australia's actions.
The update sees an evolution of strategic defence objectives in accord with our new strategic environment.
The objectives outlined in the 2016 Defence White Paper saw an equal weighting across the three areas of Australia and its northern approach, South-East Asia and the Pacific and operations in support of the rules-based global order.
In this update, the Government has directed Defence to prioritise, to make choices, ADF's geographical focus on our immediate region, the area ranging from the north-east Indian Ocean through maritime and mainland South-East Asia to Papua New Guinea and the south-west Pacific.
The Government has set three new strategic objectives to guide all Defence planning, including force structure, force generation, international engagement and operations.
They are these:
Shape Australia’s strategic environment.
Deter actions against Australia’s interests.
And respond with credible military force, when required.
We must be alert to the full range of current and future threats, including ones in which Australia's sovereignty and security may be tested.
These new policies will require forestructure and capability adjustments.
These must be able to hold potential adversaries, forces, and infrastructure at risk from greater distance and therefore influence their calculus of costs involved in threatening Australia's interests.
This includes developing capabilities in areas such as longer-range strike weapons, cyber-capabilities, area denial systems, and at the same time our actions must be true to who we are as a nation, a people, what we value, for ourselves, our friends, for our neighbours.
Soon after becoming Prime Minister, I said that our decisions as a nation are a reflection of our character and our values, and so are these decisions today. What we believe in. And if need be, what we will defend.
As one of the world's oldest liberal democracies, we know who we are, we know what we believe, we know what we're about, we know what we stand for, and we know what we'll defend.
We're about having the freedom to live our lives as we choose in an open and democratic liberal society without coercion, without fear.
We're about the rule of law.
We're about being good neighbours, pulling our weight, lending a hand and not leaving the heavy lifting and hard tasks to others.
We don't seek to entangle or intimidate or silence our neighbours.
We respect their sovereignty.
We champion it.
And we expect others to respect ours.
Sovereignty means self-respect, freedom to be who we are, ourselves, independence, free-thinking.
We will never surrender this.
Never. Ever.
Everything my Government does is designed to build our national resilience and protect our sovereignty, our freedom, our values and our independence.
This is our great trust.
Australia's defence and capability planning has been updated accordingly and is detailed in the 2024 Structure Plan, which I am also launching today.
And the good news is that we're already pointed in the right direction.
This journey didn't start today. It's been happening for some time.
The Government made a commitment to deliver a more potent, capable and agile ADF in the 2016 White Paper, and we went further than that.
We've backed it up with the investments, something that is often peculiar for white papers.
We are undertaking the biggest regeneration of our Navy since the Second World War and have charted the transition to a fifth-generation Air Force.
This includes the F-35 Lightning Joint Strike Fighter, the most advanced Strike Fighter in the world.
The Joint Strike Fighter will strengthen our high-tech industrial defence capability as well.
Minister Price and I have been out there seeing it being built in south-western Sydney, parts of it.
Over 50 Australian companies are already sharing more than $1.7 billion in contracts as part of the global JSF program, truly exciting.
Greater mobility, protection and strike power also for our Army.
New infrastructure to enhance the delivery of our war-fighting capabilities, from logistics and intelligence to bases, which also brings benefits for many local and regional communities, including Indigenous communities.
And to implement the Defence Strategic Update, my Government is making a further commitment to better position defence to respond to rapid changes in the environment that I've noted.
We're again providing long-term funding certainty for Defence and defence industry.
That enables them to plan with confidence.
An updated 10-year funding model that will enable defence to deliver the strategy and the complex capabilities it requires to keep us safe.
This will see capability investment grow to $270 billion over the next decade.
Now, that's up from $195 billion we committed in the decade following the 2016 Defence White Paper.
So what will this deliver?
It will expand our plans to acquire sophisticated maritime long-range missiles, air-launched strike and&nbsp;anti-ship weapons, as well as additional land-based weapons.
That's right. That's what we're going to do.
We will also invest in more highly integrated and automated sensors and weapons, including potential development of hypersonic weapons systems, and this investment will see us build on Defence’s collaboration with Australian industry, which is already at a new level.
In 2016, the Government released the Defence Industry Policy Statement.
In 2018, we launched the Defence Industrial Capability Plan.
As I said, we're not starting here today. We've been long at this task.
This was followed by the release of the defence policy for industry participation last year.
These steps have all been about making sure we have a robust, resilient and innovative defence industrial base, a base that maximises Australian participation and supports highly skilled Australian jobs and local investment, whether it's the small arms and ammunition being designed and manufactured at Force Ordnance in South Australia, or new capabilities such as Boeing Australia's autonomous “Loyal Wingman”, designed and produced in Brisbane and Melbourne.
We're on track with the delivery of our Boxer Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles that we've just seen outside here today, an example of which we've got for you to see.
These new armoured vehicles will provide better protection, firepower and mobility to the men and women on the ground, and they will be built right here in Australia, and it's a similar story for our naval shipbuilding industry.
The Naval Shipbuilding Plan in 2017 set out a long-term vision for a strong, sustainable and innovative naval shipbuilding industry here in Australia.
Three years on, we are delivering on that vision.
Continuous naval shipbuilding in South Australia and Western Australia is now under way.
The Arafura class offshore patrol vessels are in production.
The Guardian class Pacific patrol boats are being delivered to our Pacific families, which I know Minister Hawke has been on a number of those deliveries and they couldn't be more pleased, really couldn't.
The Hunter class frigates and Attack class submarines are now both on contract and progressing well and we will cut steel on the first Hunter prototypes at our new Osborne Shipyard in Adelaide later this year.
These naval shipbuilding programs are on track and they are on budget.
The 2024 structure plan now includes plans for the acquisition or upgrade of up to 23 different classes of Navy and Army vessels, representing a total investment of almost $183 billion, up to that.
This program is delivering thousands of jobs, even more important as we come out of the COVID-19 recession, and this will grow over the coming years.
Minister Price has ensured we have been bringing forward elements of our defence procurement and investment as part of our activity to support the JobMaker program more broadly in response to the corona recession.
Laying the foundation, though, more broadly, in all of these areas of shipbuilding, for advanced shipbuilding for generations to come, so Australia can be in a strong position.
Now, these actions that we've taken since 2016, and those that I'm announcing today,&nbsp; will deliver the cutting-edge capabilities necessary to achieve what we have set out as our objectives.
The first objective is to shape Australia's strategic environment.
Now, the Indo-Pacific is where we live and we want an open, sovereign Indo-Pacific, free from coercion and hegemony.
We want a region where all countries, large and small, can engage freely with each other and guided by international rules and norms.
These are not unreasonable objectives or ambitions or requests.
Where countries can pursue their own interests peacefully and without external interference, because this means Australia can pursue our interests too.
Indo-Pacific is where Australia has our greatest influence and can make the most meaningful impact and contribution and we intend to.
And it is also where our need is most pressing.
Before the pandemic, the ADF was participating in almost 50 bilateral, mini-lateral and multilateral exercises in our region each year with great success.
We have deepened defence and security cooperation with partners new and old, including the United States, Japan, Indonesia, Singapore and Vietnam.
And we are working more closely than ever with our Pacific family.
As part of the Pacific Step Up, which I launched at Lavarack Barracks on, I remember, a very warm day, up there in November 2018 in Townsville, we're working in partnership with Pacific countries to grow economies, build resilience and enhance regional stability.
And the transformation of Blackrock in Fiji has been part of this.
And as I said when I visited there last year, it's so much more than the bricks and mortar. It symbolises an enduring commitment to a stable, secure and sovereign region.
It speaks of a deep relationship, a commitment we've made to all members of our Pacific family, our vuvale our whanau.
They've stepped up in return, particularly in the bushfires this year, when PNG and Fiji provided military assistance and so many of our Pacific neighbours donated so generously.
It was wonderful to see Linda's posts of them singing in mess halls around the country, and just their enthusiasm.
My good friend, James Marape, the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, would be calling me saying they're on their way and he was keen to understand how they were going each and every day and I'd share the stories and when he smiles, that's a lot of brightness coming back at you. He was so excited.
That's how friends and family deal with each other and the same was true of Prime Minister Bainimarama as well, so proud that they could be there for us, as we have been there for them on so many occasions and always will.
So Australia's commitment to the region will only intensify.
Our sharpened focus will see Defence forming even deeper links and trust with regional Armed Forces and a further expansion in our defence diplomacy cooperation, capability and capacity-building.
Our new strategic settings will also make us a better and more efficient ally. It means a lot to us.
We've always pulled our weight. We want to continue to do so as challenges increase.
We remain prepared to make military contributions outside of our immediate region, where it is in our national interests to do so, underscored, including in support of US-led coalitions, and where it matches the capability we have to offer, a capability built - as Minister Reynolds often reminds me - a capability built to deal with our objectives and where that can be applied in other theatres for other purposes, then, of course, we show up.
But we cannot allow such consideration of contingencies to drive our forestructure to the detriment of ensuring we have credible capability to respond to any challenge in our immediate region.
Our first job is always our first job, and it is in our region we must be most capable and the military contributions we make to partnerships and to our ever-closer alliance with the United States, which is the foundation of our defence policy.
The security assurances and intelligence-sharing and technological industrial cooperation we enjoy with the United States are, and will remain, critical to our national security.
They are enduring.
But if we are to be a better and more effective ally, we must be prepared to invest in our own security.
Part of this means improving our awareness of what's happening in the region, and this will include expanding our world-leading Jindalee Over-the-horizon Radar Network to provide wide area surveillance for Australia's eastern approaches, complementing the existing surveillance of our north and west.
We will also increase our investment in intelligence under-sea surveillance and cyber capabilities to enhance our situational awareness.
Improving situational awareness provides the foundation for the second of our objectives which is deterring actions against Australia's interests.
Now, Australia has a highly effective, deployable and integrated military force of which we are so proud.
But maintaining what is a highly capable, but largely defensive force will not equip us to deter attacks against Australia, or our sovereign interests in the challenging strategic environment we face.
The ADF now needs stronger deterrence capabilities, capabilities that can hold potential adversaries, their forces, and critical infrastructure at risk from a distance, thereby deterring an attack on Australia and helping to prevent war.
Of course, we can't match all the capabilities in our region. That's not the point of what we're announcing today.
That is why we need to ensure our deterrence capabilities play to our strengths.
Australia will invest in longer-range strike weapons, cyber capabilities and area denial.
As mentioned, we are expanding our plans to acquire long range maritime and land strike capabilities and to invest in more highly integrated sensors and weapons.
We will increase the Australian Defence Force's ability to influence and deny operations directed against our interests.
The threshold of traditional armed conflict in what experts call the grey zone, which is becoming ever present and ever expanding.
This will involve boosting Defence's special operations, intelligence, and offensive cyber capabilities as well as its present operations, capacity-building efforts and engagement activities.
$15 billion investment in cyber and information warfare capabilities says a lot about where the world is at and where the threats are coming from, and it will range across all key touch points of capability - people, platforms, technology, research.
Our investments in these capabilities will enable Defence to more effectively counter cyber attacks on Australia, on Defence and our deployed forces.
And this will be part of my Government's broader investment in Australia's cyber defences, resources and capabilities.
It's no secret - nor have we sought to make it one - that the cyber threat landscape is evolving rapidly and soon we will announce, as a Government, our new Cyber Security Strategy, building on our 2016 strategy, and its $230 million investment in incorporating our $156 million cybersecurity commitment from last year.
It will include funding of $1.35 billion over the next decade to enhance the cybersecurity capabilities and assistance provided to Australians through the Australian Signals Directorate, represented here today and of course also the Australian Cyber Security Centre.
The focus will extend well beyond defence capabilities with, for example, over $31 million devoted to enhancing the ability of the ASD to disrupt cyber crime offshore, taking the fight to foreign criminals that seek to target Australians and providing assistance to federal, state and territory law enforcement agencies.
Over $12 million will go to new strategic mitigations and disruption options, enabling ASD and Australia's major telecommunications providers to prevent malicious cyber activity from reaching millions of Australians.
And I want to thank Australian industry, Australian businesses, for the response to my statement of several weeks ago, where we alerted them to the increasing nature of cyber activity in Australia and I'm advised by ASD the response from the business community has been extremely strong, as well as from state and territory and local governments.
We appreciate that. We'd encourage you to continue to engage. You are joined in this great effort with us.
Now, the third objective our Defence Strategy Update is ensuring Australia can respond to threats with credible military force when required.
The strategic environment and the heightened risk of miscalculation in the region makes this a necessity.
There's much more tension in the cord these days.
We need an ADF that is ready now, but is also future-ready, and this means streamlining our capability development acquisition processes as well as bolstering supply chain security, heightened by what we've seen during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Because responding credibly to threats doesn't simply come down to the ADF.
It's about the system that surrounds it, supports it, the ecosystem that it is a part of, and this is the hard bit - it's about the support and structures that has to do with the job.
We learned that with the health system during the pandemic.
It's equally true for our defence capability.
It's about Australia having what we need when we need it and the ability to provide it.
And to achieve these aims, the Government will invest accordingly in resilience and the ADF's ability to respond to an array of challenges at the same time.
That includes investment in the logistics systems that will improve the ADF's ability to deploy globally and support our allies where it is in Australia's interests.
And over time, we will significantly expand the ADF's guided weapons and explosive ordinance stockholdings.
We will modernise and reform the ADF supply system, including expansion of its fuel holdings and deployable fuel and water systems.
We will prioritise our investment in critical military infrastructure, such as the $1.6 billion upgrade to RAAF Base Tindall, where I was recently, just before the pandemic really took hold.
Furthermore, the Government will significantly increase investment in defence space capabilities, a whole new theatre, including a network of satellites so we have an independent communications network and we're going to invest some $7 billion in those space capabilities over the coming decade, working closely with industry and other government agencies, including the Australian Space Agency, headquartered in Adelaide where I was there to open that agency not that long ago.
Working with key partners and allies, we will take advantage of Australia's unique geographical position to better contribute to collective space domain awareness and we will look to enhance the ADF's ability to counter emerging threats in the space domain and ensure our continued access to space-based intelligence and reconnaissance.
And we'll increase our investment in Australia’s technology and innovation programs, partnering with defence industry, research institutions and education providers while also rethinking how Defence can better support during natural disasters.
The defence of Australia is a big team effort and it goes well beyond those who wear uniforms.
It really reaches almost into every aspect of our community and Australian life.
And that's important because we all have a stake in it.
We all have a part to play always to hold dear what we value most.
Ladies and gentlemen, the strategic challenges of today and tomorrow call Australia, in many ways as we've been called before, at difficult times.
To play our part in a region where peace, stability, and prosperity cannot be taken for granted.
2020 has demonstrated once again the multiple challenges and radical uncertainty we face, eerily haunted by similar times many years ago in the 1930s.
Today, with the Indo-Pacific experiencing fundamental shifts and increased threats, our commitment will only deepen.
Our Defence Force will need to be prepared for any future, no matter how unlikely, and hopefully not needed in the worst of circumstances.
And I'm very confident, very confident, in both the leadership and the plans of our Defence Forces, their resources, the people, whether from those in command to those following commands, there is a great culture, a tremendous culture, that will build even stronger in the future under the leadership that I know is in place from Minister Reynolds and the Chief of Defence Force, General Campbell, and Secretary Moriarty.
It has the budget certainty, our defence effort, of the Government's 10-year funding model and our sustained record of taking defence and national security seriously.
I acknowledged Jim Molan before. It was Jim who convinced our Government before we came to government of the strategic need to make the big commitment to have the budget to do the things that Australia needed to defend itself.
We're putting into action all of this, with the Defence Strategic Update and Force Structure plan.
We're Stepping Up, once again, for Australia to protect our sovereignty, to preserve peace, which we value, to help our region meet the challenges of the 21st century together.
Because that is how we will keep Australians safe.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much Ben. It’s tremendous to be here once again. And to the Daily Telegraph. Can I commend you are again on the initiative that you've taken. We've always known you're for Sydney. And what I think you've demonstrated here with this tremendous initiative is that you're not just for Sydney, you’re for the bush as well. And this is an important gathering together as we come together today. It's great to have Michael McCormack the Deputy Prime Minister here with us. A very good friend. And thank you, Michael, for the tremendous leadership you've shown to regional Australia and the passion for it. And that was on display this week, particularly in the parliament and with the many issues and challenges that we're facing. Can I acknowledge the Indigenous owners and I acknowledge the Indigenous people of our country and particularly the country around here the Ngarigo people and I acknowledge the their elders past and present and importantly for the future. Can I also acknowledge any veterans that are here with us here today and serving members of our defence forces and say thank you for your service.
Can I acknowledge the many other ministers and the Leader of the Opposition and others who'll be joining you over the course of these discussions. Can I particularly acknowledge Shane Stone who is here with me, who heads up the Drought and Flood Relief Agency. I've asked Shane to do many difficult jobs in my time, he's asked me to do a few hard jobs on occasion, too. And so we travelled here together and Shane I want to thank you and all of your team and we'll be talking a bit more about that today and your presentation from one end of the country. And it's tremendous to have you here with me here today. Shane Fitzsimmons will be here of course, a good friend and has done a tremendous. job, particularly the bushfires and now moving into new roles. Can I acknowledge the new member for Eden-Monaro. Can I also, I see there's also a former Eden-Monaro member here as well, it’s great to see you here as well.
So many people coming together today and if I was to go through the long list, Ben, I suspect there won't be much more time for questions or the presentation, but it's a tribute to you as to how many people you've been able to draw together here today. And I thank you very much for doing that.
It's a pleasure to be back of course, for the second Daily Telegraph Bush Summit and last year, we had a lot to deal with and that hasn't changed. Drought, floods, fire. And of course, there has been more and the drought that was strangling the life out of so many communities across Australia. And while it has abated, that's true in some respects, as Shane reminds me constantly when you go to the sub soil, when you get beneath the surface, we know that that's still a very real challenge that is being faced in rural and regional communities all around the country. As Michael also reminds me, and while you do see a bit of green, a bit of green, not a green Michael, but a bit of green about the place as you move around. And those of us like me who grew up in the suburbs, you can look at the surface and think it's all okay. It's just, it's good to know that we have the right advice that is helping us understand that these challenges continue. Here in Cooma you also missed much of the rains in March and April but last month and this month well, you've got a lot more. And that's good to see. It was great to see as we came along and driving along here, that things were better, but it's clearly got a long way to go.
This year, Australia, like the rest of the world, is enduring the most significant downturn in our lifetime. That's the challenge now. The COVID-19 pandemic has touched everyone anywhere in the world in some way, shape or form. And I'd like to take this opportunity to thank particularly regional Australians, as the Deputy Prime Minister was doing this, who have felt a heavy burden during this pandemic in a different way than people in Melbourne have been impacted, particularly at the moment. But a very heavy burden nonetheless. I know that state borders are putting enormous stress and strain on Australians, especially those in regional and border communities, including by limiting access to essential health care, keeping people from their work, restricting farmers’ accesses to their property and their markets. I've had hundreds of letters and emails from cross-border communities over the recent weeks and months, as have my colleagues. And they've shared those with me. And today we learnt of the just unthinkable and heartbreaking case where a young family had to take their daughter, I think it was, to Sydney and sadly passed away.
This is heartbreaking stuff. And I can understand people's frustration and indeed anger. This is one of a few other stories that have been raised. Andrea is a teacher from Serviceton in Victoria. I hope I've pronounced that correctly. 1.8km from the border, teachers in border-town South Australia. She was not deemed an essential worker. So a class is without their teacher. Les wrote to me about his 89-year-old dad who lives by himself. He and his wife Linda, visit every fortnight to care for him. And now they can't, and that worries them no end, understandably.&nbsp; Mark has a house and a cattle property on two sides, both sides of the Queensland, New South Wales border. He can't tend to the animals. He says this is harder than the drought when he had to truck water everywhere. I've got hundreds of stories like that and I have no doubt you have more. Real lives all a long way from capital cities. Some restrictions, they've been so difficult to navigate decision making hasn't always been clear nor timely, and that must be improved. And there has been an absence in some cases of due process rights of people as these arrangements have been put in place. Now through the National Cabinet, and what's known as the national coordinating mechanism which sits in the Department of Home Affairs, there has been some progress, but I'd like to tell you there's more because much more needs to be done to ensure that these border movements are made easier. But ultimately to ensure that we get the borders open again.
I do thank premiers, particularly in New South Wales and South Australia, who have engaged with the Commonwealth government to try and resolve many of these issues. And there has been resolution of some. And to address particular problems of particular cases, as I've been raising those and my colleagues have been raising those with Premiers. I thank them for that. And we need, though, to focus on getting to a place where we don't have borders and that they are unnecessary. Keeping Australia as open as possible while managing the twin health crises of economics and health.
So the next step is we've got to get these principles established to ease the impact of these restrictions. We've got to get this done. We've got to put aside the disagreements we've had so far about this. And we've got to get arrangements that can be workable, but also to protect people's health. I'm not suggesting for a second that there aren't health issues here to be managed and there aren’t risks on the health side of opening the borders. Of course there are. But there are risks on both sides that have to be weighted and assessed, and balanced. Living with the virus until there is a vaccine requires that balanced assessment. The risk of COVID-19 does not justify anything on its own. Everything always has to be measured in the relative impacts. On borders I've made this point consistently - that while the scale of the victory outbreak meant that border restrictions between New South Wales and Victoria were regrettably necessary, and they were and are and remain, this does not diminish the principle that border restrictions, especially where there are no, or very low cases in regional areas, they cannot and should not be sustained. Australia was not built to have internal borders. In fact, the very point of federation was not to have them. That was the point of Australia. That was plan A for Australia. I'm for plan A. And so was Alfred Deakin, a Victorian father of Federation, who said when he was referring – in fact to external affairs powers which has been topical of late: “The whole scope and spirit of the Constitution, require that say for the purposes of their domestic policies within their own domains the states should be blended and absorbed into one political entity. They may still appear in some respects as a body of allied states, but…to the world without it, they have become and must remain a nation, a commonwealth, one and indivisible.”
Now he puts it better than I do. But that is so true, we must be one and indivisible as a nation. Whether we're from the bush, whether we're from the city, whether we're from Queensland, the territory, Western Australia, we must be Australians first. And must not allow this crisis, this pandemic, to force us to retreat into provincialism. That's not the answer. And that's why I've tasked the Commonwealth chief medical officer to work with the medical expert panel to get a clear, clinical definition of a hot spot. Now, this will be essential for states and territories to establish containment strategies and move away from border restrictions.
Now, that work was tasked out of the last National Cabinet meeting and agreed by the National Cabinet that the medical expert panel should have such a definition. And we will have one. Whether it's the Commonwealth one, or one agreed by the states. But there will be. And that will be necessary, I think, with the transparency of arrangements that are put in place by states and territories. Now, clear and easily understandable hotspot definition has been used in overseas jurisdictions since the beginning of the pandemic. And they can be used in a similar way here in Australian states and territories. I was speaking only to the Danish prime minister this week about how they would do it. And it's instructive.
In many of the border communities, residents are simply trying to move from one COVID-free region to another COVID-free region. And so we need to get borders open based on a common set of fair simple principles taking in to account the advice of health professionals that is conveyed transparently. That doesn't mean there can't be borders. That doesn't mean there can't be border restrictions. And it doesn't mean the border restrictions in circumstances are not necessary. This is not a binary topic. It is one that has to be considered sensibly, reasonably and the balance right.
It is reasonable for Australians, particularly regional Australians, to have access to medical assistance, to get to work and to access their own properties. Where permits are required it is reasonable for Australians to expect that their applications would be dealt with quickly and that there is an appeal process. Borders cost communities and the economies they constrain. They must be proportionate these restrictions to the risk it presents. And like any restriction in a pandemic they must only be there where health evidence transparently supports that position and only for as long and as it is absolutely necessary. Borders are not substitutes as New South Wales, I believe, has demonstrated for the core defenses against the virus.
International quarantine, testing, tracing, COVIDSafe behaviours, the distancing, staying home if you're sick, getting tested and outbreak containment, particularly at that local level. We saw a tremendous result of that in north-western Tasmania early on in the pandemic. Local outbreak containment. Very effective. It protected Tasmania more broadly from what could have been a far more serious situation.
Now, the freight movement code which the DPM has put in place and congratulations for doing that, Michael. He knows there's still bugs and things. We've got to get out of that. Still bit too many bits of paper, but Big Mac will get it sorted. I've no doubt about that. We're seeing improvements in some areas, but there need to be more. And David Littleproud is leading the agriculture ministers, Deputy Leader of the Nationals, and finalising an agricultural workers code as a priority. We agreed that last Friday that will be taken forward and we'll be dealing with that next Friday at the National Cabinet. At the same time we're opening borders there needs to be a principle based approach to easing restrictions, particularly as, say, Melbourne comes up at a level four and back the level three and hopefully in the rest of Victoria, level three back into more eased restrictions. The principles for easing restrictions need to be simple, they need to be transparent. They've got to be driven by data, they've got to be location specific, they've got to be co-designed with industry where appropriate. You got to talk to the businesses and the industries that are involved. They've got to be well communicated. They've got to be based on a demonstrated preparedness, ensuring that the public risk management practices are all in place. We do not want to see a reversion take place when you're trying to come out. And so we have to do that safely. And our job, federal, state and territory governments is to achieve this. And I know there are frustrations, but I can assure you when we all get in the room again, we'll be working to try and sort this out. We are achieving this to save lives and livelihoods. And there are key things we need to do. A health strategy, an economic strategy and ongoing behaviour changes. And that is all but the Australia be part of the plan. We are still in the midst of this battle. And so we need to keep pushing on with our response and particularly on the fight to save jobs and build jobs and rebuild businesses and industries, which I will turn to now.
Regional and agriculture driven COVID recovery. That's what we want to see. And from my first days as prime minister, just over two years ago, when the DPM and I and Bridget McKenzie, I think at the time, and David Littleproud was there from memory as well. And Scotty Buchholz was with us. And we went up and through Longreach and we made it out to Quilpie. And I met the Tully family up there and I'll never forget that. And from there to more recently, being out in fire-affected Wingello north of Goulburn early this year after the fires. What remains with me to this day about all of these and there were certainly other visits up through North Queensland during the floods with Shane. I'm always struck by the positive outlook, despite the circumstances of regional and rural Australians. You're patient. You understand the longer game. You watch out for your neighbours. It's an earthy determination to outlast whatever hand you’re often dealt. That stoicism, that capacity to adapt, that strength that is required when faced with adversity as well as the untold costs and of the hidden and masked pain that you endure. That is an inspiration to all Australians, I think, as we face the challenges of this particular pandemic. And here at this bush summit I believe that that gives us the basis of taking a similar approach to the issues we're all facing.
So I want to talk about a few more things we are doing to invest in that capacity, to build on that plan, that resilience and support for regional Australia, and particularly the agricultural sector. Our Ag2030 plan a $100 billion industry by 2030. The government's backing the industry's bold plan to see agriculture in Australia grow to become a $100 billion sector by 2030. It's ambitious. It's especially given the many challenges we face of drought, floods, fire, COVID-19, facing another cyclone season this year. But we're not shying away from doing what we can to help the industry achieve. Last year at the Bush Summit, I announced there would be a national plan to support agriculture, fisheries and forestry achieve that goal. And while the pandemic is, as I'm sure you would understand, has delayed that formal plan, I can assure you that the Minister David Littleproud is working to ensure we get that plan in place and work towards achieving that goal.
What's guiding that plan is, first, the foundation of trade and growing trade. Trade grows the economy and it creates jobs. We don't get rich selling stuff to ourself. That's what we're about as an outward looking, externally faced trading nation. And when we came to government, preferential access to markets accounted for around 26 per cent for our two-way trade. That's now more than 70 per cent. People looking for more options for trade. All the 70 per cent of that trade is now covered by those agreements. We've recently completed the Indonesian agreement. There's a digital commerce agreement with Singapore. The EU agreement is the one we're working on now. The UK as well, they're the next cabs off the rank. Market access means more trade. It means more money in farming pockets and jobs in regional communities. And that's because the farm sector exports around two thirds of its output. Our trade strategy has meant that the farm sector is withstanding the blow of COVID-19, keeping supply chains open for our high value agricultural and fisheries exports, despite widespread disruption to the global air freight sector. And again, I commend the Deputy Prime Minister. Our International Freight Assistance Mechanism, which is designed with the Minister for Trade, is facilitating a one billion dollar support to exports by supporting nearly 4000 flights from nine Australian locations to 63 international destinations, maintaining thousands of regional jobs and regional food security in the process. What's known as the IFAM initiative has supported shipments of chilled lamb from western Victoria and the Middle East. Tuna shipments from Ulladulla to Japan. Shipments of abalone, lobster, oysters, lettuce and dairy from Tasmania to China, Taiwan and Singapore. And we will continue to defend the interests of our agricultural exports to see disruptions to any trade with Chinese consumers more recently.
We are disappointed about the actions against our barley exports and indeed with our beef processing. There's been a further announcement today, but these are not new, new initiatives. These have been happening for some months. And they don't just happen overnight. They come forward over a number of weeks. Also, the announcement investigation into our wine producers and we'll work with industry on those issues and address the facts of each case. And I'm optimistic that we will resolve those issues, not least because trade with China brings benefits to both countries.
Our high quality beef, lamb, seafood and wine exports to China have grown in recent years for a very simple reason. They're good. Chinese consumers like them and they've got reason to. Same reason we like it. We sell things that they want to buy. We buy things they want to sell. It's a two-way relationship. It's in both our interests for it to be maintained and that's what we'll continue to do. Just as imports from of manufactured goods assist us, particularly when it comes to important agricultural equipment on occasions which boost the productivity of our farmers.
Our AG 2030 plan is also guided by the principle of sustainability and I'm determined to get our farmers the tools to adapt to a changing climate, and build a sustainable agricultural base for the future. An essential part of that is understanding the centrality of soils to agricultural productivity. I mentioned this last year and we all owe a great debt to Major General Michael Jeffery for many things, many, many things as a former government and military leader. But as our first National Soils Advocate he was a champion for the sustainability and integrated management of our soils, water, vegetation and animals over many years. His passion on this is infectious. And this year it's with a heavy heart that I announce that General Jeffery has made a decision to step aside because of his ill health. However, the work continues and that's what always that matters to me. And so I'm pleased to announce that the Honourable Penny Wensley has been appointed Australia's new National Soils Advocate. And she will continue that great work. Penny grew up in Toowoomba and is a former diplomat and of course, a former and esteemed governor of Queensland. And I know she will continue to General Jeffrey's great work to protect, maintain and restore the health of our landscapes, and support sustainability of food security in our farming communities. And I look forward to working with Penny as we progress our national soils strategy which will be delivered as part of the 21-22 Budget. We don't just want better a approach to soils, as you all know we need a better approach to water and achieving that is fundamental to achieve in 2030. Our national water grid is about taking a national approach towards security and better protect Australia's farmers and regional communities against future droughts. That's what the Deputy Prime Minister has set out. Michael McCormack has set out in establishing this national water grid. His initiative. It's an authority in developing a future pipeline of projects so that regional communities and farmers get the water infrastructure they need. And establishing that grid as the Commonwealth water infrastructure delivery agent, it's time now for the states and territories to get cracking on with their part of the job or working with us to deliver that water infrastructure. Now four projects have been delivered and we have committed to 18 others. And it's now time to move on to critical projects from feasibility to construction.
We’ve had a lot of studies and need to build more water infrastructure, not just reports.&nbsp; We've invested in 55 such studies, we're focused on delivering the projects that stack up and delivering the water. It's essential work because our climate is becoming warmer and dryer. A direct consequence of climate change. We're grateful for the rains of recent times, of course. But we know that even in areas where there is a green veneer, that below the grass, as I've said, the soil is still very dry. And of course, we know, there are regions still in profound drought. I want to acknowledge the tremendous work of Major General Stephen Day when he was National Drought Coordinator and as I referred to it today, to Shane Stone, the coordinator general of the National Drought and North Queensland Flood Response and Recovery Agency. Now in that agency they're focused on three things.
First, responding to the immediate need of providing relief. Practical measures that help farmers and communities right now and help them hold on until the drought breaks. Second, to sustain communities so they were still there when the drought was over. And third, which is a longer term work, making our country more drought resilient.
And you can't ever make a country full drought-proof but you can make it more drought resilient. And so we are better prepared for the next drought when it comes. That means deepening our understanding better, integrating our management, soil vegetation, water, it means having and sharing better data and the latest technology. It means connecting industries and communities to make sure they have the information they need to make the decisions that will help them survive and flourish. All of our efforts were backed by substantive commitment of $10m for 26 separate measures to support our drought response. And I acknowledge particularly the work of David Littleproud, Minister for Drought, for his leadership in ensuring we were getting the funds to where it needed to get to. With the drought and indeed, the flood, bushfire recovery and even the pandemic, we have take an approach that listens first, identifies needs and gaps and then fills them. And if we have to make changes then we do. It's why in June we extended the farm household allowance payment for those who had exhausted their entitlements.&nbsp;
And that has helped more than 15,000 farmers and their partners. And we're making the investments in the longer term. The $5bn Future Drought Fund is an important part of the government's drought response, resilience and preparedness plan. That plan means sustainable investment will make, there will be sustainable investment of some $100 million out of that Future Fund available each year for projects that help our farmers and communities become more prepared for and resilience to the impacts of drought. The Future Drought Fund is not about responding to the current drought. It's about being better prepared for the next one. And just last month, the Minister for Agriculture, David Littleproud, announced the first suite of programmes under the fund. Together, they're worth almost $90 million. And they're designed to help with everything from business deals to climate data, research and innovation hubs and community resilience projects.
Now two of these programs open today. That's the $7.45m Drought Resilience Leaders Programme, and the $3.5m Networks to Build Drought Resilience Programme, which is open for applications today.
These projects are about supporting people, develop their leadership skills and put those skills to use in helping farmers and agricultural communities prepare for future droughts. And it's about helping establishing mentoring relationships so that the lessons and skills acquired over decades are passed on to the next generation. And as we respond to the drought, it's been clear to me that the people who know what's really needed are the people who live it every day.
And that's why today we're announcing the establishment of a Regional Recovery Officer Network across the country. A national drought and flood agency that Shane leads has put in place 19 regional recovery officers right across the country. A further four positions are being added to the team immediately. Many of them- a number of them are here with him today. These Regional Recovery Offices are our drought boots on the ground ensuring the governments understand the unique challenges farmers and communities in regions, that they're listening, that they're reporting, that they're working across government and across community to develop solutions and solutions that work.
Now, there are many other issues, Ben, that I wanted to raise today, but time's going to beat us today. And I can post those for people to read on a later occasion because I do want to get to questions. The announcements we've made today go further to our preparedness, to our resilience. But they also go to the immediate need. The comments I made today about addressing the challenges of a pandemic, but they're also intended to address the opportunities on the other side of the pandemic. And whether it's in the bush or whether it's in the cities. Wherever you are in Australia today, we will get through this. We are getting through this better than most and many of the countries in the world today. And there's a reason for that. And it's you. The way Australians respond to crisis. And so much of I think of the character of our nation in a crisis has been formed in the stories and livelihoods of rural and regional Australians. Even those of us from the city will look romantically and sentimentally out to those amazing stories of rural and regional Australia. And many of us these days who live in cities can speak of our own generations in times past, who came from rural and regional Australia like mine but many generations ago. That's where we draw our strength from. And those stories are being lived out today, as they were hundreds of years ago, and indeed in our Indigenous communities over thousands upon thousands of years. That's where we draw our strength from. And that is why we will prevail.
Additional speech extracts
Innovation is also a key element of our Ag2030 plan.
Australian farmers are amongst the most innovative and adaptive in the world.
Agriculture Minister, David Littleproud, has been the driver behind making sure Australian farmers continue to be the best in the world.
That means bridging the gaps in research, development and the adoption of new practices, tools and technologies - and bringing researchers and farmers and agricultural businesses closer together.
That’s why we’re investing $86 million to establish eight Adoption and Innovation Hubs around the country.
Hubs will be established in each of Australia’s key climatic and agricultural zones - and I am pleased that one of the zones will be here in Southern NSW.
Hubs will be coordinated by a lead regional university – a new National Centre for Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation.
We’ll establish the Hubs, and the new National Centre, though open competitive processes over the coming months.
As well, integral to our Ag-2030 Plan is building the economic capacity of our regions through infrastructure and stronger supply chains.
Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack, and I want our regions and producers to be able to access the capital, infrastructure and connectivity they need to compete effectively.
As part of our response to COVID-19, we’re boosting and bringing forward investment in infrastructure to help communities weather the crisis and recover.
We have committed $1.5 billion to shovel-ready, priority transport infrastructure projects identified by states and territories and small, road safety projects across Australia, with many of these projects in our regions. This is an additional $4.2 billion of accelerated projects announced with the states at the end of 2019.
We've also provided a $1.8 billion boost across Australia for road and community projects delivered through local governments.
Since last November, my Government has brought forward or injected additional investment totalling nearly $9.3 billion in infrastructure construction activity.
We’re changing the way freight moves along the eastern seaboard by building the Inland Rail from Melbourne to Brisbane.
This project just doesn’t benefit producers - it benefits consumers - lowering the costs of transportation, and reducing the time it takes for produce to leave the market and reach the dinner table.
Nationals Leader, Michael McCormack is very much a leader in the Fischer and indeed Anderson mould. One of the great sons of Southern NSW was Tim Fischer - and he’d be delighted to know we are boosting railway networks - including making investments in regional railways in Victoria.
And integral to connecting our regional communities is 21st century telecommunications - and that’s why we have committed $380 million to the Mobile Black Spot Program where more than 1,200 new mobile towers have been funded to date, with 861 now on air.
We’re also connecting regional communities health care professionals through Medicare subsidised telehealth services, and via their local general practices, with thousands more doctors and nurses heading to rural practices over the next decade.
So we are putting in place a comprehensive plan: more trade; better water management; a soils plan; drought resilience; and investments in infrastructure and regional supply chains.
All of which are about building the long term capability of our regions and investing in their potential.
The Region
I now want to say a few words about this region.
It’s been a tough year following the Black Summer bushfires.
This region suffered terribly during summer – but there has been tremendous work since then.
I know Andrew Colvin and the National Bushfire Recovery Agency have been working closely with the community to drive recovery.
There’s been relief to the Snowy Monaro Regional Council to rebuild assets, and provide economic support and funding for wildlife rescue.
$65 million is being provided to help the forestry industry recover.
Bushfire recovery grants are also helping local communities and businesses get back on their feet - well over 600 local businesses benefiting from grants.
And looking to the future, this region will benefit enormously from the Snowy 2.0 project.
Snowy 2.0 will create thousands of new jobs, support investment in the local region and take pressure off power prices.
More than 500 people are already at work on Snowy 2.0 and we expect it will create around 4,000 direct jobs over the life of the project.
I am sure I will be here many more times as this project unfolds.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, John, I'm pleased to be right here right now, here in South Australia. I've been busting to come to South Australia and there's a lot of other Sydneysiders who'll be right behind me. Thanks for the wonderful decision made by your Premier. It's going to be an $800 million dollar boon for South Australia because of the economic leadership and health leadership of your premier.
So it's wonderful to be here. It's wonderful to be back here in South Australia. It's wonderful to be here with you, Steven, and you, John. And I'll come back to that in just a second. But before I go any further, can I acknowledge that the indigenous peoples and their elders past, present and future. Can I also acknowledge any veterans who are here with us today, any sitting members of our defence forces who are here with us today and say to them thank you for your service to our amazing country.
Can I also welcome all of my colleagues who are here today of course led&nbsp; ably by Senator Simon Birmingham, who is taking on more and more responsibilities in the federal leadership team and has provided a great stewardship of the South Australian team since our re-election at the last federal election, he is ably joined in my Cabinet by Anne Ruston who’s been an absolute find in bringing her into the Cabinet and the role that she performs on the expenditure review committee, as we've worked over these many months now towards this Budget. And Anne it's it's great to be working alongside you in that capacity, as she has one of the hardest jobs in the government as Social Services Minister. I should know I used to do it. And it's a tough job and particularly at a time like this but you blend the compassion with the responsibility I think incredibly well. And so congratulations. The whole team is pretty much here today, James Stevens is here, Tony Pasin’s here, Nicolle Flint. I'm still, every single day I come back to South Australia I just think how well Nicolle did in last election and how amazingly she was supported across, right across the South Australian division. So long as Nicolle Flint is the member, we will be a government. And that is how important her role has been and the work she’s been doing particularly in, as a member of the whip’s team has also been very important in these rather extraordinary times. My good mate Rowan Ramsey, we came into parliament together and it's great to be continuing to serve alongside you, David Fawcett is here, of course, as he always would be. David's a dear friend, and it's great to have him here for my first opportunity to welcome Senator McLachlan to be here with us as a Senator, as part of my team and it's wonderful to have you as part of the team.
But to you, John. Thank you for your very kind introduction. No wonder I like coming back to South Australia so often with those sort of generous introductions. But, John, thank you for the tremendous work you have done, not only for this state, when you served as Premier, and not only for our country, when you served so ably overseas in New York and Los Angeles, but you've come back and you’ve served the Party and for all of us, and I know John would understand this deeply as well, and Steven, all of us who have had the great privilege to serve in our parliaments around the country whether here in South Australia or federally, we know we only have that opportunity, as John Howard always used to say, because of the gift that is being provided to us by the members of our party and we're very appreciative of that. And so John's commitment to serve in this phase has been tremendous and has yielded a South Australian Liberal government, a South Australian Liberal Premier, it has yielded a federal election victory as well. And to bring those two together and also Steven and I can stand before you here today as Premier and Prime Minister. John, you've been a key steward of that. And you know, about as many people know, I enjoy my NRL no one knows what that means when I'm here in South Australia- you'll get to know, the State of Origin is coming, thanks to the Premier and you'll be able to enjoy what, and you may get an insight as to why I like the game so much. But, you know, when you see a good player on another team and you've got a hiring round coming up, you like to see that you can secure that player for your team, and at a federal level to be able to be able to have John now serving as federal President is tremendous. I think it's great for us. His experience, his deep love of the party right across all elements of the party is well understood here in South Australia. And it's the way John, you’ve brought the South Australian division, I think, together here which was so critical to Steven’s victory. And that remains always within any political movement, you've got to keep everybody together. And that's a big task for us all the time. And we are succeeding in that task here in South Australia, we are succeeding in that task federally. And I know John is exactly the right person to lead our federal organisation as we go into the next election. So thank you very much John I appreciate you taking it up.
To Steve Marshall, it's a joy to be with him. Steven has become a very, very good friend over many years now. And we enjoy serving together in the National Cabinet. We enjoy spending time with each other. And I always get charged up when I spend time with Steven. He's passionate about South Australia, whether it's space, or whether it’s Osborne, or whether it’s getting money for the Adelaide Zoo. Whatever it happens to be, if it's about South Australia, he lights up like a Christmas tree every single time. And it's just hard to avoid, and be affected by that incredible optimism and enthusiasm that Steven shows. And that, I think, has really lifted South Australia back. Not just economically, but more broadly, and to hear those migration figures Steven that is a big day, when you cross- when you cross that, I remember when Will Hodgman, who had that similar challenge in Tasmania, bringing Tasmania back, the day when he saw those figures turn around and look where Tasmania's going now. And South Australia is doing exactly the same thing under your leadership Steven so, there's plenty more for us to do, and I was particularly pleased to hear about those skills figures as well and we're doing even more on that.
We are, of course, in a extraordinary time. None of us, I think when we went to the last election in May 2019, could have imagined what 2020 would have become. There was something circulating on social media. And it was talking about that film Back to the future when the doc said to Michael J Fox’ character, as he sat in the in the delorean, he said, whatever you do, don't set it to 2020. And sadly, that has been our experience this year. Not just here in Australia, but all around the world. It has been a hard and a tough year, like, few, we’ve ever known. We have known tougher years in this country. But you've got to go back a fair way. You've got to go back to the Second World. We’ve got to go back to the times of the Depression. Now, these times are not as hard as those times, but it has required the same sort of resilience and response that was characteristic of those times. To give you a sense of the scale of this, of course, we've seen almost a million people around the world lose their lives, we've seen over 800 Australians fall victim to COVID-19. We see a global economy that is going to fall by around, has fallen by around 6 per cent. The GFC, the Treasurer tells me, the world economy fell by about 0.1 per cent. So we're talking about a 6 per cent fall in our global economy. That gives you some sense of the scale of what the world is dealing with at the moment, and what we are dealing with right here.
In Australia, we have had a 7 per cent fall in our size of our economy in the June quarter. The last time we saw a fall of not even that magnitude, the largest fall prior to that was just around, just over 2 per cent in 1974. So we are dealing with a set of conditions at the moment, which means you can't do government as usual. You can't do politics as usual. And our government, as has the South Australian government, have understood that. We understand that during this time of course, you have to have an unprecedented response. You have to question all the things that you do and you have to stay very focussed on the objective you're seeking to achieve. And as Steven has rightly said, that objective has two components. It is to save lives. And it is to save livelihoods. It is the twin crisis, of the health challenge and of the economic challenge. And I was proud of Australians when I was able in the recorded address that I gave the United Nations General Assembly, which aired this morning, to be able to talk about how Australia, as John has referred to, that we are doing better than almost every other country in the world. When you put those two things together. Because it's not just about having low numbers of cases. There are other countries who have lower cases, but they are also countries who have had an even more devastating economic impact. That’s not what success looks like. Success does not look like only having success on the health front or the economic front. You have to balance both of these things. And I think Australians understand. And I think Australians have been enormously understanding of the context and the challenges that we are facing. Of course, Australians don’t want to see, and I don't want to see higher levels of debt, and bigger burdens. But the times we all understand and require such a response. The failure to provide one, is unimaginable. And that is what led our government so quickly and so forcefully to respond in the way we have.&nbsp;
It is built on a platform of a COVIDSafe health plan that ensures that we can suppress the virus and the work that Steven referred to with the National Cabinet has been critical to getting all of those elements in place. It hasn't always gone exactly to plan and there have been massive setbacks. The situation in Victoria an obvious example. But that said, even with those setbacks, the success we've had in suppressing the virus compared to other parts of the world has been extraordinary. Now it is built on ensuring that internationally we secure those borders. It was built on ensuring that we maintain COVIDSafe behaviours. The social distancing as you're practising here today and the hand hygiene and the distance rules between us and all of these things, that habit has been very important. And the challenge for us is, whether here in South Australia, as South Australia, continues to open up, as in other places, is that we don't lose that. Because losing that could have quite serious ramifications. And we must remain vigilant.
There is also the COVIDSafe vaccine. We’ve committed $1.7 billion dollars to ensure that every single Australian as well as those in our Pacific family of nations for whom we have a special responsibility, will be able to get access to the vaccine. Whether that's the Oxford vaccine through AstraZeneca or the vaccine that's being worked up through the University of Queensland and CSL. We're also part of the COVAX buyers club, that’s effectively what it is, to ensure that we're taking positions and that the ability to access other potential vaccines that are being developed all around the world. Having a plan for the vaccine, of course, as part of our COVIDSafe plan, and then, of course, there is the work we've done on our practises on COVIDSafe to ensure that we can open up Australia. To ensure that we can do that in a safe way, we have to build the hospitals’ capacity, whether it's here in South Australia or elsewhere in the country, so that the virus will not overwhelm, we believe if it were ever to break again, that is very important. We have put in place the testing and the tracing and the outbreak containment, which will become very important, particularly here in South Australia, as South Australia rightly opens up again, and New South Wales my home state, I think, has led the way in the testing, tracing, process of being able to ensure that they have been able to remain open. And at the same time be able to suppress the virus under many extreme circumstances I should stress, and I know Steven has looked closely at the way that NSW and has worked closely with Gladys Berejiklian to ensure that they are all on the same standing and that will become important.
But it was also about ensuring there was an economic lifeline provided to Australians. See, our response now is to ensure that having put in place the strong health disciplines which we must maintain, our focus also must now be focusing on getting the jobs back, getting the businesses open again, getting Australians livelihoods back. And their lives. We cannot allow the virus to tell us how we live. We have to live with the virus. That’s the key. And that can be done and it can't be done in ignorance and denial, it can’t be done thinking, oh, it's not real or it isn't there. Of course it’s there. Go to Europe, go to the U.K., go to other parts of the world. You can't pretend it's not there. It's there. You've got to have smart policies and programmes to live with it, which is what you're doing here, which is what has been done in so many other parts of the country. And when you have that approach, you can get the jobs back. You know, since the virus hit, and the pandemic began, we have now pulled back some 400,000 more jobs that were lost. And that's on measured employment. It's even bigger when you take in to those who whose hours were reduced to zero. Still technically employed, that figure’s 760,000. 60 per cent of the jobs lost and those jobs that reduced to zero hours have come back in just the last few months here in South Australia, it’s 69 per cent of the jobs lost since the start of the pandemic are back. It's 70 per cent in New South Wales. These are tremendous results. The jobs are coming back, but we've got so much more work to do. So in providing that lifeline that we did through JobKeeper and JobSeeker, through the cash flows, all of these things. Some $3.3 billion dollars here in South Australia alone on JobKeeper. About another $1.6 billion dollars on cash flows support to businesses to keep them going. All of this meaning that they could get through the most difficult parts of the pandemic and be there on the other side to open their doors again and bring the hours back, to bring people, this was to plan. This is the plan to provide that stability and support and certainty at a time when most Australians had never known a time of greater uncertainty. And that has been done at great cost. But necessary, targeted, temporary, proportioned, principles based. To ensure that Australia could weather that storm.
But it hasn't just been about cushioning the blow. It's also about the recovery. It's also about the fight back. It's also about the road back and that road back has been supported. And you will see more in the Budget just over a week's time where the Treasurer has been doing an absolutely outstanding job. That road back is about businesses getting access to credit, the businesses that have gone through a difficult time are not dragged under through arcane insolvency laws. It's about business being out to get back because we're seeking to reduce the red tape on how they operate, whether it's on the EPBC Act or many other issues. Getting major projects going. This this road back is all about making sure that businesses can do business more easily for one simple reason, to put people back into jobs, as the Treasurer said the other day, our recovery is about jobs first. Everything else will serve that goal. Jobs come first and for jobs to be there, businesses have to be successful. They have to be able to operate, they have to be able to not just survive, they need to be able to thrive and expand. And that's why it's so important that our plan is not just about cushioning the blow, not just about providing the comforting support of record levels of income supports. It's also about the process of boosting and stimulating demand through infrastructure projects. And the skills investments that the premier and I have been- 15,000 additional places under JobTrainer this year alone. That's just this year. A key part of our recovery plan.
But then there is the longer term, because we just don't want businesses to recover. We want them to grow into an environment in our economy where they can succeed and be more competitive and be able to take on the rest of the world. And win. And that means you have to continue to address things like skills. It means that you have to address the infrastructure challenges that Australia is involved in. And so whether it's the Flinders Link project, some $141 billion we have there, the $750 million going into the Darlington upgrade project, slashing that daily commute. Or the $145 million for shovel ready projects throughout South Australia, including North South Rail Freight Project. And $867 million dollar non-stop, six lane Northern connector, to finalising the design of the $231 million Ovingham level crossing removal project. All of these projects are essential to our growth into the future. But, including there are two areas that I wanted to focus on particularly, here in South Australia you understand the importance of ensuring critical sectors are successful. Whether it’s the defence industry in which we work closely, or whether it is the space industry which the Premier and I are wildly excited about. It is tremendous to see what's happening. These are critical sectors and there are so many others, n advanced manufacturing, which provides great opportunities here in South Australia. And we want to see those realised. The ag processing, they all have great opportunities as part of Australia's recovery and rebuild for the future. And there are two projects we've been working on to aid that. The first of those you have heard a lot about recently with the energy minister, Angus Taylor. For manufacturing, and advanced manufacturing to work here in Australia, in the future, it must have access to reliable, affordable energy. It has to. Andrew Liveris, Former head of Dow in the United States, very successful manufacturing chief executive in the United States. When he came back to Australia and he is advising us working with Karen Andrews, and other Ministers, he said, you've got to get the gas. You’ve got to get the gas. Because you don't get the gas, you can’t get the manufacturing jobs, if you’re up in Elizabeth and you're looking for jobs in manufacturing. You need gas. Gas does two things. It's a feedstock, it is an important source of reliable power generation and it firms and makes viable as the transition continues, our renewable energy sector. It is the link. It is what enables us to go forward with an ambitious plan around that advanced manufacturing sector in this country. That will bring income and that will also bring jobs. But to do it, you have to make the decisions about how they're getting access to affordable energy. And gas is a central component of that. It forms part of a longer term, as we said, technology roadmap, which involves hydrogen and many other important technologies which need to be developed to ensure that we can make steel, that we can make aluminium in this country, and that we can build things with it. But without that reliable, affordable energy, that won’t happen.
We remain committed, as always, to the important targets that we have set, that we have met when it comes to emissions reduction, and you don't, as Alan Finkel has said in today's press, you don't have to lose jobs and close industries to lower emissions. You can do both. And we will do both. And we will demonstrate how that can be done, that you can make things in this country and meet those commitments at the same time. Now, as you know, not everybody agrees with us when it comes to this. Here in South Australia, their leading South Australian, or one of them- although I suspect there’s contention over that too Simon, is Mark Butler. Now Mark Butler does not believe that gas has a role to play in the future of Australian Industry. It's an extraordinary position for him to have taken. I would have thought in South Australia more than anywhere else where that sort of thinking forced the lights to go out in South Australia. That he wants to remain stuck in the dark. Where Labor’s energy policy is. Now, there are other views in the Labor Party. The Member for Hunter, understands that this is what's necessary, but I don't think he's winning the argument. Not when he's referred to as the idiot from Hunter by one of his own shadow cabinet colleagues. That is not a healthy debate that's going on inside the Labor Party when it comes to energy. They are torn and they are riven and they are divided. By contrast, our government is unified on this. We all understand the need for reliable, affordable energy. We all understand the need to ensure that we're moving to a lower emissions' future. And that these two, with the right technology can be achieved. And that's why the energy minister has made it clear. It's about technology, not taxes. It’s about technology, not taxes. We can meet these challenges, as Australia always has, as we have faced up to the challenges we've had here, as we have addressed COVID and bushfires and so many other things. We are a resourceful, innovative people. And we can make this Australia, by pursuing that kind of approach.
And final area, is in industrial relations. Now that has enabled us through the COVID period to get together union leaders, business leaders and put them in a room. My expectations of this have always been measured. And there's still some, there is still some time to go and some progress has been made and progress may well still be made. And I do want to thank the ACTU and Sally McManus for the role that the ACTU has played in coming to that table. How thankful I will be, we'll see, in terms of what comes out of that process. But there has been a good faith engagement and I welcome that. But if you forgive me for being a Sydneysider for one second, what is going on at the moment at Port Botany is an absolute disgrace. While you've got the leadership of the ACTU starting to sit down with businesses in Australia to try and find a way forward, as to how we get people back in to jobs, the MUA over in Sydney is holding the country to ransom with extortionate claims which has seen ships backed up, out at sea, trying to get to port, trying to bring things into our country at a time when we are in a COVID national recession, the worst elements of the union movement and the militancy of the MUA is on display. They’re not picking a fight with the government. They're picking a fight with farmers. They're picking a fight with Australians who just want to get household goods into their home. And at a time when Australians have been tightening their belts and looking after each other, the MUA just wants to look after itself. And I'm so disappointed. It's not anger. It's just disappointment. There are other elements of the union movement who are seeking to do the right thing. I commend them for it. And I'll give them the shout out and they deserve it. But when we see that sort of militancy and selfishness at a time of great national crisis, I can only denounce it. That is not the future direction of this country. That is not the path we want to go down. And I think it is incumbent on the union movement to call this out. At the end of the day, it affects our national supply chains right across the country. And it's not okay. And it should not be done. And I hope that they will see sense and they will be pulled into line by their other colleagues in the union movement because it is, it is drawing down, I think, the reputation of the union movement at a time of [inaudible].
But let me finish on a more optimistic note John, I better do that. Australia has done so incredibly well. So incredible well over these many months. And I'm so proud of Australians. I’m proud of South Ausrtalians. I'm proud of Victorians who had to go through an enormous amount over recent months, but they’ve stayed the course, they've kept their heads down. They’ve found their way through and they can see the light at the end of the tunnel. I know they just want to be out again. I know they want to be going about their lives again. What happened in Victoria was a reminder that we can never be complacent about the health, the systems that we have and we must remain vigilant or we could go into that space again. But what I'm inspired by, is the continued resilience of Australians through this crisis, it has enabled us, it has empowered us. When I look at what we've been able to achieve as a country and I look at what has happened in other parts of the world, they look at Australia and they say, I want what they’re having. And they’re right to. And we’ve shared so much of what we’ve done with other countries around the world. And so, as I said to the United Nations General Assembly today, Australia, although we had been hit by this, like all other countries, we've been able to cushion that blow. But more importantly, we're fighting our way back. We want to see that occurring in all the other countries of the world. Because unless the globe can move forward, then that will also hamper Australia's progress.
Now, Senator Antic is here as well today, I didn’t see him on the way in so I want to acknowledge him here today it’s great to have you here of course as part of the team. But in concluding, can I thank all of you for your passionate support of our great Liberal cause, I hope you feel that in the governments that you've done so much to see elected at both a state and federal level, that you can sit there today feeling in every measure an equal partner in the work of our governments. You are part of the work we do, you've enabled the work we are doing, and you encourage us on to deal with the challenges ahead.
Thank you all very much.


Prime Minister
Prime Minister: Mr President,
This is an historic and unusual gathering of our General Assembly.
We gather not in the great city of New York, but from among our people, from across the nations of the earth, as together we face the same storm.
A global pandemic that has claimed the lives of at least 1 million souls that we know of and has plunged our world into a global economic recession.
These events reminds us of our shared humanity, our interdependence and, indeed, the value of our common hope.
To get an education, a job, a livelihood.
To be safe, healthy and free.
To live in a clean and unpolluted environment.
In such times of crisis, there is actually an opportunity for our shared humanity to overwhelm the differences that usually beset us and to focus once again on pursuing our common hope. Which is why we gather.
I speak to you today from Sydney, Australia’s largest city and the ancient home of the Gadigal people.
One of Australia’s many Indigenous peoples who have cared for our continent for more than 60,000 years. The world’s oldest continuous living indigenous culture, and so I acknowledge their elders past, present and future as I make these remarks from Sydney today.
Australia is contending with this storm of the global COVID-19 pandemic and recession with great determination.
Our aim is simple, to deny the virus the destruction it seeks to visit upon us, upon our lives and our livelihoods.
Sadly, over 800 Australians have lost their lives to COVID-19. But in comparative terms we have fared better than most and we are grateful for that.
Our COVID-19 case and fatality rates are a fraction of those across the globe.
And while our economy has not been spared the blow of recession, our first in almost 30 years in Australia, the impact has been far less than almost every other developed economy in the world.
Almost half the jobs that we had lost to the virus early on have been already recovered. Australia is getting on with the job.
Our national COVIDSafe action plan has been straight forward.
Secure our borders early and consistently.
Entrench COVIDSafe behaviours in our community and in our economy.
Social distancing, mask use and sanitation measures, to deny the virus the opportunity to move amongst us.
To build and ensure strong testing, tracing, and outbreak containment capabilities, shutting the virus down, before it can take hold.
Investing in our hospitals and our medical supplies to ensure the virus does not overwhelm our health system.
And to provide an economic lifeline to millions of Australians, their families and businesses, who have lost jobs and livelihoods as a result of the recession with income and investment supports worth more than 15% of our GDP.
Our approach, though we have been tested, has saved lives and livelihoods and has protected, as best as we have been able to, our most vulnerable.
And we have done this consistent with our principles as an open, liberal democracy, respecting the dignity of each and every individual, every citizen, every life.
In Australia, we have also been mindful of our wonderful Pacific family during this pandemic, our wantoks, our vuvale, our whanau, particularly the island nations of the South West Pacific.
Australia is the single largest development partner for these nations.
So we’ve provided personal protective equipment, testing equipment, medical expertise, and we’re maintaining an essential services and humanitarian corridor so experts and supplies can get in and out.
In Southeast Asia, we’re also providing much-needed equipment and expertise, as well as supporting collaboration to develop a vaccine.
And we’ve contributed $80 million to the Gavi COVAX Advance Market Commitment.
When it comes to a vaccine, Australia’s view is very clear.
Whoever finds the vaccine must share it.
This is a global responsibility, and it’s a moral responsibility, for a vaccine to be shared far and wide.
Some might see short term advantage, or even profit.
But I assure you to anyone who may think along those lines, humanity will have a very long memory and be a very, very severe judge.
Australia’s pledge is clear: if we find the vaccine we will share it.
That’s the pledge we all must make.
At home, our Australian efforts are about producing and providing a vaccine to our citizenry, sovereignly produced, once a vaccine is safely available and we’ve invested $1.7 billion in that task.
And that includes being committed to ensuring our neighbours in the Pacific and other parts of South East Asia can also access a safe, effective and affordable vaccine.
The World Health Organization has a vital role, ensuring that if and when there is a vaccine, people around the world can get access it.
Australia supports the WHO’s efforts to develop a global framework so that vaccines and therapeutics are allocated fairly.
In facing a global health threat, we have all been reminded about the importance of multilateral cooperation.
And I acknowledge the efforts of the WHO in containing the spread of the virus, including in the Indo‑Pacific region.
I’m pleased that the WHO has established an independent panel to evaluate the global response.
There is also a clear mandate to identify the zoonotic source of the COVID-19 virus and how it was transmitted to humans.
Australia strongly advocated for this review.
This virus has inflicted a calamity on our world and its peoples. We must do all we can to understand what happened for no other purpose than to prevent it from happening again.
When the resolution was put to the World Health Assembly in May, a record 145 countries were co-sponsors.
And as we try to control the spread of COVID-19, we also need to shine a spotlight on the dangers of disinformation.
Disinformation costs lives, and creates a climate of fear and division.
It goes against Australia’s values and beliefs as a free, open society.
So we recently worked through the United Nations to co-author a statement countering widespread disinformation, one signed by more than 120 countries.
I acknowledge the other UN bodies that are also making vital contributions.
The World Food Programme is transporting much-needed medical equipment and humanitarian supplies across the globe.
And the UN Development Programme is sending food into nations in dire need.
In fact, the UN is fulfilling its high purpose, the purpose that 75 years ago brought the world together in a united hope, and in goodwill.
Mr President, 75 years is a remarkable milestone.
Of course, much has changed since 1945.
When the UN Charter was signed, 51 countries were listed.
Australia was proud to be one of them and we are proud of the role we have played since then within the UN, to the present day.
Today, there are 193 UN member states.
That’s a good thing.
More voices. More ideas. More partners.
But with more voices and challenges comes complexity, negotiation, processes, bureaucracy that would test any organisation.
At 75, we know that the UN, like the humanity it serves, the nations that form it, are not perfect.
So against this backdrop, we should think about what the next 75 years look like for the UN, its structures, its functions and for multilateralism more generally.
We want these multilateral institutions to continue to deliver for us and all nations.
So we’re committed to ensuring they are fit for purpose, that they’re effective, that they’re open and transparent and, most importantly, that they are accountable to the sovereign states that form them.
The UN is its members, not its committees, processes, institutions or officials.
Its authority and efficacy is derived from the free participation, contributions, cooperation and collaboration of the sovereign states that comprise the United Nations, in a common purpose, to pursue our common hope.
We know that sovereignty doesn’t mean turning inwards though.
We value rules that protect sovereignty, peace and security, and curb the excessive use of power.
As Australians we also prize respect for international law and the peaceful resolution of disputes through dialogue.
This includes ensuring that competing territorial and maritime claims are based on, and determined in line with, international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
As an outward-looking, sovereign, trading nation, Australia also values the rules and institutions that enable international trade.
We know that trade creates wealth and brings nations together. It makes us more prosperous, all of us.
We won’t retreat into the downward spiral of protectionism in Australia.
So we’re leading efforts to reform the World Trade Organization.
We’re advocating for trade rules that are predictable, transparent and non‑discriminatory.
We’re helping to design the first-ever set of global digital trade rules so we keep pace with modern realities.
And we’re working hard to preserve crucial elements of the WTO’s dispute settlement system so trade rules can continue to be enforced.
Australia also relies heavily on the international standards that UN technical bodies set, especially in areas like aviation, telecommunications, and health.
These issues are vital to all of our prosperity, and we want to play a bigger role alongside business and civil society in setting relevant and efficient standards.
We need to make sure these standards serve all countries rather than any single power, and that they are developed in line with the fundamental principles of the global order.
Australia is helping to shape the norms for other emerging issues, also.
Like ensuring states abide by agreed rules in cyber space, maintaining a peaceful outer space, and managing critical minerals resources.
Australia is also committed to ongoing counter-proliferation efforts.
We played a major role in negotiating the establishment of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization in the 1980s and 1990s, and we see it as a critical pillar of international peace and security today.
As signatories to the Kyoto and Paris Accords we are reducing our carbon emissions, effectively. Most recently Australia beat our Kyoto target commitments by 430 million tonnes of CO2 abatement.
Between 2017 and mid-2020, more than $30 billion was invested in renewables in Australia.
In&nbsp;2019 we saw investment at more than three times, in renewables than the per capita rate of countries like Germany, China, or France.
Across 2019 and 2020, Australia will add more than 12.6 GW of renewable capacity, now that’s over four times that of our largest power station in Australia. And nearly one in four households have rooftop solar systems.
As a liberal democracy, we’re also committed to promoting universal values like human rights, gender equality and the rule of law.
We’ve always believed in these values, it’s what makes us who we are.
Australia was one of only eight countries involved in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We’re proud of that role.
And today, we’re serving as a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council.
We’re the first country from the Pacific region to serve on that body.
Our term ends this year, and we’re pleased to have served but I’m proud that we’ve raised our voice and been heard on important issues like the rights of women and girls, the rights of Indigenous peoples, and the global abolition of the death penalty.
Australia will continue to bring its influence to bear to make sure it responds to the interests of its members and the needs of our time.
Mr President, 1945 was a defining year in human history.
The year the Second World War ended.
The year the United Nations was founded.
It was a year when humanity found hope amidst despair.
This year is one of the hardest since then.
So let our resolve now also be undiminished as it was at the beginning of the United Nations as we commit again, together, to realising the common hope that binds us all together.
[ENDS]


Prime Minister
Prime Minister: Thank you very much, Sabra. It's good to be back here again at the Press Club and this all-important week leading up to next year’s- next week's I should say, Budget.
And it's great to be joined by so many of my colleagues here today. The Deputy Prime Minister, of course, Michael McCormack, and I commend him on his tremendous speech he gave yesterday. The new Richard Mercer of Australian politics with his calls for Australians to go to bush and support with the harvest, I strongly endorse his comments yesterday. It's good to have the Leader of the Government in the Senate, Mathias Cormann, and Mathias will be leaving us at the end of this year. They'll be very big shoes to fill in our Government, and this will be his last Budget and I want to thank you, Mathias for the tremendous work you’ve done. Not just on this Budget, but the six prior to it. It has been a herculean effort. Today the Treasurer is still back there with a sharpened pencil as he works through the time touches of the Budget for next week. I also want to thank the Treasurer for the tremendous job he's been doing together with Mathias Cormann to bring forward what will be a very important Budget next week. To Karen Andrews who joins us here today - what I'm presenting to you today is absolutely the product of her labours over not just many weeks, but over many, many months, and I'm looking forward to presenting that today. Karen, and I thank you for your leadership in this area in particular. We're joined by other ministers, of course, as well. We have Keith Pitt in resources and energy and Angus Taylor - sorry, resources and Northern Australia, I haven't made any changes, Angus, don't worry, or Keith. You'll be pleased to know, nor do I intend to. They're both doing a tremendous job in all of those portfolios. They share a department together and they’ve got it absolutely cranking on all cylinders. And tomorrow you'll hear in Sydney from the assistant minister Ben Morton who’ll be speaking more about the Government’s deregulation agenda.
Can I begin - can I also acknowledge Nev Power, I’ve just seen him here, as the chair of the National COVID Commission. And Nev, thank you for the great work you have been doing with the Commission. As you know, together with Andrew Liveris, what we have been speaking about today has been importantly informed by the great work that you and your team have been doing in its previous and now its new form.
Can I begin today by acknowledging the Ngunnawal people of course, their elders - past, present and emerging for the future.
Can I also, as is my custom, to acknowledge and pay my respects to any veterans or serving members of the Australian defence forces who are here with us today or joining us from outside this place and simply say on behalf of a grateful nation, thank you for your service to our country.
The 2020-2021 Budget, to be delivered by the Treasurer next [Tuesday], will be arguably one of the most important, if not the most important since the end of the Second World War.
This year, the global economy is forecast to contract by around four and a half per cent. The world economy during the GFC declined by 0.1 per cent. So in simple terms, the economic contraction we’re expecting this year in the global economy is 45 times greater than the GFC.
The scale of what is occurring today is incredibly sobering.
Never before have we experienced a global recession of this magnitude in a truly modern, interconnected world and global economy, no longer insulated by geography and old technology. Global recessions now occur in real time.
So this Budget will be necessarily different in scale to those we have seen in many generations. It will respond responsibly to the challenge of our time and consistent with the principles that we laid down at the outset of the pandemic back in March.
The Budget will confirm the strong plan we have to recover from the COVID-19 recession and to build our economy for the future.
To cushion the blow of the pandemic recession.
To recover what’s been lost - the jobs, the livelihoods, the hours, the incomes, the customers, the clients.
But importantly to take new ground by rebuilding our economy for the future.
And we’ll do this, importantly, while honouring our guarantee to the essential services that Australians rely on - the schools, hospitals, Medicare, aged care, disability services.
And we’ll do it while keeping Australians safe. And we’ll do it without increasing taxes.
That's what the 2020-21 Budget is all about.
The work though, is already underway. Unemployment was falling. More Australians were in jobs than ever before, the female participation rate at an all time high. More working age people were off welfare and into jobs. Our AAA Credit Rating had been secured.&nbsp; And our Budget was back in balance.
This meant that, as the pandemic hit, we could act quickly and confidently to cushion the blow.
Treasury advises that some 700,000 additional jobs would have been lost in measured unemployment were it not for the measures the&nbsp; government undertook - JobKeeper, JobSeeker, cashflow support and many, many more.
We are also working to recover what has been lost. 760,000 jobs that were either lost or reduced to zero hours as the COVID crisis hit, have already come back into our economy. This is a great tribute to the resilience of Australians and the Australian economy, its fighting spirit, the Australians who make our economy work each and every day.
Our effective unemployment rate has fallen from 14.9 per cent, as the crisis hit, back to 9.3 per cent. But that’s not good enough. there are further risks, there are further challenges ahead, there are further unknowns.
We are not through this yet not by a long shot. And there is still much more to be done.
We are rebuilding our economy for the future through our JobMaker economic plan that I first spoke of right here at this platform.
Our plan for affordable and reliable energy will secure our liquid fuel reserves and lower emissions. It will get the gas we need for manufacturing to succeed, for households to have more money in their pockets, to firm up the reliability of renewables, like solar and wind, and to transition our energy economy into the future.
This transition will be guided by our comprehensive technology investment roadmap, released by Angus Taylor recently. To deliver reliable, scalable, lower cost, lower emissions technologies to underwrite our economy over the next 30 years and beyond. A plan not driven by taxes but by technology.
We’re delivering lower taxes for businesses and individuals. Australians are already benefiting from the tax cuts made in the last two budgets. Just this year alone, in the billions. The small and medium-sized businesses tax rate has been cut to 26 per cent and the instant asset write off extended and expanded to investments of up to $150,000.
Australians are keeping more of what they earn, as we promised they would. But there is still more to be done and there will be more next week.
Major changes have been introduced to how we do skills training. Our $1 billion JobTrainer program with the states and territories is boosting the number of training places in this year alone by 340,000 places, that’s good news for school leavers and those who are looking for those training places, coming out of jobs.
We have secured a new heads of agreement on skills reform, as I said we would do, with the States and Territories through the National Cabinet to ensure Australians acquire the skills they need for the jobs that businesses need them to be able to do. The National Skills Commission and Commissioner has been established to guide these investments, not just by the Commonwealth but by the States and Territories also.
The Government has committed $2.8 billion to keep up to 180,000 apprentices in this country on the tools at some 90,000 small and medium-sized businesses through to the end of March next year. And yesterday, the Education Minister Dan Tehan announced an extra 12,000 places for students going to university next year to help them upskill and get job ready.
We are working to fix the problems in our industrial relations system so we can employ more people.
The Attorney-General Christian Porter has brought unions and employer groups together in search of common ground to boost employment, to grow our economy. One thing is very clear from this process, and particularly recent events out at Port Botany, that we cannot afford “business as usual” in industrial relations. It keeps people out of jobs.
We continue to bring forward record investments in infrastructure in our three key infrastructure grids, as the Deputy Prime Minister well knows and leads that work - our transport grid, our water grid and of course our energy grid.
Major projects like Inland Rail, Western Sydney Airport, the North South Connector in Adelaide, Stage 3A of Gold Coast Light Rail in Queensland, the Bunbury Outer Ring Road in Western Australia.
The $484 million Dungowan Dam project, where we’re committing half those funds. In NSW that will increase storage capacity from 6.3 gigalitres to 22.5 gigalitres. Design, geotech and environmental assessments that are underway at the site. Then there’s the Emu Swamp Dam, a 12 megalitre irrigation dam and water supply scheme on the Severn River in Queensland. It is under construction, boots and utes on the ground.
We are working with the states to accelerate the critical energy infrastructure identified in the AEMO Integrated System Plan. We are bringing forward projects like Marinus Link, VNI West and Project Energy Connect by at least 12 months, it’s creating over 4,000 jobs and helping ensure reliable, affordable energy for families and for businesses to create jobs.
We’re making it easier for business to do business, cutting red tape, streamlining approvals, particularly for major projects, including our new single touch approvals reform under the EPBC Act.
Our Digital Plan I announced with the Treasurer earlier this week will upgrade the circuit boards of our economy, making it safer and easier to get paid, to make payments, to connect with customers and deal with government. It will drive uptake of digital technologies across businesses, that will in turn boost productivity and innovation, especially vital for our manufacturing sector which is our topic today.
That plan brings together some $7 billion of investments in cyber-security, NBN, 5G applications, digital skills capability, RegTech, FinTech, open banking, consumer data right, many things I suspect people looking on today would not be familiar with, but they’re going to make a big difference to how businesses operates in this country in this new age.
Assistant Minister Morton, as I said, will be outlining more changes tomorrow, a further update on the work of our Deregulation TaskForce he leads on my behalf.
We are continuing to prise open new markets for Australian business overseas, that work hasn’t stopped. More than 70 per cent of all our two way trade is now covered by export agreements, that compares to just 26 per cent when we came to government, giving Australian companies preferential access to more overseas markets. And we are not just stopping there.
Second round market access discussions as part of the UK FTA negotiations are underway this week. Our EU FTA negotiations are continuing. Our landmark deal with Indonesia has come into force in July and we’ve set a new benchmark for digital economy agreements with our high-quality deal with Singapore.
More affordable and reliable energy. More effective and better resourced skills training and development. Lower taxes. Boosting infrastructure investment in our water, energy and transport grids. Cutting red tape and making it easier to do business. Fixing problems in our industrial relations system to get more people into jobs. Opening up access to more overseas markets for Australian exporters.
That’s our plan.
Our economic response has meant that, despite the hardships that Australians have suffered, Australia is still one of just a handful of economies, along with South Korea, Taiwan and Norway, leading the world in both the economic and the health response to the pandemic.
Our June quarter contraction of 7 per cent, which hit hard, we must remember compares to falls of more than 20 per cent in the UK, falls of more than 10 per cent in Canada, New Zealand, Italy and France, and falls of almost 10 per cent in Japan, the US, Germany and the OECD on average as a whole.
Today, I want to talk about our JobMaker plan for the future of manufacturing in Australia.
We make things in Australia. We make them well, we do it well. We need to keep making things in Australia. And under our plan we will.
Manufacturing employs some 860,000 Australians, and prior to the pandemic it generated more than $100 billion in value for our economy each year and over $50 billion in exports.
It is also a large driver of research and development. Manufacturing contributes around a quarter of total R&amp;D investment in Australia, roughly four times its share of the economy.
Manufacturing is particularly important to regional economies, in places like the Hunter, north and central Queensland, Tasmania, regional Victoria.
Over recent decades, in time, our manufacturers have largely moved on from the mass production of standardised goods. Long gone are the days of trying to compete with labour-intensive, low-cost manufacturing economies.
Gone too are any pretensions of protectionism as a viable strategy for domestic manufacturing.
That’s not where our future is. Manufacturing in Australia has been transformed and will continue to transform, today it is more agile, more dynamic and less monolithic.
Today’s advanced manufacturing enterprise stretches from the labs doing the research and development, the skilled workers doing the design and engineering, through to sales, marketing and after-sale services.
Increasingly, this is where most of the value is created - around half of the jobs in manufacturing are actually in these parts of the manufacturing process.
Even the assembly line is changing through the increased use of intelligent robotics and 3D printing.
We need a deeper appreciation that advanced manufacturing is not just about what we make – it’s about how we make it, how we sell our products domestically and internationally. So what is to be done?
Now an accomplished engineer before she entered Parliament, Karen Andrews, our Minister for Industry, Science and Technology, has taken up this question with gusto, providing the leadership for the strategy I am outlining today. And I thank her for her work. I also thank and recognise the role of the National COVID Coordination Commission’s Manufacturing Taskforce led by Andrew Liveris. Under Andrew’s guidance, the taskforce has consulted widely and provided practical advice to inform our work, including valuable insights from best-practice overseas where he has had great involvement.
So to our modern manufacturing strategy. The objective is to build scale and capture income in high-value areas of manufacturing where Australia either has established competitive strength or emerging priorities.
This will require our manufacturing sector to be even more productive and highly-skilled. To be more collaborative, at the leading edge of R&amp;D, commercialisation and technology adoption. To be more outward-looking in searching relentlessly for footholds in global markets.
At a government level, we must first understand that a successful manufacturing sector will depend on broader economic policies that support greater productivity.
Again, affordable and reliable energy. Lower taxes. Industrial relations changes. Training and skills development. Cutting red tape. Infrastructure investment. All of this supports manufacturing and there is more.
Too often in the past industry policy has ignored these foundational elements in the vain hope that isolated programs, subsidies and work-arounds could make up for the broader deficiencies in economic settings.
We also need to get more targeted and apply greater discipline to how we invest in these sectors as a government. It must be part of a longer term planning.
Our Government is determined to set a ten-year time horizon under this strategy where all parties - industry, workforce including unions, governments at all levels, capital including superannuation funds and our scientific and research community - are pulling together in the one direction.
Our practical strategy has three components.
Firstly, create a business environment where our manufacturers can be more competitive. Secondly to align resources to build scale in areas of competitive strength. And thirdly to secure sovereign capability in areas of national interest.
That’s our plan. And we will be investing an additional $1.5 billion in specific industry measures, over and above what we’ll be doing in tax, energy, infrastructure and the like, to back our plan in next week’s Budget.
Now, firstly, creating a business environment in Australia where our manufacturers can be more competitive. That is foundational, as I have said.
You can invest all the resources you like in industry programmes, but if taxes are too high, if industrial relations systems are too complicated, the adoption of digital technology is patchy, if energy is too expensive, if approvals take too long and are too costly, if the roads are clogged, and employees do not have the right skills, and you are shut out of overseas markets, then you are wasting your time. That’s why all those things - correcting all those things is important.
For manufacturing to be successful in Australia, all manufacturers, we must become a more competitive place for manufacturers to do business. Whether it be aluminium smelting in Gladstone, steel processing in Port Kembla and Whyalla, ethanol production at Shoalhaven Heads down on the south coast, fertiliser production in Mount Isa, aerospace at Fishermans Bend for Boeing or ships at Port Adelaide and Henderson in Western Australia. And that is what our JobMaker plan is all about - creating the right incentives and enablers for businesses to compete so they can create more jobs and keep more Australians employed.
Our broader JobMaker plan is the foundation of our manufacturing strategy, benefitting all manufacturers, especially when it comes to tax incentives for investment, energy, skills, R&amp;D and technology.
Now the Treasurer will have more to say about those particular issues next week, especially when it comes to investment and R&amp;D incentives, so I will not touch on those issues today.
In a manufacturing context, it is especially important to highlight the necessity of our efforts to create a competitive domestic gas market.
The NCCC advised us that gas is up to 40 per cent of many industries' cost structures in manufacturing. Combined with higher electricity costs, the NCCC said that has moved many firms into a ‘doom loop’ where they are living ‘turnaround to turnaround’, making existential decisions about their operations at each point of the next major maintenance decision, rather than decisions, that they’d prefer to be making, in technology and much-needed productivity improvements to remain competitive in the future. This needs to change.
That is why, as part of our gas-fired recovery plan, we have committed to resetting our east coast gas markets, unlocking gas supplies, establishing a new gas hub and improving our gas grid distribution systems. If you’re not for gas, you’re not for manufacturing and heavy industries and the jobs that they support. For many manufacturers, gas is half the problem that they confront and that is why reforming that sector is so foundational to that achievements we hope for in the manufacturing sector.
Now the second component is to align resources to build scale in areas of competitive strength. The reality is we cannot and should not seek to reach global scale in a large number of sectors, we can’t be all things to all. This is an important lesson from other small and I’d say medium-sized high income economies like ours, which have leveraged home-grown manufacturing into global success, this has happened in Singapore, the UK, Germany and Canada. all circumstances and areas that we have looked at.
A lesson is don’t try to do everything. It’s all about alignment, across different levels of government, with industry and with the research and education sectors and siloed programs don’t work.
Against that backdrop, the Government has identified six National Manufacturing Priorities in areas of established strength and emerging priority. They are:

The resources technology and critical minerals processing
Food and beverage manufacturing
Medical products
Clean energy and recycling
Defence industry, and
The space industry.

As the world’s leading mining economy, Australia can capture min-tech and critical minerals processing based on our natural resource endowment. Our high-skilled workforce and world-class technological capability. And I particularly welcome the announcements made today by BHP to that end. They have set, I think, a leading standard.
Australia’s Mining Equipment, Technology and Services sector, the METS sector, already plays a key role in adding value beyond resource extraction in the mining supply chain. At the same time, we know demand is increasing for critical minerals that are inputs to batteries, and renewable technologies and other manufactured materials - from partners like Japan, the US and Europe providing us with opportunities to just move up that value chain.
Food and beverage manufacturing, like Bickford’s down there in South Australia, one of the fastest growing parts of our manufacturing sector in recent years and the largest employer in our manufacturing sector. It is the second area of focus as part of this strategy. Australia’s status as a leading agricultural producer with a premium reputation for safe, clean produce gives us a real edge here, a vital edge.
Thirdly, the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted our gold standard health and medical research and manufacturing capability. This provides a key platform for commercialising new medicine and medical product breakthroughs right here in Australia. Firms such as Cochlear, CSL, ResMed have shown what can be achieved when you combine high-quality manufacturing, major investment in commercialising great ideas and a global outlook, supported critically by world-class primary research and a stringent regulatory framework to support it. All of those things, particularly CSL playing such a critical role as we respond to COVID.
Then there is clean energy and recycling, an important part of the government’s broader challenge. Something we believe we can make a major contribution to.
As Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor highlighted last week, Australia has a great opportunity to make a global contribution in areas like battery storage and hydrogen technology in particular.
So too the fast growing waste and recycling sector offers Australian firms great potential and global scale underpinned by research strengths in the circular economy in places like the University of Sydney’s Waste Transformation Research Hub and the UNSW’s Centre for Sustainable Materials Research and Technology. When I was in New York about this time last year, Sims metal does all the recycling for New York. An Australian company, doing a big job on a global scale. We know how to do this stuff.
Our defence sector provides Australian manufacturers with the opportunity to provide sophisticated defence equipment and supplies to the Australian Defence Force, but not just them, but also as well as for export markets and part of global supply chains as we’ve seen with the Joint Strike Fighter project.
The Defence Sovereign Industrial Capability Priorities are about targeting investment to build national capability and capacity through manufacturing, and it’s backed by the National Naval Shipbuilding Plan, the Defence Export Strategy, and the $1 billion Defence Innovation Hub and the $1.3 billion Next Generation Technologies Fund.
Space opens up a further area of emerging sovereign capability where Australia is in a position to leverage close alignment between governments, the research community and industry - all under the umbrella of the Australian Space Agency, which Minister Andrews has already established down in South Australia.
The space sector is estimated to reach some $1 trillion globally by 2040. And we want to be a part of that.
Achieving scale in these areas and all of these areas I have spoken about will be a multi-year project which is why we are taking a ten-year perspective. Immediate action will be taken though, with additional investment, a refocusing of existing programs and deeper alignment across all parts of the manufacturing innovation system.
Firstly, we will commit $52.8 million in additional funding to a second round of the successful Manufacturing Modernisation Fund, focusing on larger projects. The Fund will provide grants of between $100,000 and $1 million on a three-to-one funding basis to support transformational investment in technologies and processes. This new round is expected to support around 150 businesses in our priority areas.
The centrepiece of our strategy though, is a $1.3 billion Modern Manufacturing Initiative (MMI) it will provide a new investment vehicle geared to overcoming barriers to scale. We’ve got to get the scale. The MMI will leverage co-investment with states and territories, industry and research institutions across three streams of activity.

Firstly, collaboration – investment of around $80 million each on average to foster long-term, large-scale production or R&amp;D facilities involving consortia of businesses and other organisations, including physical clusters – like at the Western Sydney aerotropolis
Secondly, translation – investments of around $4 million on average for industry-led projects translating research and bringing new products to the market.
And thirdly, integration – investments also of around $4 million connecting local firms with global value chains, giving businesses the tools they need to access export markets and create economies of scale.

Now through this initiative we will both target priority areas and invest in the cross-cutting technologies and processes that enhance production efficiency - such as automation, digitisation, data analytics, artificial intelligence and other enabling technologies, which make everything else work.
Additional investment will occur in tandem with a comprehensive review of existing programs in the Industry, Science and Technology portfolio to better align them with the strategy. As part of this, we’re providing an additional $50 million to the Industry Growth Centres initiative to support projects in the priority areas out until the end of June of 2022.
Now having established those six priority areas, the next phase will involve partnering with industry to co-design roadmaps geared to build scale in each area.
These industry-led roadmaps will identify growth opportunities, barriers to scale and required actions along the entire value chain in each of our priority sectors. They will guide future investment and action from both government and industry, getting that alignment.
Now these will be finalised by April next year before the Budget. The roadmaps will set clear goals and performance indicators - so how many more jobs, what level of R&amp;D and how much more investment - so we can track it over the next two, five and 10 years. Where appropriate, they will draw on the previous Industry Growth Centre Sector Competitiveness Plans and the lessons learnt from those efforts.
To aid this effort, Minister Andrews will enlist a refocused and refreshed Industry, Innovation and Science Australia Board in a key advisory role.
That will occur under the continued leadership of Andrew Stevens, the former head of the Advanced Manufacturing Growth Centre, and the new IISA Board will provide expert advice to the Minister. And Minister Andrews will have more to say on the governance arrangements and new appointments to that board over the coming weeks.
Now, the third imperative of our Modern Manufacturing Strategy is to build national resilience by securing sovereign capability in areas of national interest.
We cannot ignore the obvious. The efficiency benefits of hyper-globalisation and highly fragmented supply chains can evaporate very quickly in the event of a major global shock like the COVID-19 pandemic as we have seen.
Armed with this experience, it is only sensible that Australia consider, as so many other countries are, more options to guard against supply chain vulnerability for critical necessities and to secure us against future shocks.
To this end, a whole-of-government review of Australia’s supply chain vulnerabilities in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic is underway. And for the most part, Australia has performed very well, with limited disruptions to critical supplies of manufactured products through this pandemic.
This achievement can be attributed in no small measure to the agility and adaptability of our domestic manufacturing industry. But equally it would be irresponsible for any Australian Government to not consider new mechanisms to support local capability for critical materials, equipment and services in the wake of this shock.
So that is what we are doing.
The Government will invest $107 million in a new Supply Chain Resilience Initiative. This will support Australian manufacturers investing in capabilities to address areas of identified acute vulnerability domestically, and to ensure they are in a position to contribute to the supply chains of trusted partners and like-minded countries.
Sovereign Manufacturing Capability Plans will be developed in key areas and a range of policy options will be considered, including procurement and long-term contracting arrangements, as well as actions to promote better information sharing and collaboration between government and industry.
It is not to overcome each and every source of vulnerability based on domestic production alone. The current crisis is not an excuse for protectionist policies that subsidise inefficient firms and industries.
Hence we are complementing our actions to boost domestic sovereign capability through greater collaboration with like-minded countries. Already, this has been an area of fruitful discussion with other world leaders as part of the Smart COVID-19 Management Group convened by the Austrian Chancellor.
So in conclusion, Australian manufacturing will play a key role in our economic recovery from COVID-19, creating and supporting jobs in cities, in towns and regional communities and rural areas right across Australia. It’s a plan for all of Australia and all Australians.
Our efforts to grow Australia’s manufacturing sector begin by creating a stable and competitive business environment, through our JobMaker plan, but it does not end there. Our Modern Manufacturing Strategy will open a new chapter based on:

Building scale in areas of competitive strength
In driving collaboration and better aligning resources across governments, industry and the research community
Enlisting expertise to set clear goals for global success
Making science and technology work for industry and for Australians
And finally, strengthening sovereign resilience in areas of strategic importance.

That is how you create jobs. That is how you recover from the COVID 19 recession. That is how you build your economy back for the future, which is what our Budget will be all about. That’s our plan.
Thank you very much for your attention.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you very much Pat and it’s great to be here at these headquarters, at the premises which I’ve had something to do with over the years. But no one has driven this agenda like you, and I want to thank you in particular for being so available to me and to Greg and so many of my Ministers and other advisers. When Pat McGorry’s calling, you pick up the phone, I can assure you of that, to speak about these issues because he will be telling you about what is happening on the ground with patients and with others in distress and he always has very practical suggestions. We get to the practical element very, very quickly. So Pat, I want to thank you for your leadership throughout this crisis and I am sure that is shared by the Premier here in Victoria, Premiers in other states and territories as well and the magnificent work that is done.&nbsp;
To Christine Morgan my national suicide prevention adviser, and Ruth Vine our deputy Chief Medical Officer. Ruth and I have spoken on many occasions over the course of this last six or seven months, but this is the first opportunity we have actually been able to be in the same room together. I want to thank Ruth and Christine for the tremendous work they have been doing over the course particularly of this year in not just responding to the crisis, but also the foundational work that has been done in terms of how we deal with what happens after this crisis.
And I think we all understand in this room in particular, the legacy that we will have to live through as a result of the scarring impacts of this crisis on Australians all around the country. We understand that and that is why we are doing the things that we are doing.&nbsp;
To the acting Chief Medical Officer, Paul Kelly, who is here with us as well today, thank you, Paul. Paul of course is very focused today on the other challenges we have in relation to the pandemic, particularly in South Australia and he's been working on those issues and we have been meeting on those earlier today and has been meeting with the AHPPC, the medical expert panel earlier today, to address those issues. So I know you will have to get away quickly, Paul. But I thank you for being here as well.&nbsp;
And of course to Greg Hunt, my Minister for Health, but a great Victorian, and someone who - he I together working in a partnership that has been very important when it comes to the national response to the pandemic. But, there are many other areas of passion that Greg and I share when it comes to the Health portfolio. The PBS is one that we have shared, both as Treasurer and now as Prime Minister. But also in the area of mental health. And I remember, in particular, not long after becoming Prime Minister, I spoke to Greg on the phone one day and we were looking forward to the next Budget. I said, Greg, we just have to do more in this area, let's get to work. And Greg hasn't stopped since that time, whether it is drawing Christine into our team of very high-level advisers and working through these issues and engaging the sector and particularly through people like Pat. Greg I want to thank you for your leadership in this area, and your input and carrying that along with the many other burdens.&nbsp;
To the team from the productivity commission here, Innes Willox is here representing industry and that is a very good understanding that this is first and foremost a health issue, but health issues have very significant and serious economic consequences as well. And if there has ever been a year to understand that, it is the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020. Our nation's health is as linked to our nation as prosperity as any other thing and we need no reminder about that going through this year.&nbsp;
That is something that I believe our Indigenous Australians have always understood. And I want to acknowledge and pay respect to the Wurundjeri people and the Kulin nation as the original and ongoing owners and custodians of this land.&nbsp;
I also want to acknowledge Australia's mental health workers. Every day you reflect the very best of our humanity to others. I want to acknowledge all of those Australians who live with mental illness. Those who have lived experience of suicide, their loved ones and their communities. Their carers. In particular, I acknowledge the many veterans who struggle with mental health challenges, who carry a burden because of their service that we must always remember and a debt that we owe to them that we will never be able to fully repay. I thank all of our serving members of our defence forces as well and honour them.&nbsp;
Mental health issues and suicide do not discriminate. It doesn't matter where you live, what you do for a living. 1 in 5 Australians will experience a mental health illness every year and half of us will be diagnosed during our lifetime.&nbsp;
In 2018, 2.4 million Australians aged 18 and over experienced high or very high levels of psychological distress. Now that was in 2018. Now this is before COVID-19 which we know had a significant impact on mental health and wellbeing, not least so here in Melbourne and in Victoria.&nbsp;
In just the last four weeks, Lifeline, Kids Helpline, Beyond Blue together answered over 112,000 contacts for help, around a quarter higher than the same time in 2019.&nbsp;
65,000 Australians, 65,000 Australians attempt suicide each year.&nbsp;
Just let that figure sink in.&nbsp;
We know that last year 3,300 Australians died by suicide.&nbsp;
So that is 9 Australians each and every day.&nbsp;
On average, every suicide impacts around another 135 people.&nbsp;
Men and boys account for three quarters of all suicides, and our highest rates of suicide are among men over 85, men in their 30s, 40s and 50s.&nbsp;
But there is also an increase in self-harm and suicide amongst women and girls. I can tell you as a father of two daughters, this is something that terrifies me.&nbsp;
Most confronting and heartbreaking is that suicide is the leading cause of death amongst our young people.&nbsp;
As we know, Indigenous communities bar the scars acutely. Last year, 195 Indigenous Australians were lost to suicide. I know Indigenous Australians Minister Ken Wyatt understands this only too well.&nbsp;
Indigenous Australians die by suicide at double the non-indigenous rate.&nbsp;
And of course, as I mentioned, our veterans are also vulnerable. From 2001 to 2018, 465 Australians who had served over the previous 17 years died by suicide.&nbsp;
Phil Thompson, a colleague of Greg's and mine, has been to too many of those funerals. It is an experience that I can't pretend to imagine.&nbsp;
And I applaud all of those veterans in the way they stand by each other and deal with this.&nbsp;
Today, I want to speak to you about the road ahead, though. I want to talk to you about where we are going on mental health and suicide prevention.&nbsp;
Of course it is a big challenge. The figures I have just shared with you are quite overwhelming. If you dwell on them for too long.&nbsp;
They are intended to confront us and so they should - brutal truths should have that effect. But our response shouldn't be to fall victim to them, but to chart a better way forward and a road out.&nbsp;
I want to affirm the government's commitment today to providing Australians with the mental health support they need, particularly in these challenging times.&nbsp;
In my first Budget, as I reflected before as Prime Minister, this included an additional $740 million over 7 years to improve access to mental health service and to combat the tragedy of suicide.&nbsp;
This included our $509 million youth mental health and suicide prevention package, the largest in Australian history, which is growing the national HeadSpace network to 153 centres around the country by 2021. That's right, next year. While reducing wait lists and boosting funding for youth psychosis and eating disorder services.&nbsp;
Now both HeadSpace and the early youth psychosis services I have just mentioned, they are the brainchild as we all know of Professor Pat McGorry who is with us here today. I want to acknowledge Pat's enormous contribution, developing and scaling-up early intervention and youth mental health services. And Pat knows, because he equally acknowledges it, that when HeadSpace was set up under the Howard government and particularly with Christopher Pyne, who was the Assistant Minister for Health at the time, of the many things that we have done as Coalition governments, both present and in the past. I can think of few more important than the services that we have established in the community for assisting young people with their mental health through HeadSpace. And again, I thank you, Pat.&nbsp;
Today, I am releasing the Productivity Commission's report into mental health. Now, this is the most comprehensive report of its kind in our history in Australia. And I have got the executive summary here because I can’t carry the other two volumes that sit with this report. It is well worth the read for all of us who care about the mental health of our fellow Australians.&nbsp;
It examines the interaction and effectiveness and outcomes of policies, systems and programs across all jurisdictions and I'll talk more about that. As well as assessing the economic and social impacts of what we are doing right now.&nbsp;
The commissioning of the report was one of my earlier decisions as Treasurer. Followed through, of course by Treasurer Josh Frydenberg, and I want to acknowledge Professor Stephen King and Ms Julie Abramson and Professor Harvey Whiteford commissioners on the PC’s Mental Health Inquiry.&nbsp;
Last year, I appointed Christine Morgan, who is here with us, on the Minister for Health’s very strong recommendation. It took many of all of half a second to agree, as Australia’s first National Suicide Prevention Adviser, seeking new direction on how we can prevent the loss of so many Australians each year and today I am releasing her suicide prevention interim advice. There will be further volumes coming I know in the final and, again, these reports given the events of 2020 could not be more timely.&nbsp;
When we set out on this path, nobody could have foreseen a global pandemic impact every facet of our way of life. Separation from family members, the loss of jobs and businesses. The disruption to our community and social networks.&nbsp;
Devastating, for some the loss of a loved one. And being constrained and restricted from being able to process that loss through the normal human interactions we would have at that time.&nbsp;
Understandably, that couldn’t take place, but it doesn't take away the pain or the lost opportunity that is presented by how we deal with grief in attending the funeral of a loved one. You can't replace that. And so, that has made that experience so much more difficult than it always is.&nbsp;
COVID-19 has exposed a new vulnerability to a range of known mental illnesses. A substantial year on year increase in child and youth contacts for eating disorders, with hospital admissions up 40% in most states.&nbsp;
For others, the pandemic has triggered mental health, mental ill-health for the first time.&nbsp;
We know the pandemic is taking an immense toll on business owners. I was with business owners here in Melbourne this morning. In late September, around 54% of small business owners and managers reported being concerned for their personal health and wellbeing. And those I spoke to this morning talked about their concern for their staff's personal mental health and wellbeing.&nbsp;
And as a Government, we've held nothing back in our response. Since the onset of the pandemic, we've invested more than $500 million in additional mental health and suicide prevention services. Switching on telehealth for all Australians, and making more mental health services subject to the Medicare rebate. Setting up a new Beyond Blue COVID-19 wellbeing service and getting extra resources into Lifeline and into Kid's HelpLine and other support services.&nbsp;
Establishing 15 pop-up Head to Head mental health clinics across locked down Victoria. Doubling the amount of medicare funded psychological services from 10 to 20, under better access. And ensuring better culturally appropriate help for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, and people from cultural and linguistically diverse groups.&nbsp;
I would especially like to acknowledge as I already have, both Dr Ruth Vine and Ms Pam Anders for their support in establishing the Victorian mental health clinics during Victoria's lockdown.&nbsp;
With investments made this year, the Commonwealth's health portfolio expenditure on mental health is expected to reach a record high of some $5.7 billion in 2021. Those seeking the additional support, I can assure you, have been pushing on an open door right from the outset, and I believe that's been their felt and lived experience as well in dealing with our Government, and I'm sure with state governments as well.&nbsp;
A key focus has been on prevention and early intervention. And today, I announce a further down payment on prevention and early intervention, for young people in particular. We will extend the early psychosis youth services program for a further year to June 2022 with funding of some $53 million to support that work.&nbsp;
We will extend the National Mental Health Initiative, called Be You, delivered by Beyond Blue, for a further two years with funding of $46 million. 70% of schools are participating in Be You nationally, and in that context, I also acknowledge the announcement on the weekend by the New South Wales State Government and the work they're doing on putting mental health nurses and supports into public schools, into schools around New South Wales. States are doing their share as well.&nbsp;
And thirdly- fourthly, I should say - extending the important work of emerging minds for a further 2 years with funding of $16 million.&nbsp;
These investments build on the $45.7 million expansion of the individual placement and support program of the 2020-21 Budget to assist vulnerable young people with mental illness to participate in the workforce. A clear message from our advice is that we need to, must look at the whole person and these reports say the same thing. And take into account their whole life circumstances in our approach to mental health services.&nbsp;
Counselling alone isn't going to alleviate distress. Not if you're about to lose your house, your job, your relationship. Looking at the whole person means working with the states and territories in the community and business sectors to reduce the risks of loans defaulting, home evictions and even, of course, going without food. Investing in financial counselling, food relief, domestic violence services and family support programs - all essential. We need to keep this going. We need to keep the dialogue going. But, we're well under way.&nbsp;
With more Australians experiencing mental health challenges, we are in the dialogue about it more as a nation, together. More Australians know, now, it's OK not to feel OK. And to talk about that, and to raise it.&nbsp;
It’s okay to talk about it.
It's a good thing to seek help and others will encourage you in that. We've been helping each other now I think more than every, certainly in my lifetime.
Connecting in new and different ways. It's a reminder of the untapped force of the human spirit. Our compassion and love for one another. The family and friends and our fellow Australians.&nbsp;
Mateship isn't just something that is talked about as a form of identity that we like to celebrate, it has a very practical relevance for every single Australian, because it goes to our deep affection for one another, and that's what we're enlisting to deal with this great challenge.&nbsp;
Collectively, as Australians we must set ourselves the goal of making COVID-19 an inflection point, on a path to a new and better mental health system. Both the Productivity Commission's final report on mental health and Christine Morgan's interim advice on suicide prevention offer very detailed and sober reflections based on excellent research on where we are as a country, and more importantly, what needs to be done.&nbsp;
Christine's advice is particularly compelling. It's data-rich, but importantly, it draws, and I commend you to read that first report in particular. Read them all, but I must admit, I was really sat down on reading the first report. Because it draws on the voices and experiences of almost 2,000 people who have lived with this in their own experience and amongst others.&nbsp;
This is a process that has listened hard and the listening is not easy. Among them are those who survived suicide attempts or lived with suicidal thoughts, and those bereaved by suicide, who I think often believe, don't think their voices are heard. That their experiences are shut out of the policy process. Not so, in what Christine has done in bringing forward her report and the extensive listening and narrating of their stories back to Government.&nbsp;
The Productivity Commission report also offers detailed data on the basis for reforms. So I like how these two come together. They support each other. Evidence that is absolutely critical. And I've often said, the economy is about people. And the Productivity Commission has framed it in a similar way in addressing this issue. They’ve said, it's not necessary to quantify the cost of mental illness and suicide to understand the damage that they impose on the lives of individuals and the community as a whole.&nbsp;
That's true. We don't need convincing of that. We know it's a big problem. But quantifying these costs, they say, helps to identify where reform efforts should be focused. And that's very, very wise.&nbsp;
So how much does mental ill-health cost? What's the update? The answer is at least $200 billion a year. That's more than a tenth of the size of Australia's entire economic production in 2019. It's around $550 to $600 million each and every day. When you add up the impacts on work, as Innes would know, on health and life expectancy, that's what you get. And as the report says, these costs are borne by those people with poor mental health and the people who care for them. And by governments, employers, insurers and the wider community, it's the cost that doesn't discriminate. It falls right across-the-board. The cost of lost opportunity, lower living standards.&nbsp;
You know, when young people disengage from education. When those with mental illness and their carers have reduced hours of work or cannot work or are less productive at work. It's also the social and emotional costs of suffering, exclusion and in worse cases, premature death.&nbsp;
Both reports shine a very bright light on the existing challenges and, as I said, it's not easy reading. But despite our efforts, people are still falling through the cracks at different points. Too often, mental health services aren't looking beyond the symptoms to work out what help a person needs to recover and remain well.&nbsp;
There is a sense in which the mental health system has been tacked on to the physical health system and when you think about it, it's obvious that we can't use the same template for a national mental health system as we use for a physical health system. If you have a broken bone or cancer or other physical problems, Australians seek help from within our universal health system but we tend not to react the same way when we're experiencing mental illness or risk of suicide.&nbsp;
Yet both, obviously, life-threatening. As serious as cancer. Many suffer in silence. Many never reach out. Even for those who do reach out, the health system isn't always as helpful as it could be and it's rarely the whole solution.&nbsp;
Now, I don't think that that is because people don't care. I don't think that it is because the system doesn't want to provide every support it can or governments, likewise. But we're not getting there yet. Both reports tell us that the mental health system needs to look beyond the symptoms to work out what help a person needs to recover and remain well. Because multiple factors, biological, environmental and social, affect mental health and wellbeing.&nbsp;
Another clear finding from the report says that too many Australians are treated too late or, sadly, not at all. Up to half of those who die by suicide have not interacted with the mental health system in the months leading up to their deaths.&nbsp;
And finally, the system is too complex and uncoordinated. Our mental health system fails too often because it is too complicated to navigate. And that system is despite the incredible care and efforts of mental health professionals. People who need help and their families are left to try and find and coordinate their own care without clear guidance about what is available, affordable and appropriate. And this happens at a point in their lives when they are most vulnerable and they will be finding it most difficult to try to access the services. The services that are there. Well intentioned, well supported, well funded. But difficult to access.&nbsp;
Both reports are emphatic. We need new approaches. Together they set out three directions for changing reform.&nbsp;
First, we must take an investment lens when it comes to a person's mental health and wellbeing. That means our first line of defence in preventing mental health and suicide is, as Pat McGorry has often reminded me when it comes to young people, is having a strong economy and communities and a strong safety net. Housing, employment, psychosocial services that support people to engage in the community can be as or more important than healthcare alone.&nbsp;
Both reports are adamant one of the most important protective factors is a job. Now, I don't need to establish the Government's credentials in terms of how keen we are on creating jobs, and of course, that has an enormous benefit to the Australian economy and people's livelihoods. But a key plank in promoting mental health and wellbeing is getting Australians into work and back into work, particularly right now. Because there's strong evidence that not having a job, even for a short time, can impact your mental health in a very negative way. It is a significant disruptive life event that can trigger many mental health episodes.&nbsp;
People receiving unemployment benefits are three times as likely to have anxiety or depression as wage earners are. This is not only as a result of financial hardship, but often associated with limited social support, loneliness and a decreased sense of personal control and achievement.&nbsp;
The second line of defence is addressing stigma once and for all. I believe we are making progress on this. So different from what it was a generation ago. So people can reach out for support when they need it, and we can't wait for risk factors to eventuate or for warning signs to escalate. 75 per cent of adults with mental illness first experienced mental ill-health before the age of 25.&nbsp;
To identify the early warning signs, we all need to play a role at various levels. We need to go beyond Government. We need to go far beyond the health system, and we need a whole of economy approach, whole of community approach, partnerships between all levels of Government, sectors, organisations. All of us are involved in this.&nbsp;
And we also need to harness the power of our business and community organisations to ensure people remain socially connected and feel supported. Participants at the PC's business round table, and I want to thank them for their participation and the business community's prioritising of this issue. It's not new, they have long done that. And they suggested there that mental health in the workplace should be elevated from the HR department to the boardroom and that's good advice. That's a powerful endorsement of the approach we need, but also about leadership in the corporate sector when it comes to dealing with mental health issues right across our economy.&nbsp;
Secondly, this must be comprehensive and compassionate and provide the right care at the right time. This involves a range of supports for easier to access support and low intensity services for those needing help every now and then, right through to coordinated community support for those with moderate to complex needs. That means filling gaps in the system,particularly for those with mild and moderate needs in what's called in the report, in the Productivity Commission report, the missing middle, who are not sick enough for hospital care, but do require more care and support than provided by the GP.&nbsp;
A comprehensive system would also harness the power of technology. But when we think about this missing middle, this is the grey zone between federal and state governments. Both of which I can assure you, as we often speak of these matters, as you would expect us to around the National Cabinet table. And indeed last Friday, when we said the National Federation Reform Council's priority on the next agenda would be this issue.&nbsp;
There is a grey zone. At a federal level, we deal with that primary care. At a state level, they deal with hospitals. But in between, both in prevention and dealing with those who may have had suicide attempts on the other side of hospital, there is a role for both in community-based mental health care. And we have to get that partnership right between the states and the Commonwealth, and I am looking forward to having a discussion later on today with Premier Andrews, who I know is very passionate about this topic. He and I may not agree on everything, but I can tell you that we agree on this very, very firmly. And I think together with other Premiers, who I do know are very committed to seeing that we can get the right set of arrangements in that we can get it right.&nbsp;
And that will include through the digital area. We've begun through digital service platforms and telehealth, as well as expanding access to NDIS rebates. What's recommended here in the report itself, and we've already taken action on those - extending out telehealth and mental health for two years. And obviously, understanding its longer term value.&nbsp;
A comprehensive system needs a skilled, comprehensive workforce. So central to every single health challenge we have in this country, whether it's mental health, whether it’s aged care, whether it’s disability support. Building up our care workforce, and in particular, our mental health workforce, will be vital to how successful we are. We must build a workforce inside and beyond the health system from peer workers, community workers. And as well, of course, our clinical workforce. It must be compassionate and it must take a recovery-based approach.&nbsp;
Compassion means going to where people are, rather than waiting for them to present. Why I'm so thrilled to see how Headspace is trying to get their services out in the community, not waiting for people to come in, Pat, a chat we've had many times, particularly with those who work within Headspace.&nbsp;
And third, we must build a system centered on the experience of those with mental ill-health and their carers. In the Productivity Commission's words, the mental health system is plagued by a bewildering array of unpredictable gateways to care. We must value the input of people who have lived that, who understand it better than the politicians, better than the policy makers and administrators and the bureaucracies that do this. You want to know how to fix it - then the people who have had to live with it have got a pretty good idea about how we can help them navigate a system that has become complex.&nbsp;
The lived experience of mental illness at all stages of planning, commissioning and reviewing services should be paramount in our thinking. Focused on the outcomes and views of these individuals who receive those services. It's about empowering people to make decisions for themselves and their loved ones, and this is important - never leaving them alone to do the heavy lifting or feeling alone.&nbsp;
So what's at stake if we don't implement these reforms? According to the Productivity Commission, 84,000 quality adjusted life years lost, and about $18 billion. According to Christine Morgan, more lives lost, more lives impacted. Recently, the National Cabinet agreed to establish a health reform committee - one of only six. National Cabinet has been cleaning house when it comes to a lot of the committees and councils and things that can drag down our Federation and distract it and slow it down.&nbsp;
So we're going to focus on six key areas reporting to National Cabinet. This is one of them - a Health Reform Committee whose first priority is to deliver a new agreement on mental health and suicide prevention by November 2021. That's this time next year. And if we can get there sooner, we will. The agreement matters because it will clarify that grey that I was talking about between the states and federal in the most important areas of where mental services have been found to be ambiguous or missing.&nbsp;
Over recent years, there has been great bipartisan support around Australia to improve the system and there have been many reports and inquiries. The Royal Commission, of course, here importantly in Victoria and there's tremendous good will. But that framework isn't there and we need to put it in place, agreed by the Commonwealth, states and territories. We all have responsibility here that we'll all have to get our cheque books out, too. Australians don't care who is responsible for delivering mental health care services. They care about them being delivered. They don't care about whose particular part of the job it is in their role to prevent suicide. They simply, rightly, want suicides prevented.&nbsp;
So, that's how it will be. People focused, coordinated, comprehensive and compassionate. This agreement will be at the heart of delivering just that. The Health Reform Committee will be led by my good friend and Federal Minister for Health, Greg Hunt, who is, as I said before, a passionate advocate for mental health reform. I know Greg and all the state and territory ministers will leave no stone unturned to deliver the first ever agreement under the auspices of the National Cabinet in this area, to ensure that whole of Government and lived experience input.
We need the Health Reform Committee to be supported also by a small strategic advisory group which brings together the views of experts, and importantly, Australians with lived experience of mental health, ill-health and the business sector.&nbsp;
So today, the National Mental Health Commission also launches a suite of resources for our workplaces. Practical guidance on how to be a mentally healthy workplace in COVID. These resources have been developed with a mentally healthy workplace alliance, a group of dedicated organisations representing the needs of workplaces across Australia. These resources will help sole traders, small businesses and medium and large organisations right across Australia.&nbsp;
So as we strive for these better days ahead, I commit my Government to a number of principles that will guide our way and governments around the country to honour them as well, as I have no doubt that they will. Moving towards preventative and proactive support for all Australians, starting with infants and families.&nbsp;
We will not wait for risk factors to eventuate or warning signs to escalate, but offer the right intervention as early as possible. It will support Australians where they live, where they learn and where they work. There will be more front doors into support. If you knock, we need someone to hear you and for someone to open that door and for someone to help. And proactive help for people who can't knock on that door or ask for it.&nbsp;
This also means better identifying points of transition or disconnection, where our mental health and suicide prevention efforts are most needed. It will require health systems to better integrate with schools, businesses, civil society organisations, non-health sectors where people at risk or in distress are most likely to be identified early.&nbsp;
To provide that triple A care - appropriate, affordable and accessible. No matter where you are on the mental health spectrum, or how persist your suicidal thoughts are, support must be there to meet your needs and this means timely proactive care that treats the person as just that - a person. Not a case, not a number. Not even an experience, but as a fellow human being.&nbsp;
We will build a system of comprehensive coordinated and compassionate care. That must be our goal, bringing together clinical care and social supports in the community and understanding how they connect, particularly for Australians with complex needs. And this means holistic care based on the needs of the person, their carers and their family, and we'll commit to a system that is consumer, person-driven, carer driven. This means facilitating power and choice, recruiting people into support networks into the individual's recovery journey and listening when something isn't working.&nbsp;
Of course, we must be driven by evidence, by the data, enhancing our understanding of what is happening in our communities. Understanding what works and why it works, and using this information to arrive at further decision making. We'll build a system that is scalable. The pandemic has shown that we need a system that is adaptable and scalable, up and down as needed.&nbsp;
Given the breadth of our ambition, mental health will be a feature of the budget not just next year, not the one that we just had and the one before that, but it will be a feature for many years to come under the governments that I lead.&nbsp;
This is a reform agenda for all Australians. Those who are currently receiving or requiring support for their mental health, their carers, their families, their colleagues, their mates. And those who might be well right now, but may, one day, like so many will, seek help for themselves or someone they know.&nbsp;
We all have a part to play as individuals, as families and communities. As businesses, non-profits, governments, and ensuring Australians get the support they need. And as one submission to the Productivity Commission said, those of us with mental illness need much more than weekly therapy to bring back the health and stability. We need support and companionship. Help connecting to communities. Help with friendships. Support to study and to work.&nbsp;
So, in conclusion - my Government will be carefully considering all of these reports but with a view to action. Reinforcing the actions we're already taking. Better coordinating and linking together the actions we've already taken. Those of state governments as well. Developing a comprehensive report to the Productivity Commission's report by the May 2021 Budget and other measures earlier if possible.
This will be informed by public consultation as well as other key reports and especially the advice of Christine Morgan’s final report due next month. Of course, he Victorian Royal Commission on mental health and the work of Gayaa Dhuwi on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander suicide prevention, the National Children’s Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy, and the findings of the independent taskforce on the mental health workforce.
No shortage of source material for us to use to transform our system which is mammoth and it will be a long-term undertaking. But we will make the progress. It’s not just about money and resources. It’s about the way we pout it all together, ensuring how this health apparatus interacts and supports how we support each other.
It will also require some good doses of humility and some good faith as we engage with each other, acknowledging where weaknesses have been and where vulnerabilities may continue to present. Because we must all be prepared to call those out and acknowledge them and learn from each other to understand the complexities of our humanities and strive to support each other much better.
No government, no not-for-profit, institution or mental health professional has all the answers to this. None of us can pretend to. But I am an optimist. I am always one who votes for hope. By working together, we can make tremendous progress so that Australians suffering from mental ill-health will have more better days and fewer bad ones.&nbsp;
That’s always our goal, whether in treatment or therapy or as a nation. Thank you so much for your very patient attention. Thank you.
Resources available at the below links:

PC report on mental health: https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/mental-health/report&nbsp;
NSPA interim advice: https://www1.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/mental-national-suicide-prevention-adviser&nbsp;
NMHC workplace resources: NMHC workplace resources: https://www.Health.gov.au/mentally-healthy-workplace&nbsp;



Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much, Phil. And and to Peter as well and to all of those who are joining us here today. These are very extraordinary times. And to be joining you in this way from isolation here in The Lodge is certainly unique, but it's great that we can continue to connect up. The government doesn't skip a beat as we continue on, regardless of these rather extraordinary circumstances.&nbsp;
Can I also acknowledge the Ngunnawal people and their elders past, present, and emerging. And as you know, I always like to acknowledge our veterans and our serving men and women, particularly at this time, as we're dealing with some very difficult issues, which we're all very aware of. We owe them a great debt and we thank them on behalf of a grateful nation for their service. But to all of you, thank you for your service to our country. Last year, I addressed the leadership of the APS, at the event at the Great Hall, and I said I wanted the APS to be professional, capable, flexible, technology enabled and citizen focussed, and open also to outsiders and diverse points of view, both within and without. And I believe this year has been a year of great delivery for our Australian public service, in spades. On behalf of the government, I want to thank all of you who have served so well and say thank you.&nbsp;
This year, the Australian Public Service and the entire public sector stepped up, and Australians needed you to, I needed you to, I said last year that more than advice, implementation and execution was key. It remains my view, in 2020 we witnessed strong implementation and execution by the APS during the most difficult crisis we've faced in certainly in my lifetime and in many generations. Silos fell. They dissolved, real substantive and fast collaboration occurred. You should all be enormously proud of what we've accomplished this year. We faced twin national crises in real time, a health crisis and an economic one, to save lives and to save livelihoods. There was no rulebook. There was no set of procedures for the broader actions that were undertaken by our public service, certainly when it related to our pandemic plan that was implemented. But the broader activity of the public service and what I saw occur, you've written that book now about how it should be done, through your actions. Decisions that once might have seemed absolutely impossible, like closing the national borders, quarantining Australians - including a Prime Minister - closing pubs, gyms, schools, theatres, weddings and funerals limited, a very difficult decision, shutting up places of worship. All these were made in a matter of days, difficult decisions made decisively, but also based on clear medical advice.&nbsp;
Thousands of members of the APS were redeployed. Within 24 hours, hundreds were seconded to Services Australia answering calls. We even had a Service Australia call centre operating out of Parliament House. All up, processing hundreds of thousands of claims in weeks. We saw functions and apparatus like the National Cabinet and the National COVID-19 Co-ordination Commission quickly and supported almost instantaneously. We witnessed incredible action in the earliest days of hearing of COVID-19 in Wuhan. DFAT staff drove 12 hours from Beijing to Wuhan to coordinate getting Australians out. And our consular staff around the world have been working tirelessly since. We all shared a goal this year, the executive, the parliament, the bureaucracy, and that was to save lives and to save livelihoods, and be COVIDSafe ourselves. And that's still our goal.
This year we've tragically lost 907 Australians to this virus. Our performance though as we all know has been very strong, but we can't bring those Australians back. But it's worth remembering that the mortality rate around the world has been more than 4 times greater than ours. And in the US and the UK and many European countries, it's been 20 times greater. Ours has been an $18.5 billion dollar health response. Every part of our medical response has been like an interlocking piece of the jigsaw. The national medical stockpile dispensed over 82 million masks, the purchase of thousands of ventilators, the deployment of emergency resources, a pathology ramp up some 700,000 COVID tests, 150 pop up COVID clinics, the absorption of the private hospital system into our COVID response, mobilising over 30,000 hospital beds and 105,000 skilled workers for our national response. Decisions about elective surgeries, accessing a wider pool of medical professionals, rolling out telehealth. A 10 year reform rolled out in 10 days with 38 million telehealth services provided so far.&nbsp;
The dramatic expansion of mental health funding and support further expanded during the Melbourne lockdown. Targeted support for indigenous communities, dozens and dozens of critical health decisions working hand in glove with the states and territories and of course, the incredible work that continues to ensure Australians can access a safe and effective vaccine in 2021.&nbsp;
There have been massive decisions on the economic front as well. You delivered JobKeeper. The biggest financial lifeline in our nation's history. This happened in weeks. $100 billion dollars, in fact, a bit more than that. 3.5 million jobs supported, 700,000 jobs saved. Now, I've been around this place for a while and many of you watching on have been around even longer. I find it hard to think of any single act by a Commonwealth government that has had a bigger impact on more lives in this country than JobKeeper. It has been a defining, game changing moment in our nation's history. It was the product of Ministers, particularly the Treasurer, working together with myself as Prime Minister, the then Finance Minister Mathias Cormann, working together with Treasury officials, led in particular by Steven and Jenny, to produce an extraordinary programme. I'm proud of many things during my time as both Prime Minister and in other Ministerial roles, but I'm going to be hard pressed to think of something that has had a more transformational impact and we couldn't have done it without you.&nbsp;
There were major supports for households and businesses, pandemic leave, JobSeeker changes, cash flow support for small and medium sized businesses, keeping a country going through a pandemic, over $500 billion dollars support in total, representing over 25 per cent of our GDP when combined with the monetary measures of the Reserve Bank, major decisions on visas, tenancies, childcare, aged care and so much more. Done professionally, done carefully and done quickly. Proving what I said last year, meeting the standards of high quality implementation and execution, you helped keep this country's head above water while so many other countries were plunging. You know, when you decided to join the public service, I suspect it was to be of great service to our country in moments just like this. This year, you've realised that vision for yourself, and I hope you feel incredibly proud of your service.&nbsp;
Now, we're expected to have one of the lowest falls in GDP across the advanced economies in 2020 across every area of government, people adapted and responded in areas most don't know about. And perhaps we'll never know. The National Measurement Institute, which if you didn't know, measures things by the way, ramped up its efforts to take testing masks, people and instruments and tests for labs and frontline staff. The engineers in the ADF who'd already demonstrated their great skills on so many occasions during the bushfires and the drought, rebuilt and refitted mask machines in the Med-Con factory in Shepparton as a result of that, that factory now has an output capacity of 200 million masks per year. All part of a tremendous effort by the ADF in 2020.
I said in the Parliament at the start of this pandemic that this year we would find out as Australians how strong we really are. And I can happily report to you that the quality, depth, skill and commitment of our public service met that test. It is strong. It really is, and I'm very proud of it.&nbsp;
This year, our country has witnessed the Australian public service at its very best. This virus we know is a common enemy all around the world. And like an enemy, when it engages, it seeks to disrupt our plans. But you have met that disruption head on. And now I'm going to ask for something from you once again, and that is more next year.
We are rebuilding what we've lost. We are reclaiming the jobs, the investment, the exports, the businesses and the hopes of millions of Australians that were crushed this year. And they're rebuilding. We are now, and as we go into next year, we are in the comeback phase. We are in the recovery and rebuilding phase. And you have as critical role to play in that, as you have had in the phase we've gone through this year as we've cushioned that blow and carried Australians through and ensured that we can get to the next stage.&nbsp;
To put it in perspective, the amount of support in particular we have given in our support of Victoria in this year alone, over about $35 billion dollars, that's more than a third of their total Budget this year. That is extraordinary.&nbsp;
And going forward, the recovery and rebuilding the plan for achieving that is our JobMaker plan, creating the settings for Australians to make decisions with confidence. Starting a business, getting training, building a home, having a family, even going on a local holiday. Our Government is about a business led recovery. We want businesses to drive this recovery. Now, that doesn't mean that there's no role for government. Quite the opposite. But what we have to be clear about is that we are enabling, through our policies, through the work that you're doing, a business led recovery. Because that's what is sustainable. Governments can't carry countries forever in our economy. Our economy will be driven by businesses. And so our policies and our implementation must be about spurring those businesses on to make those decisions, to plan for their future with confidence, and to move forward. There has been an important time for government and for government to step up, but we are very clear that it was temporary, that it was targeted, that it was proportionate, and it used the existing distribution channels to ensure that it didn't fail and it hasn't. Government has done and is doing the essential job that it had to do in the midst of the crisis. But we must graduate from that phase and allow business led recovery to take us forward into the future. 2021 is about ensuring our country recovers from the worst economic shock in our lifetime and businesses will carry that forward and we're already on our way. Major decisions on manufacturing, on skills, on energy, on cutting red tape, reducing the cost of business through deregulation. And of course, the Budget, which is our blueprint, our recovery plan from the COVID-19 recession. We're looking ahead to 2021. We'll need to keep our foot on that accelerator.&nbsp;
This year is coming to a close, but we all know the crisis is not yet over. We need to keep bringing Australians also home. Thousands more are still stuck overseas, wanting to get home to lives and loved ones here. And I want to thank those, whether they be in the Department of Home Affairs or the Department of Transport, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Those over at Services Australia who are also assisting in this effort, contacting people overseas. This is what I'm talking about, how all of these agencies have worked together in the past year. Let that be your take out from this. You know, a lot is said about this town, in particular, and I know we have federal Commonwealth public servants all around the country. But a lot's been said about it in the past, about how it only looks inward at itself and it doesn't connect with the rest of the country. Well, I think the Australian Public Service has done a lot this year to disprove that. And what it's also disproved to itself is that everyone doesn't have to stay in their silos for this to work. You've demonstrated how when you come together, you achieve great things. So that's got to be our take out. Let's take that as the learning and the legacy from what has been a very, very difficult year. That coming together does work. It does get better outcomes. It does increase the productivity and the outcome delivery of our public service for all Australians.&nbsp;
So we need to stay vigilant. We need to stay the course. And whether it's on our COVIDSafe behaviours and social distancing and hygiene to prevent second or third waves of this disease from taking hold or maintaining the course and supporting the business led recovery. Next year we’ll be delivering that COVID-19 vaccine. We've got a strategy that puts Australia at the front of the queue for a safe and effective vaccine. Whether it's one we bring here or one we develop here, and our elderly, health and aged care workers and other vulnerable people will be the first to get it. In a year of recovery and rebuilding, we will be asking for fresh thinking and new ideas and delivering for Australians just like this past year. My message to every member of the APS is that you demonstrated this year that together you are stronger, more effective and more capable than I think perhaps you imagined as well. So let's step out in that in 2021. And I need you fresh in 2021 as well. So use the Christmas break to recharge.
Just in finishing, let me make two points. Recently I set up the Policy Implementation Committee of Cabinet. You all know that the Expenditure Review Committee and the National Security Committee are the big subcommittees of Cabinet which drive a lot of the Government's agenda. The establishment of the new Policy Implementation Committee sits at equal status with both of those Cabinet subcommittees. And what they're designed to do is to ensure that we stay on track for delivering what we have developed and sought to put in place through our budgets. How we deliver is, frankly, more important than even the planning phase. It's the execution, as I said last year, that is most important. This Policy Implementation Committee of the Cabinet provides a venue, a channel for accountability of performance against what we've set out to do. And I can tell you honestly, the inspiration for it for me was in the major changes we made to Closing the Gap this year. And I want to thank particularly the team that worked on that and Ray and everyone there. Because working together with the Indigenous leaders, what we came up with was a set of metrics, not about just what we wanted to achieve. Whether it's reducing the mortality rate for infants in Australia from Indigenous communities or the school attendance rates or any of these things. But it set out what the things were we had to track well on to achieve that goal. It actually set out a clear pathway and a set of metrics and a dashboard that said if you want to achieve this and if we want to know we're tracking towards achieving this, then right now we know we need to be achieving this. And that's how the Policy Implementation Committee, that's how I want it to work.&nbsp;
One of the things I need to be looking at right now as Prime Minister and the other ministers is to know that we're going to hit this mark in two years time, ten years time, indeed 20 years time when we think of long term defence procurements. It's fine to talk about the absolute outcome metrics. But there are metrics we need to satisfy every single day to know we're on track. Now, you are the professionals about knowing what those are. That's where your skill and your expertise comes into being. And that's just not the role of central agencies. It is the responsibility of every department for you to be supporting your ministers so they can know how we're tracking against what we as a Government have committed to do. I take delivery and my commitments very seriously to the Australian people. That is a bond you have as a Prime Minister with the community, and I'm relying on you to help us ensure that we can deliver on those commitments and knowing what we need to do each and every day.&nbsp;
Final point I wanted to make was a personal reflection, but it's far broader than that. I'm sure Phil would join with me in welcoming the nomination of Professor Brendan Murphy, as the Australian of the Year from the ACT. Brendan is a very humble guy. You all know that. And he has possibly the worst jokes in the public service, I suspect, having had to endure many of them over our many meetings. He's a wonderful man and he's a great Australian. I'm so proud of you, Brendan, that you've been nominated. But the thing about this is when I tease Brendan constantly about his notoriety, is I know that he accepts this nomination not for himself personally. I know that he feels he's accepting it on behalf of all of you. He represents the tip of the spear in so many respects, supported by Paul Kelly and so many others who have worked so hard over, particularly in the health area this year. He is the tip of the spear of the entire public service effort during COVID-19. In so many ways, he's been the face of the public service. And I know every time, as it's been also true with Paul, we've stepped out there and particularly in those early days of the pandemic and we faced the nation and we said it's going to be okay, we're going to get through this. Of course, they look to a Prime Minister for that. But to be flanked by one of you, by a member, a professional member of our public service, that's said the same thing. I think that said a lot about the partnership that you and I have in our commitment to serving the Australian people. So congratulations, Brendan. You're up in a pretty good field, I've got to say, with Shane Fitzsimmons and many others, but I appreciate the way and the humble way in which you received that order on behalf of everyone here in the Australian public service. And I wish you all the best and I look forward to more of those jokes, I suppose.&nbsp;
Thanks, everyone.&nbsp;
PHIL GAETJENS, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET: Thanks, Prime Minister.
&nbsp;


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well thank you very much and it’s good to join you this morning, and I am speaking to you from ISO here at the Lodge, which is a bit extraordinary but we have all been getting used to that this year. As some of you may well be as you are joining us today.
Can I also acknowledge the Ngunnawal people, on whose land we meet where I am, and to pay my respect to their elders, past and present. And I also, given the nature of this event - can I specifically acknowledge all of our indigenous women leaders around the country who do such an amazing job, you know when I talk to those who are involved in programmes on the ground, they talk about how important it is to engage with female leaders in communities, and to sit and to listen.
And it doesn’t matter whether I’m talking to people working out of the Federal Police, people who are working in homelessness, people who are working in health, and I’ve got to say when I used to work in New Zealand many years ago, it was the same there. In engaging with Indigenous health, Maori there and other Pacific cultures. [Inaudible] to engage and understand the challenges [inaudible]. Have an amazing bravery and an amazing [inaudible] and a protective character which is truly inspiring.
Can I also acknowledge, as I always like to, all the serving men and women who serve in our Defence Force and particularly at this time dealing as a country with some very difficult, hard news and I want to thank all veterans and all Defence Force personnel for their service [inaudible].
I also acknowledge our parliamentary colleagues who are joining us here and fellow leaders with us today - and particularly acknowledge the Co-convenors of the Friendship Group - Senator Waters, Dr Aly and Dr Martin. Thank you.
We come together on this day [inaudible]. There are some issues which we will [inaudible] with hammer and tong, but on this issue, and I’ve been around this place for a while now. There is agreement across the divide. There is a sense of frustration and anguish across the divide. There is no dispute and no lesser level of conviction across any area of policy in this country when it comes to dealing with this issue.
Natasha, I want to thank you once again, we’ve been working with each other for a while on this, back from when I was Social Services Minister in particular many years ago. And I thank you for your introduction today and the issues that you’ve raised. And I particularly want to congratulate you on your appointment to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. So congratulations [inaudible].&nbsp;
You know, we all come to this with different perspectives. I grew up as the son of a police officer, and you know, when you grow up as the son of a police officer, you don't grow up with any illusions about true nature of the society in which you live. They know. My father was a good cop, and he was a good man and he saw the worst of society and he would see it every day, particularly when he was a younger officer. He worked the beat like anyone else when he was a young officer. And that was back in the 60s, not today. And we all know that while there are terrible, awful, atrocious things that continue to happen today, spare a thought for 30, 40 years ago when it was even more silent than it is today. And they would see this, and they would live with this. Good men and women who were aware of what was happening.&nbsp;
So I grew up in an environment where I was not disabused with any sort of fairy tale view&nbsp; about the absence of violence in our society, the absence of the things that we know that we are still dealing with today. I thank him for not, and sparing me the grisly detail a young boy, but I could see how he carried these things over the course of his working life and his mates who dealt with similar things.&nbsp;
So I come to this with no illusions about the reality and the honesty of the situation and how we have to confront it. But I also come to it with the legacy of so many others who have served in my role and served in so many other roles, including the brave women who have entered our parliament. And are here joining with us today from all sides of politics.&nbsp;
But this year we had the passing of two amazing women who did so much. And I'm talking about of course Senator Susan Ryan and Dame Margaret Guilfoyle. Dame Margaret was the first woman to hold a Cabinet portfolio and she said this of her ethos, equal participation of women in the parliament and the whole community of life can only lead us to a better understanding of humanity and the fulfilment of aspirations that we would have for a civilised society. Dame Margaret’s point was clear, we can't separate how our country treats women from what our country actually is. And I share that view. Susan Ryan expressed the same sentiments, she she demonstrated the same passion. She also fought to claim ground, on behalf of my daughters I thank them both.&nbsp;
That they will inherit a world and a country that is better than the one that my mother, when she started work and the idea that someone would be working, wasn't necessary, at a time when one mother, she had my brother and I, they couldn't understand why she would then go back to work. And when we lost my father earlier this year, a lot of these stories came back and we discussed them as family. And I could see quite a bit of the change that is taking place, but so much of the change that is still to be achieved, which is why we come together today.&nbsp;
This year has been a hard year for all Australians. With COVID-19 and the stresses and strains and anxiety that it has placed on people. And we, of course, and this was one of our greatest concerns at the outset of the pandemic, the Premiers and chief ministers myself alike, all through the federation that we knew that the virus, and shutting down communities and keeping people in homes where we know home is not always safe for a lot of women in this country.&nbsp;
That was one of the hardest decisions we had to make because we knew that there would be circumstances that potentially would potentially put women at great risk. And when you talk about hard decisions about containing the virus, that can pretty much destroy your country. And also at the same time, trying to protect women and children in vulnerable situations. This was one of the toughest decisions. And then we, and we agonised over them, and the only response was to do what we did, but at the same time ensure we doubled down as much as we possibly could on the services that would be necessary to support vulnerable people in these situations.
And this was a joint effort, it was no one single issue. It was a shared commitment and concern that we were acting on and state and federal governments working together to do whatever we can.&nbsp; There were no lines when it came to how we were going to protect women and children in vulnerable areas during the pandemic. There were no spats between the feds and the states. It was ‘We’ve just got to get this done.’ And I want to thank all the premiers and chief ministers and the health ministers. I know Greg Hunt will join me on that and Marise Payne in thanking them for the work we've done together.&nbsp;
But all too often, and that has continued to be the case over the course of this year, we have seen these behaviours that persist and seek to silence, control women in so many cases. In this country, we know that one woman is murdered by her current or former partner every nine days and that one in four women experience physical or sexual violence. One in four. You know these figures, we all know this because we say these figures and they cause us to shrink when we hear them. But this year, when Hannah Clarke was murdered and her three young children, I think for so many Australians, these weren’t numbers. A beautiful, young, strong woman, a mother and her three children killed in the most violent way I can imagine. You just can't get it out of your head. And when I attended the funeral and I looked at those beautiful faces of Aaliyah, Laianah and Trey and I looked at Hannah putting her arms around her children, well, it was hard to cope. And I hope this stays with me, and I'm absolutely certain it will. And others as we seek to deal with this issue. Because we do focus rightly on the prevalence of this issue and the statistics and that's an all important part of the evidence-based policy, as you rightly say, Natasha, that needs to drive our decision making. Of course, it has to drive our decision making and how we apply funds, where we do it and where we understand the problem will be the greatest and the contributing factors to be most prevalent. We need to understand all of that. But we also can never lose sight of just the sheer emotional scarring, torment, torture. And that also has to drive us. That's also what has to sustain us, and I can assure you, it sustains my commitment to this and the members of my government and I believe every single member of parliament and opposition and wherever you sit.&nbsp;
How many times have we all heard the news report and said to ourselves, not again. And we know that has to change. It’s violence caused by a twisted view of masculinity that thinks masculinity means control. It’s about control, it's about power. We know that to be the case. Healthy masculinity is not threatened by equality in the workplace, at home or anywhere else. Healthy humanity is not threatened by these. Whether it's people of different backgrounds or sexuality or colour or views, healthy humanity is not affected by these things and healthy masculinity is not either when it comes to issues of women. And to the credit of all sides of politics in the states and territories as well, the journey on this for Australia is well and truly on. We've been tackling the systemic challenge since 2013. We have committed more than a billion dollars to programmes and activities that seek to tackle violence against women and their children. We pick up from the work that was done by the Rudd-Gillard governments and the packages that were put in place and those responses. This is a continuation of that work with equal passion.&nbsp;
And this here, in the early days of the pandemic, we did put in place, as Fiona said, $150 million for the COVID-19 domestic and family violence support package, providing needed support for crisis accommodation, frontline services and intervention programmes. We did put additional funding for the 1800RESPECT counselling services. When I was a social services minister, I visited those places and the calls were made and the calls were taken. In September, we announced our Safe Places Emergency Accommodation Programme, which provides 58 safe emergency accommodation in remote regional and metropolitan areas, and the government is still considering a number of those proposals now having dealt with the others. We're proud to fund Our Watch to the tune of $21 million from 2019-2022 to support vital preventative activities.&nbsp;
But alongside the vital programmes must come a fundamental change in attitudes to Australian lives. There has, of course, been progress, but not nearly enough and the evidence tells us that attitudes which justified or condone gender inequality are a driver of violence against women. To prevent violence and inequality, we have to challenge those beliefs, to call it out, and behaviours that excuse justify or condone it. And this year, as part of this International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women, Our Watch is focusing on sexism and disrespect towards women that happens online. Because more and more, we live our lives in this space, and particularly over the course of this past year during the pandemic. Australia has led the world with an e-safety commissioner, Julie Inman-Grant, who does an amazing job. She's awesome. To help protect us all women, kids in particular as well. She is a champion. I'm glad Julie Inman-Grant is out there protecting my kids online and I'm glad she's protecting Jenny, I’m glad she's protecting all the women on this call today and elsewhere in the country. And she's there to stop the trolling, the abuse, the vile attacks on dating apps, the unwanted sharing of private images, and, yes, the everyday sniping on Twitter that all seeks to silence women politicians, women journalists, women academics and commentators, just like those who tried to silence Dame Margaret and Susan Ryan long ago as well.&nbsp;
So there is, friends, still so much to do. Attitude change, behavioural change, continue to renew support services that support women. I want to assure you that my Government is committed to that work and all the members of the House. Now, as many of you know, the current national plan will end in 2022. We've already begun work on the next one, just like we did last time, picking up on the work done by previous governments. The preeminent human yearning in all of us, men and women alike, is to be safe. And for too many women we know that fundamentally is not being met. That's why keeping Australian’s safe is the first priority of our Government, because it's the foundation of a civilised society.&nbsp;
So on this International Day of Eliminating Violence Against Women, I recommit and rededicate my and our efforts to keep women and their children safe. I really want to thank Our Watch for all your efforts and I look forward to seeing the outcomes of today's meeting. I thank you very much for your kind attention.&nbsp;


Prime Minister
Well, thank you very much. It's a great honour and privilege to join with you all here today.
Can I commence by acknowledging, of course, the Dharawal and Gundungurra people. And thank you for the welcome to country today and the just wonderful singing of our national anthem in Dharawal. That is something that young children in my electorate in the Sutherland Shire have done for many, many years. And my children grew up singing in Dharawal as well at their local schools. And I can only think of Harvey and Charlotte growing up and learning the anthem in that language as well. It is absolutely beautiful.
Can I acknowledge the elders past, present and future. Can I acknowledge any veterans serving men and women of the Defence Forces who are here with us today. And say, just simply thank you for your service.
To all those volunteers, particularly the rural fire service who are here with us today, thank you for your service.
To the Premier Gladys Berejiklian, thank you for your leadership in such an incredibly tough year here in New South Wales. You've been a great supporter, a great colleague, and I greatly appreciate the strength that you've shown here in our largest state.
To Angus Taylor, the Member for Hume, he is here in that capacity today, thank you for your leadership here on the ground during the terrible Black Summer of fires that was endured. And to Nat also to you the Member for Wollondilly the same, Councillor Robert Kahn the Mayor of Wollondilly Shire, Commissioner Rob Rogers thank you Rob for your leadership that extends now and into the future. But of course, if you would join me in acknowledging the former Commissioner, Shane Fitzsimmons from Resilience New South Wales. And it's great to see you both here today.
To the O'Dwyer family and the Keaton families, to Melissa and to Charlotte, to Jess and to Harvey, to the parents, to the brothers and sisters, of all the extended family that comes together today and of course, to the members of the Horsley Park brigade and to Darren Nation, a champion of a leader who is an example to so many right across the brigade and of course, the local Buxton brigade here as well, and all the RFS members who fought those fires together.
Thank you for inviting me to mark the formal opening of this Memorial Park in honour of Geoff and Andrew.
There have been many moments of sadness in this past year, and I hope as I have already conveyed, that this is a day that might have a light of joy for you on this long road.
It's another step in the journey, a tough journey I know for the families. I hope this is a day that you can look back on as a day of some joy.
Children have a great capacity to bring love and to create joy, and to generate laughter.
I want to thank the Buxton community and the Wollondilly Shire for their efforts to make this day in this wonderful place a reality.&nbsp;
It was a generous action, one supported at all levels, so the children could come and play, so they could establish a new hope.
Children can heal us in a way that we can never understand or explain.
And so this place will be a place of healing.
It'll be a place of peace, of quiet reflection, but above all, a place to play. A place for children like Charlotte and Harvey, who I know have given their very strong seal of approval, earlier today as I watched them play.&nbsp;
It's great to see them here today. They’re fantastic kids, who I know bring great comfort to their families through all of this.
I'm sure, and I hope, your dads would have loved this place as your mums, I'm sure do.
We all wish that Geoff could have chased Harvey through this fire truck behind me, and that Andrew could have lifted Charlotte up to help grasp the monkey bars. While Jess and Melissa watched over enjoying a cup of coffee and a bit of a catch up.
I hope this is a place where Harvey and Charlotte and their mums and their broader families can feel the presence of Geoff and Andrew.&nbsp;
It is said that one of the meanings of the word Wollondilly means a place where spirits dwell. I'm sure that will be true here in this very special place.&nbsp;
Anniversaries are difficult, particularly anniversaries of the nature that we mark here in coming times.
Australians will never forget all of those who served so valiantly, our volunteer firefighters and what they did for us during our Black Summer.&nbsp;
I'll personally never forget Horsley Park’s decision, under Darren's leadership, to honour their colleagues by getting back out there on the fire trail.&nbsp;
A while back, I had the privilege of speaking and addressing and honouring some veterans of World War II. And I said to them, we pledge to always be a country as good and as courageous as you.&nbsp;
Good and courageous. That's Geoff and Andrew.
Let's make the same pledge to them again this day. And not just to them, but to David Moresi too, and Sam McPaul and Bill Slade and Matt Kavanagh and Ian McBeth, Paul Hudson and Rick DeMorgan Junior. Those who we also lost in the Black Summer.&nbsp;
And good and courageous is how we would also describe our RFS volunteers and particularly those at Horsley Park, and of course here in Buxton.
I’ve mentioned Darren Nation a few times, I want to acknowledge him here today, personally, he has been a constant source of encouragement and strength and an inspiration to me over this past year, and I thank you, Darren for leading locally and encouraging nationally.
All of you keep us safe and it's everyone who supports them beside- behind the scenes as well gathered here today, spouses, kids who are all too familiar with the interrupted dinners, the hasty departures of birthday parties and the sounds of pagers or phones going off, you are all good and courageous.
So today, again, I feel sad for the loss, certainly. But also I'm reaching out to that joy that is there for all of us to take, in this wonderful playground.
A place of pride, pride in the selflessness of Geoff and Andrew, pride in the brigade and the community who have rallied here together, pride in the good and courageous people who protect us every day.
I'm sure the Premier feels the same way. And the other Ministers, representatives of the community here.
I have never felt more proud of Australia as we draw to the end of this terrible year, as I do now.
I've never felt more proud of our country and of my home state of New South Wales.
So, for many here. You did not get a Christmas last year. And again, Christmas this year I'm sure will be difficult.
There will be grief, but also, hopefully, the joy of the wonderful message of Christmas for all of you.
I hope and pray that the buds and sprigs of laughter and joy will be found again in your lives this Christmas and beyond. That’s my Christmas wish and prayer for you all.
It's a great honour to be with you all here today.
God bless.
[END]


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: G’day from Australia!
It’s fantastic to be part of this world renowned FinTech festival.
For many years, I have been an enthusiastic believer in the potential of this dynamic sector.
Because it’s demonstrating its ability to drive change, growth, innovation and productivity, most importantly, across every field of economic endeavour, and even more broadly than that.
This is a sector that can transform lives - by unlocking the financial system, by giving more power to consumers, fintech is a boon to small businesses and start-ups, but also families.
This sector is proving that we are only limited in this day and age by our imagination.
These are extraordinary times - and today I want to speak to you about the times we live in, the innovation these times are driving within our Government and governments, and what I believe is the compelling Australian FinTech story.
The times we face
The world over - we have all faced the health and economic crises generated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
2020 is a year none of us want to repeat.
In Australia, we have used our strong balance sheet - built up over many years of discipline, to support and provide our health system with the additional resources, record levels, it has needed - and to provide major, unprecedented economic supports for households and businesses - providing much needed strength and resilience to the economy to both cushion the blow and to recover.
On the health front - the virus has been largely suppressed and contained here in Australia. But sadly, like so many other countries, we have lost lives. 900, just over here in Australia.
Our efforts have successfully suppressed the virus - and we are now focused on ensuring there are no more outbreaks, and that they are contained in the event that they occur.
On the economic front, our actions have saved 700,000 jobs - and many of the jobs that were lost are returning. In fact, around 80 per cent of jobs that were either wiped out or people’s hours were reduced to zero, have now been returned to our economy.
We’ve had one of the lowest falls in our GDP of any of the advanced nations. Only last Wednesday we learned that in the September quarter our economy rebounded with 3.3 per cent growth.
The strong results is a credit to all parts of Australian life. It’s by virtue of the great contributions of workers, employees, of governments, of businesses, of employers.
Through some of our businesses, though they were frozen in place by virtue of the pandemic restrictions, they are now coming back to life. And many are accelerating at warp speed.
Fintech and JobMaker
Nearly 9 out of 10 Australian firms took on new technology to cope with new conditions here in Australia.
McKinsey has estimated that in terms of business and consumer digital adoption, we vaulted forward some 5 years in just 8 weeks.
Now that’s supercharged change.
I am determined, here in Australia, that we don’t lose that momentum.
And that’s why we had our JobMaker Plan put in place, which is all about our recovery plan, the rebuilding, rebuilding our economy for the future.
And that comeback is on. It is happening right now in Australia.
Building an economy that is more advanced and adaptive, more creative and resilient than ever before.
That means modernising our digital architecture.
Getting the regulatory settings right and governments leading by example in how we do business.
It’s also about supporting businesses to take up that new technology, to apply it, to adopt it, and become digital by default.
Ensuring our cyber security settings though are fit-for-purpose is critical to underpin the confidence that is needed for Australians and the businesses they run, households they’re part of, to engage in that digital technology future.
Encouraging unimagined innovation by removing barriers to entry, we have been doing through regulatory sandboxes here in Australia.
And building on consumer data rights - which I started work on when I was the Treasurer.
These are landmark reforms to our economy, some of the biggest reforms we’ve seen.
Vital to giving customers, consumers power, more access and control over their data, where data has become a commodity in this digital age.
This year, we launched it in our banking sector, as part of our banking sector reforms, our open banking reforms. And other sectors will soon follow, particularly in energy and other utilities.
The whole sector relies on partnerships in FinTech - connecting different parts of the eco-system - and that includes government. We’re no exception here.
Our Partnership with Singapore
Australia and Singapore are Comprehensive Strategic Partners and I greatly value the relationship I have with Prime Minister Lee and that Singapore has with Australia. It is very important to us.
It is a deep friendship, it is a deep partnership, and it is based on such clear values and an outlook on the world and our economic futures that is highly aligned.
In August this year, Australia and Singapore signed a ground-breaking Digital Economy Agreement - one of the first of its kind.
The Agreement is a digital bridge that features modern, upgraded rules to free up data flows and increase compatibility for online trade.
It gets rid of unnecessary restrictions on where data has to be stored, while at the same time protecting personal data and consumer rights.
It makes government information also easier to access, and government rules easier to follow.
It covers everything from AI to ID; e-invoicing to e-certification; data protection to protecting our children from online harm, from online predators.
It’s a massive step forward, and a new global benchmark for digital trade for others to follow, and for both of us to pursue with other partners around the world, so we can all become linked up.
FinTech is a big plank of this digital bridge.
We’ve opened the way for collaboration between FinTech and RegTech enterprises and industry bodies to explore business opportunities, and develop standards for open banking.
And all of this, it’s just the start.
The Australian Acceleration
FinTech, it’s not a destination or a one-size fits all approach to modernising policy.
It’s not a buzz word, it’s real.
It’s all about government taking on the same flexibility as well, and adaptability and willingness to experiment and innovate - just like business does when it wants to flourish.
I want the pace of change in our government to continue to accelerate in these critical areas.
And it has this year. Dramatically.
On the FinTech front, we’ve seen great work with our Parliamentary Committee into FinTech headed by Senator Bragg and the work of our Assistant Minister for Financial Services and Financial Technology Jane Hume - and my message to my colleagues across government is: don’t let up, keep going!
FinTech is integral to the economy we are rebuilding.
And there are plenty of fronts where we have so much still to do - particularly in deregulation, taxation, and especially skills development.
We have a fantastic Australian story - and I am incredibly proud of what our Aussie start-ups and early age ventures are achieving, as well as our well-established unicorns and what they’re achieving.
You know some of them: Atlassian, Airwallex, Afterpay, Judo Bank, Athena Home Loans.
In fact, “Buy Now Pay Later” Is an Australian innovation.
As a people, we are very keen adopters - it’s just how we are, it's part of our psyche - and that means it's easy to create a customer base here.
Australian’s get this.
We’ve seen that this year in the Medtech space - with a massive roll out of telehealth services throughout the pandemic. So far, over 40 million telehealth consultations have taken place - providing medical support to 11.9 million Australians.
Now when you think of Australia, we’re a vast country. Vast spaces, populations far removed. And so our geography, our society, our passion for delivering essential services right across our country, it produces this type of innovation.
We have difficult problems to solve here in Australia, and these tools help us solve them, which demonstrates why we are a country that really does understand the future of FinTech.
As the world’s only nation continent, we always have to be outward looking. You don’t get rich by selling stuff to yourself. Singaporeans certainly understand that.
It’s why we always look beyond our own borders for our economic opportunities.
So half of our FinTech firms actually have a presence overseas.
Last year, 7 Australian companies were named among the world’s top 100 FinTechs.
And for Australia, we know that continued acceleration requires greater attention to skills.
This technology, it doesn’t invent itself.
As your conference theme reminds us, technology is as much about talent as it is about tools.
We need more highly-skilled people to develop and commercialise the next wave of cutting edge innovations. And they are welcome here in Australia, if this is where you wish to come to further you FinTech’s opportunities.
Some countries are worried about the brain-drain - we’re focused on the “brain gain”. That’s about attracting talent and global businesses to Australia.
This can be your place of great success as it has been for millions over many generations.
A country that is reliable, safe, stable and free. Resolutely free. And, although I might be a little biased, it is a beautiful place to live, and to raise a family.
And we can comfortably pitch for that talent - because we are the most successful multicultural nation on earth.
No one has greater diversity across its population and more successful cohesion of the many cultures, of the many language groups, of the ethnicities and heritages that come together in this amazing Australian nation.
So we are building our skills locally as well as attracting skilled people from overseas.
That’s an invite by the way!
To help us do that, I’ve appointed a Special Envoy for Global Business and Talent Attraction, Mr Peter Verwer AO.
Peter’s an experienced business leader here in Australia, but he is also experienced overseas. He’s based in Singapore, with deep commercial, academic and cultural networks that reach out across the world. He’s spent much time there.
His team is scouting for talented people to come to Australia and work with us.
His message, and mine as he is my Special Envoy on this issue, is that Australia is a great place to do business - and yes, it’s the best place in the world to live.
We have a blossoming tech sector, a digital bridge to Singapore and the region, a culture of innovation and collaboration, and a fierce determination to keep building on what we have already achieved.
We are also keen to work with our global partners to ensure international policy rules keep pace with the needs of the communities that we represent.
And we want to set that pace too. We’re looking for pace setters here in Australia.
I hope many of you will want to work with us. I hope many of you will want to join us. And I hope that we’ll be able to welcome you for that purpose.
So thank you, everyone. I hope enjoy the festival of FinTech.
It’s an exciting part of what’s happening in the world today, a real bright spot. Something that I think our countries, our populations, our citizens can gain great hope from.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Today I am speaking to you from the Lodge here in Canberra, which is on Ngunnawal land and I would like to acknowledge the traditional owners and pay my respects to their elders, past, present and emerging for the future.
I also wish to acknowledge serving members of our Defence Forces, any veterans who may be watching this broadcast and thank you sincerely for your service to our nation.
So welcome to the 13th Prime Minister’s Literary Awards.
Today’s virtual event has provided an opportunity to break what has become a rather unfortunate tradition, for the past two years, these awards have been held at Parliament House, and both ceremonies have been interrupted by the less than melodic Parliamentary bells. So far, I’m two for two for having to dash off to a division. But not this year. It would seem this year, we’ll at least be spared that distraction.
Let me start by congratulating everyone who’s nominated - you are our nation’s story tellers, our poets, our historians and our illustrators.
Your work helps to define of course, who we are as Australians, and articulates what many of us feel but so often struggle to put into words. You make it look too easy. But I know it’s not.
It takes countless hours. Long days. Research. Hard work. And above all, a great talent.&nbsp;
And this year, maybe more than any other, Australians have relied on your work, I know I have, on your stories.
For most of us, this has been a very tough year.
A book, a kindle, an audiobook, has been the perfect retreat - to escape into another world, to savour a different time or reflect on the ideas that are contained in your works.
This year, one in five Australians have reported they’re reading more often.
And our younger Australians, our ‘Gen Zers’, like my daughters — are reading more than they have, also. And I welcome that, it’s terrific.
&nbsp;
They’re discovering the remarkable insights that books offer.
Books like The Happiest Man on Earth by Eddie Jaku released only a few months ago. A truly great book. It’s Eddie’s first work, he’s 100 years of age.
You are never too old to tell a story.
Eddie’s is a harrowing but hopeful story. Of life in Nazi concentration camps. Of surviving Auschwitz and the holocaust. Of losing family.
And despite the deprivations, Eddie never lost his faith in humanity or the importance of friendship. At War’s end, Eddie found himself a home in Australia where he was welcomed with open arms.
He called our country the working man’s paradise: a land where opportunities abound. But there was one thing Eddie said that really struck me.
For years, he never wanted to tell his story. It was just simply too painful. But he realised that if he didn’t, his story would be lost, and with it would go the chance to make the world a better place, his ambition.
That’s the power that stories have.
Whether it’s the lessons from history, narrative fiction, or even stories for our children. Each one carries a seed for change.
And that’s why what you do of course, is so important.
Your voice, your stories, show us what’s possible.
And we need a diversity of voices. Which we pride ourselves on in this country.
I was very pleased to see so many Indigenous writers shortlisted this year. Of the 40 shortlisted authors, 9 are of Indigenous heritage. Now that is wonderful - because we know how integral storytelling is to Indigenous culture.&nbsp;
And this means we are now sharing stories that struggled to be heard for so long. When these stories are told our Australian history is preserved, it’s enriched, and that rich mosaic of what it means to be Australian shines ever more brighter.&nbsp;
With it, the canon of our national life grows. Those stories become part of who we are. And they make us a stronger, a richer nation.
We are a country that believes passionately in the freedom of ideas, of speech and expression.
Australia is a place where ideas come from across a very broad spectrum, they intermingle, they co-exist. Even when they may be at odds with each other.
It’s why for people like Eddie, Australia was heaven after the awfulness and the atrocities of the Holocaust.
A place where people are accepted, no matter who you are, no matter your race, your first language, your creed, your background, your ethnicity.
So keep telling your stories.
Keep reflecting and shaping the character of our nation.
Congratulations again to everyone nominated, and very well done.
&nbsp;


Prime Minister
Thank you very much for that very warm welcome.
We gather in Ngunnawal country at our National Arboretum, whose elders past and present and future we acknowledge and respect.
A place where we can wonder at the breadth and the diversity of our land - amongst the 44,000 trees are hundreds of plant species from across our nation.
Our Arboretum looks out across much of our capital - our parliament and its freedoms, our War Memorial and the price paid for those freedoms.
We can see far from here.
And this year, the view is different from last.
The bushfire scarred landscape is recovering. The greyness of the Australian drought is giving way to a new green tinge.
If our land teaches us anything - it is that if we persevere - we can withstand, we do recover and we do renew.
And this land - the home of the world’s only continent nation - has a seamlessness about it that accommodates so much difference.
Nature reminds us there is a place for everyone and everything in our land.
We know from our first Australians that our country teaches us much.
It is a country that requires us to listen to it, and most often, to contend with it.
This past year, we faced adversity again - nature confronting us in a different form - beckoning us again to persevere.
And we have – and we continue to do so even now.
The story of Australia is of a people who persevere and overcome - who know that reward and effort, enterprise and fairness, justice and hope, accompany each other.
Our stories now number more than 25 million Australians, they are all important, they are all respected, woven together to make us strong.
We are a people who contend and prevail.
And we prevail, always by looking ahead - through debate, effort and striving - drawing out the very best in each other.
These awards are an annual reminder of just what Australians can do and achieve.
Of what we can build together - as a country one and free.
The nominees here tonight, like the land they are drawn from, are diverse and different - men and women who strive, and study, they argue, they give, and they engage, they love, they care.
Who share a yearning to make a good Australia an even better Australia.
Like the eucalypts, wattles, the cassias, the wildflowers and grasses that surround us, and the capital that is below us, the nominees here tonight are diverse.
All playing a part. Doing their bit.
Nominees, who when brought together, give us a glimpse of who we are, and even more importantly, who we can all aspire to be.
It is a great pleasure to be with you tonight - to honour you, and the tens of thousands of people who you embody - and to thank you for everything you have done and will continue to do for all Australians.
Happy Australia Day.
[End]


Prime Minister
Prime Minister: Well thank you very much Your Excellency the Governor General and Mrs Hurley. To the Leader of the Opposition Anthony Albanese who joins us here today, good to see you. To Danielle Roche the Chair of the National Australia Day Council, Karlie Brand the CEO. My Ministerial colleagues, Minister Colbeck and Assistant Minister Morton. To our Australians of the year, to Grace, to Isobel, to of course Rosemary and Miriam-Rose, you express Australia like none I can imagine and I am so proud of you being here with us today.
But to Australians all, one and free. I start today by acknowledging the Ngunnawal people and I thank you for the welcome to country today.
I pay my respects and of all Australians to elders past present and emerging for the future.
And I acknowledge all those who have served and are serving today, our nation, in our defence forces and to say to you thank you for you service.
As Australians, our fates have always been bound together.
During this past year, we have been reminded once again of our shared fortunes. How much we indeed depend on each other.
In a year where much of the world has struggled under the strain of the global pandemic, Australians, together, have prevailed, in our own Australian way.
Australians patiently doing the right thing.
Health workers collecting samples and tracing the virus; nurses, aged and disability care workers tending to our elderly and to our vulnerable; the medical teams, our defence forces, the police running our quarantine facilities; the farmers, and the truck drivers, the wholesale and the retail workers keeping our supermarket shelves stocked and all those even now working to produce our vaccine.
And, of course, the many business owners of Australia, small and large, struggling with the uncertainty of a pandemic, keeping their show together and Australians in work.
On this Australia Day, we say thank you to the many who have once again pulled Australia through.
But you know, this is not a new experience for our country.
From whatever our beginnings or our circumstances, Australians have always demonstrated our ability to overcome. To rise above. To better our history. To create our future.
Today, on Australia Day we reflect on that journey, the price that has been paid for our freedom, the lessons of our history and the privilege of being able to call ourselves Australians.
We do it on this day when the course of this land changed forever.&nbsp;
There is no escaping or cancelling this fact. For better and worse, it was the moment where the journey to our modern Australia began.
And it is this continuing Australian journey that we recognise today.
Our stories since that day have been of sorrow and of joy. Of loss and redemption. Of failure and success.
We are now a nation of more than 25 million stories, all important, all unique and all to be respected.
Whether it is the story of our first nation peoples’ strong, ancient and proud culture and their survival in the face of dispossession and colonisation.
Or the forsaken souls who came as convicts, not to start a new world, but because they had been banished from the old one. Condemned and outcast by empire, they too overcame.
The settlers and waves of immigrants who have followed seeking a better life for themselves and their families, creating a nation in the process, including the 12,000 people from over 130 nations who become citizens today.
These stories do not compete with each other, they simply coexist. They weave together to create Australia.
Today we reflect on how far we have come, but importantly we humbly acknowledge the work still ahead of us.
We have risen above our brutal beginnings.
We have overcome, survived and thrived.
We have learned but yet we are still learning.
And as the many peoples of the world joined our journey, we have become even stronger,&nbsp;
The most successful and cohesive immigration and multicultural nation on earth.&nbsp;
The home of the world’s oldest living human culture.
A modern, prosperous and generous nation. Fair minded, hard working.&nbsp;
A standard bearer for liberal democracy, in a world where authoritarianism is once again seeking to push itself forward.
An honest nation that continues to confront the truth of our past and to reconcile this with our future.
Much to appreciate and to be thankful for.
And this year we will face many more challenges.
But it is Australian to be optimistic and look forward.
It is a choice we make to believe in hope.
Our optimism has always enabled us to push past the adversities we have faced and overcome.
We have been made extraordinary gains, these extraordinary gains by the extraordinary contributions of ordinary Australians.
In 2021 we will be relying once again on all Australians to be at their best.
To once again exercise their responsibility and make their own unique contributions to our success.
In our families, in our communities, in our places of work, and education and of worship and in our environment, caring for country.
The exercise of these responsibilities and contributions are the ones that will continue to make for a successful and resilient Australia.
We do this, because in Australia we believe in the unique value of each Australian as individuals, rather than seeing or indeed allowing ourselves to be defined solely through the identity prism of our age, or our race, or our gender, our ethnicity or our religion.
As Australians we are more than any and all of these things, and together we share and steward our Australian inheritance.
As Australians we write our own story. We create our own future. And we will do so again this year, together.&nbsp;
Happy Australia Day.
[End]


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you very much. Thank you very much, Gerry. Thank you for the incredibly warm welcome that you’ve provided to me and my team here today.
Can I also begin by acknowledging our traditional owners on the land on which we meet today here, the Kaurna people of the Adelaide Plains, and acknowledge their Elders past and present and emerging for the future.
On this day particularly it is exciting to acknowledge our veterans and members of the Australian Defence Forces. So many of them gathered here today, serving our country so magnificently, but particularly on this day, the centenary of the Royal Australian Air Force. What a proud day for Australia - that we have the finest air force in the world of any country. We stand proudly amongst all the free nations of the world, and our air force men and women, over centuries, have done so much to achieve that, and I’ll mention a bit more about that in a second. But to all of those veterans, to all of those serving members, thank you for your service.
To our host Michael Ward, Managing Director of Raytheon, thank you so much for this wonderful venue where we can speak of the things we are speaking today. To all the defence industry leaders that Gerry mentioned who are here with us today. Can I also welcome Major General Andrew Bottrell, Head of the Land Systems Division. Can I welcome Premier Steven Marshall - premier of the turnaround state. Premier who was making things happen. I mean, it’s so exciting to see what’s happening here in South Australia. It’s tremendously exciting and I congratulate you once again on the way you’re leading the state.
To Ministers Birmingham and Price, and particularly I know that Birmo would join with me in welcoming Melissa Price back into the Cabinet, particularly in the portfolio of Defence Industry, which I know the Premier is very excited about. But she joins a wonderful team in Cabinet, and particularly a very strong female team, with people of the experience of Marise Payne and Sussan Ley. I mean, many of these names have been mentioned over these last couple of days, but it’s great to see Melissa back there in this critical portfolio for Australia’s future. But someone who wasn’t mentioned as much was Sussan Ley. Sussan Ley has been an outstanding member of our Cabinet over many years, and serving in the Environment portfolio and doing an absolute tremendous job. So I’m very proud of my team, and it’s wonderful to have Melissa there joining Anne Ruston, of course, a proud South Australian, joining our leadership team as well. So a very strong voice for South Australia in our Cabinet, Premier, and that’s wonderful. To Senators McLachlan, who was here as well, great to see you Andrew, and of course Senator Fawcett who, a serving veteran himself and knows more about what goes into most of this technology and I think that many of us, and he’s a constant source of advice to me and, and wisdom.
Can I also acknowledge Brendan Nelson, a fine Defence Minister, of course, but a good friend and his work in honouring particularly the service of men and women at the War Memorial was the finest since its founder, and has gone on to new things now at Boeing. And we’re excited about the partnership we have with Boeing as well, so good to see you Brendan.
Today we take another big step, big as this flag behind me, big as this truck that I’m standing on. Another big step in reaching two of our most important priorities in my Government - keeping Australians safe in an uncertain world. Uncertainty is no stranger to Australians, but I think particularly in the course of the past two and a half years while I’ve been Prime Minister, we have known an uncertainty that has moved to a whole new level. It is a very difficult world in which we live at the moment.
The second is to cement our economic recovery, as we lead the world out of the global pandemic recession. To create jobs, and more jobs and more jobs and more jobs, and we take this step, as I said, on a day when we mark the 100th anniversary, the centenary of the Royal Australian Air Force, and acknowledge them and their dedication. I acknowledge their sacrifice in defending our nation's interests in the midst of these most challenging times. We call to mind the history, and Brendan can I’m sure do it far better than I could. He’s available for at least an hour dissertation at, off the cuff. But he will tell you about defending Darwin and the fight that saved Port Moresby, strafing over Milne Bay, providing air cover at Normandy and launching the raids on the Reich, striking at [inaudible] targets in Korea and Malaya and Vietnam and Iraq and Syria in defence of our freedom, serving our nation with distinction in conflicts and peacekeeping operations around the world. The humanitarian objective of our defence forces should never be underappreciated because I know it’s not underappreciated by those to whom the hand of humanitarian support is reached out to, to supply the Prime Minister of Fiji, most recently. He was sending me all the pics of him with our defence forces there on the ground after the recent cyclone. Couldn’t be more thankful to his Australian family. Indeed, as we look on them as our family also in the Pacific. But here serving us here as well at home, particularly in the last few years - pandemic, droughts, bushfires and now once again, floods. So I thank them all. I thank those who served. Backing in our defence force personnel in an industry that contributes so much to keeping Australians safe is a very high priority of my Government. People like the men and women who work here at Raytheon, Australia’s Centre for Joint Integration. Raytheon Australia has a history of supporting the air, land and sea capabilities of the ADF and highly-skilled Australian jobs. The Centre is a tremendous vote of confidence in the Australian defence industry and in the future capability that we continue to develop. Here you are doing vital work in our national interest, integrating the National Advanced Surface to Air Missile System as part of Australian Army’s new Short Range Ground Based Air Defence system, to provide ADF personnel with protection from a range of things, from a range of threats. Threats that include manned aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicles, cruise missiles and so much more. In other words, they’re massively boosting our defence capability. And that’s why I’m here with my colleagues today.
Today I’m very proud to release the defence manufacturing roadmap. It’s part of a bigger strategy I announced last year, together with the then Minister for Industry Karen Andrews, who’s done a fantastic job in pulling all this together, particularly working with the Defence Industry Melissa Price in this particular area. It sets out to build scale. I want to underline this. We do a lot of things well in this country, but we need to do some of them even more so at scale, because that’s what is the game changer for Australia’s economy. To do it at scale and to capture income in high-value areas of manufacturing, to earn for Australia, because when Australia earns then that means incomes increase, that means there’s more jobs, that means our economy is stronger, and that means we can provide the world-class services that Australians rely on - our hospitals, our schools, our aged care facilities, our social security system. You thought you were just making defence industry equipment, but in building that economy, that’s the ultimate outcome that we’re able to achieve in lifting the living standards of Australians. Defence was one of six key priorities as part of this manufacturing strategy. What we’re releasing today is the mode that, roadmap that drills down into defence industry, a vision for our defence manufacturing that delivers world-leading capabilities, both for our defence force, and responsible exports in our nation’s interests.
A stronger manufacturing base, enabled by a large number of defence businesses which together can contribute to and sustain defence capability. Building deep, comprehensive supply lines and chains, capability, skills that have been taken from the ground up like the young students we met today at the Discovery Centre, which we were opening this morning, who see the same things I’m sure many of you saw when you were that age and deciding I want to be in that industry, whether it’s space or defence industry or things like this. So this is what this, this roadmap, this roadmap is for them, because it’s creating a future for the industry that they’re going to be a part of. It looks like, at things like ability for businesses to form global partnerships. So critical to our future, such as the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. It was only last month I was in Williamtown with Melissa to mark the introduction, induction of a F-35A Lightning fighter, which is to be maintained and modified at BAE Systems Australia.
We live in an increasingly contested strategic environment and the roadmap recognises how vital our manufacturing is to delivering our defence capability. During COVID we have seen in the production of vaccines how vital it is to have domestic capability. It was, I would argue, probably the most important decision we made in combating COVID. We said we’re not going to rely on the rest of the world to get ourselves out of this. We’re going to build the capability to produce that vaccine here in Australia. We’re one of only a half a dozen or so countries that are producing the AstraZeneca vaccine anywhere in the world. One of only about 20 countries in the world that has a domestic manufacturing capability to produce any of these vaccines anywhere in the world. It didn’t happen by accident. In the midst of the second wave raging through Victoria, Health Minister Greg Hunt and I and the National Security Committee, we took the decision to build that capability. And today we have a sovereign vaccination programme in Australia. We’re doing the same thing here in our defence industry. We’ve taken the decision as a Government not just to get to two per cent of GDP, as we should to protect our nation and ensure our defence forces have the capability we need, but to ensure that we can build it here. Not just assemble it here, but build it here, to design it here, to innovate here, to actually lead the world in the areas that we are able to demonstrate that proficiency. It’s what this is about, because growing these capabilities is good for our economy to create that sovereign capability, to ensure that Australian small and medium businesses are playing a fundamental role in our major programme. It’s so important to the Premier’s plan here in South Australia to engage and lock in, interconnect all of these small and medium-sized Australian businesses, many of them family business, into these supply chains. And that they get that opportunity to demonstrate just what they can do, and participate in these exciting projects. Because while it’s very important that we are getting what we need for our defence forces, what has been demonstrated the world over is if you’ve got a defence contract, you’re having to nut out some of the knottiest problems there are. It’s hard stuff. It’s complicated stuff. And the application, the ingenuity, the innovation, the skills that are needed to solve those problems that are needed at the advanced level that is demanded - you can do that, you can apply that anywhere. And so the onward application of the skills lift that comes from choosing to make defence industry a priority sector, and to back it in with the capability building we’re doing along the supply chain, and I know this is something Minister Price is very passionate about - that we build that capability all the way through the chain, both now and into the future. This is about greater self-reliance, that is true, as well as building greater supply chain resilience and creating more Australian jobs. But we are not going to do this alone.
We do it alongside the great liberal democracies of the world. There has never been a more important time, I think, since the Second World War, where Australia has to stand and lead the way amongst liberal democracies, as we have before, in standing up for liberal democracy. This is the great polarisation that our world is at risk of moving towards. Liberal democracies, authoritarian autocracies, this is what the four Quad Leaders’ gathered together to speak about. And I commend President Biden in leading that discussion. It’s been something I’ve been saying for some time. In this country we cannot take liberal democracy for granted. In the world and indeed in our own country, we have to appreciate it, we have to value it, we have to defend it, and we have to be prepared to do that. A key plank of my Government’s platform is standing up for Australia - in our region, in our economy, in our society - and to protect it from the things that would come to do it harm. Whether that’s taking on big global tech giants or those who might seek to coerce us, and we will stand with those who share our values. And there are none greater than that than our friends in the United States and the United Kingdom, and Japan, and India now, as we work together, our great friends in Indonesia. Great liberal democracies. This is what we’re doing here. This is what we’re doing here. So much bigger than the things that I stand on here today, or I see around this place. It’s what they enable that is so exciting.
This is the latest chapter, of course, in the Government’s long commitment to strengthening our defence capability. We don’t leave this to the United States or other partners. We do our share of the heavy lifting. We don’t leave it to others when it comes to our defence. We do what we need to do, as we always have. We ended that era of neglect, which was corroding our sovereignty, and over the past eight years we have restored the very things that when Brendan was Defence Minister he was also establishing and creating under the Howard Government. In 2016 we released the Defence Industry Policy Statement, and followed that in 2018 when we launched the Defence Industry Capability Plan. Then we released the Defence Policy for Industry Participation last year, and then our Defence Strategic Update and Force Structure Plan for 2020, where I made that observation that we live in a time not dissimilar to the 1930s. I don’t believe it will finish the same way. I really don’t. I’m far more hopeful and positive about that, but I’m not naive to the threat environment in which we exist and the importance of doing what we’re doing right here and the work we’re doing, banding together in strength with those who also share the values of liberal democracy. All of these steps have been taken to ensure that we have a robust, resilient and innovative defence industrial base, one that maximises participation of Australians and supports the highly-skilled jobs that flow. And of course, at the end of the day, this is all about securing and protecting Australia’s interests - what we value so much here, the very simple things that we can appreciate each day. And that is possible because of what is done here and by our defence forces. So it is a great day. It’s a proud day. It’s a very exciting day. And I want to thank you all for the role that you’re playing as part of this vision, whether on the factory floor, whether you’re assembling parts for a surface-to-air missile system, whether you’re lecturing at a university, whether you’re training skilled in our technical colleges around this state as we build that workforce here, particularly in South Australia, for the great feats of manufacturing that are ahead of us here in this state, whether you’re a small business looking to take part and demonstrate what you can do in this great industry. You’re all part of it. Standing alongside, of course, the proud Australian women and men in uniform who serve, as I think you used to say Brendan, under our flag to defend our values. And for them we say, thank you for your service, and thank you for yours.


Prime Minister
Prime Minister: G’day, everyone. It’s great to be with you again. Wherever you are joining us, I acknowledge our traditional owners. 60,000 years of contending, reckoning and understanding the wonders and challenges of this continent. I pay respects to their elders past, present and emerging.
I also acknowledge the service men and women of our country, and the veterans who have served - so many of whom are drawn from our rural and regional communities.
The soul and character of our country is drawn from rural and regional Australia.
More than our identity, it is a critical part of our economy and our day to day lives.
We’ve seen this during the pandemic.
You kept the food on the tables.
You kept the supply lines open.
And you kept the resources coming out of the ground, the exports on ships - and you kept the country going.
You had the country’s back.
And I want you to know that my government has yours.
We had your back during the drought.
We’ve had your back as you’ve faced the fires and floods and calamities of recent years.
And we’ll have your back as the world transitions to the new energy economy.&nbsp;&nbsp;
So it’s great that we have this Summit again.
I want to thank Ben English and everyone at the Tele for getting us all together again for another year.
I know the Deputy Prime Minister will also be speaking and he will outline the Government’s investment in water and infrastructure to support regional Australia, so I’ll leave that to him.
A lot has changed since the last Summit in Cooma.
And how good it is that there’s been some rain!
Murray-Darling Basin storages are at 89 per cent and this is driving record production.
Areas across the country that were struggling with drought have then had to deal with floods, especially in NSW and Queensland.
Nature is a force, certainly, to be reckoned with but we’ve shown that this Government is always here to help you get back up, to clean up, to get up and doing what you do best.&nbsp;
The value of farm production is forecast to reach a record $73 billion this year. We’re well on the way to supporting the industry to reach its goal of $100 billion by 2030.
COVID might have stopped us from gathering this time, but I tell you what, that won’t be the case for much longer!
And I want to thank regional Australia - not only for getting the jab and playing your part in the extraordinary national effort on vaccines, but for your work during the pandemic more broadly.
You’ve adapted, you’ve got on with the job.
You know, all of us have learned many things during this pandemic.
Again and again, I’ve heard people say one thing - it is, “we worked out what’s most important.”
In our personal priorities, in our families, and our communities.
And we’ve seen that in the economy as well.
What’s important? Jobs.
Being competitive.
Keeping costs down.
Being able to adapt to the changes that are going around us.
All around us, the world is changing.
As you know, I am on the way to Glasgow where I’ll share Australia’s pathway to a low-emissions future.
I want to speak about that today.
To explain our pathway to net zero emissions by 2050, and what it means for you, for your jobs, for your communities.
Our plan is to deliver on our target of net zero by 2050.
It’s a serious plan.
It’s not something that we’ve doing lightly.
And we’re not starting from a zero base.
Because as a nation we have already achieved a 20% reduction in our emissions, mostly due to the heavy lifting done by our agricultural sector.&nbsp;
That contribution hasn’t gone unnoticed, I assure you, or unrecognised and I want to thank you for the hard yards already taken.&nbsp;
I also want to thank the National Farmers’ Federation and peak industries bodies like Meat and Livestock Australia and Australian Pork Limited for their leadership in supporting a reduction in the carbon footprint of the sector.
We are backing you all the way, including through significant investment in research and development.
I want to assure you that our plan for net zero doesn’t force our farmers to do anything more that what you’re already doing and will choose to do in the future.
And we won’t be asking the states and territories to use their powers, under our plan for 2050, to regulate the way you use your land.
We trust you as being the best stewards of your land.
Our Government wants Australian farmers to be able to choose how they use their land to get the highest and best outcomes.&nbsp;
Our plan for net zero supports farmers to take advantage of new markets, including carbon markets.&nbsp;
And we’ve got a detailed plan, based on the best economic modelling and analysis, done by the Government’s departments, the Department of Industry, Energy and Resources, that sets out how, not just the why or when.
How we do the right thing by jobs, in particular how we grow regional jobs.
How we do the right thing by the environment.&nbsp;
How we develop and deploy new technologies.
How we strengthen our rural and regional communities through the global transition to a new energy economy.
To me - and I know for you - the how really matters.
I want you to know, so you can be certain our plan won’t put jobs or industries at risk.
It won’t reduce the competitiveness of our exports, including our agricultural exports.
It is about ensuring that we’re not leaving people behind, but we’re going forward strongly together.
What our plan does is deal with both the costs and the benefits.
It puts regional communities at the heart of the opportunities that are real and that are there.
Our plan - the Australian Way - will continue to reduce emissions while keeping our economy growing, ensuring reliable energy and ensuring our regions, importantly, remain strong.
In the plan, you’ll see our approach takes a technology-driven focus.
Technology, not taxes.
Building on work we are already doing.
Work that will see the Australian agriculture sector grow to $100 billion by 2030.
With up to 100,000 new jobs by 2050 in hydrogen, renewable energy, green iron and alumina, and critical minerals.
And the majority of those jobs will be in regional Australia.
Under our plan the Government will not close one mine, one factory or one power plant or change the way farmers manage their land.
Not one thing in our plan that we have set out does any of those things.
But we all know, there will be regional communities that face more challenging transitions because of where the world is heading.
We are not blind to that, and we know you’re not either.
The world is changing, and we need to respond and adapt, and put ourselves in the strongest possible position to be successful, just as you’re seeking to do.
But those transitions, they’ll unfold gradually and predictably.
We’re not forcing them, giving us ample opportunity to make the long-term investments necessary to achieve a smooth shift to the industries and jobs that will be there in the future, not just today.
Clean hydrogen, energy storage, even lower cost solar, low emissions steel and aluminium - and much more, will see Australians benefit from global energy transition that is already under way, and we can’t pretend is not occuring.
I am determined that the gains will outweigh the costs.
Knowing what’s truly important: jobs, more affordable power, lower emissions, and an Australia that is competitive.
Importantly we will bring on major new investments in our regions to support:
New energy generation - as we decarbonise and electrify our economy.&nbsp;&nbsp;
We aren’t afraid of power - or hold our noses when it comes to power generation. Our goal is to expand the power sector with a large roll out of new renewable and Carbon Capture and Storage projects.
Projects that will be foundational to the continued growth of the Australian economy.
We are investing and will invest further in Hydrogen - creating a major new industry providing hydrogen both for exports and for domestic use.&nbsp;
These projects will become major regional energy, industry and jobs centred on areas like Gladstone, the Hunter, Darwin, the Pilbara, Whyalla and the Upper Spencer Gulf.
You are going to hear a lot about critical minerals in coming years as well.
Australia will be a world leader - mining and processing rare earths and minerals such as nickel and copper, it’ll boom in order to supply clean energy and new technologies the world over.
And we will be investing in more productive farming - unlocking productivity in our pasture and cropping lands creating incentives to boost solid carbon.&nbsp;
Under our five technology stretch goals we’re aiming to get soil carbon measurement from over $30 a hectare to under $3 per hectare.
That’s the transformation that achieves the positive change.
Australia has untapped potential as a globally significant source of carbon sequestration in our soils.
Getting carbon measurements costs down will provide our farmers with a valuable additional revenue stream.
And increasing soil carbon concentration can improve farm productivity and crop yields.
That’s why it’s important for agriculture to be part of the plan, to be part of the future with where we’re heading with our low emissions technologies.
Our National Soils Strategy, backed with over $228 million&nbsp; in investment, is aimed at helping farmers care for our land and soils.
For example, we’re investing in:

a National Soils Minoring and Incentive Pilot program to improve our understanding of the condition of our soils; and
a National Soil Science Challenge to help address gaps in soil knowledge

We want our farmers to be rewarded for their efforts and their innovation.
That’s why, through the leadership of Minister Littleproud, we are delivering the $66 million Agriculture Stewardship Package.
As part of this, we’re trialling the Carbon + Biodiversity Program, a market-based mechanism aimed at rewarding farmers for increasing biodiversity while also sequestering carbon and receiving payments under the ERF.
Today, you will hear that both sides of politics are saying they can achieve net zero by 2050, or at least setting that target.
But I want to be clear: only the Liberals and Nationals, only the Coalition actually has a plan and having no plan puts future wellbeing at risk.
It’s a blank cheque.
Labor won’t say how they’ll get there. In fact, they’ve be highly critical of our technology not taxes plan.
I’ll tell you, if you’re not getting there by technology, then the way they’ll seek to get there is by punishing through taxes, punishing industries they don’t like, making the false choices of those who don’t live in rural and regional areas, and imposing those costs on those in the bush.
It’ll come with greater regulation and mandates, telling you what to do in rural and regional Australia.
We don’t share that view.
We believe that in the bush people are making their own choices now. They’re taking their own actions, they’re moving forward, they’re making decisions. They’re actually part of this process already, that has already seen our emissions come down by more than 20% and our economy grow by 45%.
You’re already doing it, and we just want to back you in to do it.
We don’t want to tax you to do it.
We don’t want to put restrictions on you.
We don’t want to put new laws on you and legislate you.
We just want to get on with it, and enable the technological changes that you’ve always known.
You’ve always know that the science and technology are what happens on your property, in your manufacturing industries, in the regional towns and centres all across the country, in the mines, in the transport sector, on the roads.
All of that, you’re already doing. And we want to back you in.
That’s why I believe you can be confident that the Coalition understands regional Australia and rural Australia, understands its place in our country - and in our economy.
Of course we’ve wrestled with this. But we feel this in our bones.
There’s an outlook, an ethos, a way of life, that is part of rural and regional Australia.
And I promise, we will always serve to protect it - and we will promote it and celebrate it.
Because we get it.
We instinctively understand how intrinsic the way of life is in rural and regional Australia to who we all are as Australians.
So I want to be very clear: Only the Coalition has a plan, and will stand up and be strong to ensure that we keep Australia strong, our economy strong, our rural and regional areas strong.
A plan that keeps those regions moving forward.
A plan that is strong for more affordable power.
And we’ll stand up to those who will seek to want to shut things down, stand up to those who’ll want to shut you down.
We have a plan that enables us to go through that together, and ensure that we don’t have to have those punishing mandates and regulation and taxes that others think are the answer.
We don’t think that’s the answer, we think you are.
And a plan that involves you at its centre, is a plan that delivers net zero by 2050.
Not taking jobs - certainly not in farming, and not in mining or gas. That has a strong future.
Ours is a uniquely Australian plan: an energy, trade and economic plan, not just an environmental one.
It focuses on our national interests, and keeps our traditional advantages in the regions.
That’s what we are working towards.
So I want to thank you all again for coming together with the Tele for this important Bush Summit.
I wish you all the very best for your discussions.
I’m sorry I couldn’t be there, and we couldn’t all be there in person once again, but I’m looking forward to that opportunity down the road.
So thanks again everyone, and I’m pleased I’ve been able to share these views and updates with you. And I’m sure you’ll be looking forward to hearing from Barnaby shortly and through the course of the Summit.
Thanks everyone, all the best.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: It’s great to be back in Melbourne. It is absolutely wonderful to be back here in Melbourne, as Melbourne begins its process, and Victoria begins its process of roaring back. When I think about Melbourne, I think about the roaring crowd at The ‘G, I think of the roar of the crowd at Flemington, I think of the hustle and bustle of the streets and the people in the cafes enjoying the wonderful city life that is Melbourne, and to see everybody back here this morning, many of you for the first time to be together again in this way, it is really, truly, tremendous to be back. Just as the roar of the crowd, whether it’s at The ‘G or at Flemington, we want to see that roar of the economy back here in Victoria, we want to see that roar of Melbourne as it ascends again and takes its place, and we see it drive once again, the Australian economy, as it so importantly does. So, it’s great to be here, and with so many people who make our economy tick here in Australia.&nbsp;
To Karyn, President of the Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, thank you for that very kind introduction. To Paul and everybody, I want to thank you.
I begin by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet, the Boon Wurrung and Wurundjeri peoples of the Kulin Nation, and pay my respect to their Elders, past, present and emerging.
As we approach Remembrance Day, in particular, I also want to acknowledge, as I always do, our serving men and women of the Australian Defence Force and any veterans who are with us here today, and thank you for your service.
I am particularly pleased to be here with the Victorian Chamber - the premier business group for small and medium businesses here in Victoria.
To Paul Guerra and his team have done an extraordinary job, in difficult circumstances, bringing this breakfast together - and I want to thank you very much for hosting me.
I also want to recognise the many colleagues joining me this morning. Too many to mention, and they already have been, but I really want to thank Josh Frydenberg, my Deputy and very dear friend, for his strong economic leadership during the course of this pandemic. Alan Tudge is here of course, and Angus Taylor is here, Jane Hume and Tim Wilson. Here I go. Katie Allen is here, and I’m sure there are others here as well. Sarah Henderson is here, I can see, so thank you for being here with me today.
Can I acknowledge Matthew Guy as well, and thank Matthew for the important role he has played here in Victoria, of reminding everybody about where we have to go forward. We have to go forward in this state, and ensure we stay open, and embraces the opportunities that are before us.
As we gather this morning, the reopening and recovery of our Australian economy is proceeding at pace.
Just last Friday, the Reserve Bank confirmed that our economy is recovering rapidly, and as Josh reminded us yesterday the news of&nbsp; business confidence I think backs that in.
Australia has done the hard yards through the pandemic, and especially here in Victoria, and especially those running small and medium-sized businesses.
I want to thank you for what you’ve done. Of course as a Federal Government, we’ve been pleased to do our bit, to play our role through JobKeeper and many other programmes, but you’re the ones who’ve kept Victorians in jobs.
You’re the ones who’ve kept supply chains open and connected.
You’re the ones who’ve managed the heartache, and the complexity and the frustration of extreme lockdowns and restrictions and keeping your people COVID safe.
And you are the ones who are now opening your doors again.
I also want to thank more broadly the people of Victoria.
You have had to endure what no-one else in this country has had to endure during this pandemic. You’ve had the worst of it. You’ve endured the hardest of it.
And, now over 85 per cent of Victorians over 16 are now fully vaccinated.
The human face of reopening, I’ve been enjoying in these last few days since coming back - recovery and renewal is everywhere to see here.
You see it in the smiles on the faces of small business people, as they pull up the shutters in the morning on their deli, their newsagent or their coffee shop.
You see it in the hugs at airports, as families reunite across geographies and across generations.
And you see it in the really simple of pleasures. Friends catching up. Having a beer. Going to restaurants. Strolling around the shops. Getting a haircut.
It must never be taken from us again.
That is why I put the National Plan together. I also want to acknowledge the wonderful work of the Doherty Institute. A plan based on the best possible medical science, home grown here right in Melbourne, and economics to ensure we open safely and stay safely open. We’re not going back.
Australians have kept their side of this deal by getting vaccinated.
Governments, right across this country, must now keep theirs and return to Australians their freedoms.
So here we are.
One of the lowest fatality rates from COVID anywhere in the world, we’re now approaching one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, even exceeding the UK, on double dose, and one of the strongest economic performances of any developed nation in the world through the pandemic.
So, what’s next? What’s it all about now? What’s the big issue?
Our challenge now is to secure the economic recovery for all Australians.
That is what my Government is 100 per cent focussed on.
Only by securing our economic recovery can we restore our livelihoods and continue to guarantee the essentials that Australians rely on to support our Australian way of life - our health, our security, our jobs, our freedoms.
That is what is now at stake. And we cannot take it for granted.
Economic management matters more now than ever before.
The world remains a highly uncertain place.
The pandemic will continue to rage.
Inflationary pressures are re-emerging, putting upward pressure on interest rates.
Strategic competition between the world’s two largest economies, the United States and China, is reframing the global geopolitical landscape, especially in our region.
We need to keep Australians safe.
Supply chains are being disrupted and reformed, not always to our advantage.
And the global energy economy is transforming as the world responds to climate change.
Now, all of these forces have very real implications for Australia.
How we navigate these next few years, the choices we make, as a Government, the choices Australians make as a people, will have a major impact on our future prosperity and indeed the security of our country.
But you know what, I’d rather be us, here in Australia, than anywhere else in the world. As always we have reason to be optimistic. It is our country’s nature, and I can assure you it is my nature.
In its latest economic forecasts, the RBA projects the Australian economy to grow strongly by 5.5 per cent, you didn’t hear me wrong - 5.5 per cent by 2022.
And the unemployment rate, as Josh constantly reminds us rightly, is forecast to decline to four per cent by the end of 2023, the lowest rate since August 2008. It is currently 4.6 per cent, down from 5.7 per cent when we came to Government.
We’re not there yet. There is still a big job to do. But I am very confident that with your enterprise, combined with the continued right policy settings we will continue to secure our economic recovery and Australia’s future.
Today I want to speak more about one of the single largest economic challenges our country will face in the decades ahead. And, there are many, and there will be many opportunities to discuss those as well on other occasions.
But, today I want to focus on this: How we respond to climate change, and the impact that the global response to climate change will have on Australia - that is a significant economic challenge.
These issues are not just about the environment. They will have profound economic implications.
There are great opportunities associated with these changes, but there are also great risks for Australia. It’s not a one way street.
Taking action on climate change is extremely important for the health of our planet.
Australia is doing its part and we will continue to do our part to achieve our target of net zero emissions by 2050.
Australia has already reduced our emissions by more than 20 per cent. Now, I’m not sure a lot of Australians know that. Our emissions are going down, not up. They’re down by more than 20 per cent. You may say to yourself, or others listening in, ‘Oh yeah, other countries, they’re doing so much better than that’. Not true, as Angus Taylor and I had the opportunity to share directly with them, whether it was in Rome at the G20 or at COP26, because a 20 per cent fall is broadly in line with what’s being achieved across the EU. But, it’s better than the United States, it’s better than Japan, it’s better than our Kiwi cousins across the ditch in New Zealand, in Canada and South Korea.
Australia’s emissions intensity has fallen since 2005 by 54 per cent. Now, that ranks Australia second only to the UK of all the G20 countries. I particularly enjoyed sharing that with my G20 colleagues when I was there.
While reducing our absolute emissions by more than 20 per cent since 2005, our economy has grown by 45 per cent, proving that emissions reduction need not come at the expense of economic growth. And, Angus will remind you this is at the same time we developed one of the world’s biggest LNG industries.
Our latest projections show that our emissions will fall by up to 35 per cent by 2030, and may well exceed that. But, what I do know it exceeds is the Paris commitment that we gave of 26 to 28 per cent.
A lot of people are making a lot of claims about what they’re gonna do about this. What I know is what Australia has done, and what Australia will continue to do.
Now, this is happening because Australians are making their own choices in this area, they’re not being told what to do by government or international bureaucrats overseas. That’s not the Australian way.
There is no better example, I think, than the fact that we have now hit three million rooftop solar energy installations in Australia.
Aussie rooftops are now the nation’s largest power station, reducing carbon emissions in 2021 by more than 17.7 million tonnes. And this will only increase more and more in the future.
More than one in four houses and many non-residential buildings have installed small-scale rooftop solar. And we’re adding up to 2,000 small solar installations every business day.
Now, some of you might have heard that I was in Rome and Glasgow recently for the G20 and COP26. A little bit went on while I was there.
The pandemic, our economic recovery and the global response to climate change, that was my focus in my engagement with leaders while I was there.
My discussions at these events, and indeed Angus’s, reinforced my core beliefs about how we, as a free, open and enterprising society, should approach these challenges.
You know, no one passed a law or introduced a tax or passed a resolution at the UN that led to the world developing a COVID vaccine. No one passed a law or introduced a tax for the world to move from analogue to digital. Google and Cochlear were not invented at a UN workshop or summit.&nbsp;
Just as the animal spirits of enterprise have worked together with scientists and technologists to change the world in the past - and we’ve seen that here in this very city - through advances in medical science and digital technology, I am more than convinced they also hold the answer to solving the challenge of a decarbonised economy.&nbsp;
If you don’t believe me, just follow the money. Boris made this point at Glasgow, in his opening remarks, $100 trillion of private capital pouring, pouring like a waterfall into climate technology solutions - that’s the big change between Paris and Glasgow, versus on a good day $100 billion from Governments, all going into climate finance initiatives.
In many respects, Glasgow has marked the passing of the baton from political diktats of targets and timetables, which have had their place and are necessary, to private enterprise and the millions of dispersed decisions, choices and flashes of inspiration that make up consumer-led technological progress.
Of course, summits have their place, I particularly have to say that in the middle of the Exhibition and Convention Centre. But we believe climate change will ultimately be solved by ‘can do’ capitalism; not ‘don’t do’ Governments seeking to control people’s lives and tell them what to do, with interventionist regulation and taxes that just force up your cost of living and force businesses to close.
‘Can do capitalism’, not ‘don’t do Governments’. I think that’s a good motto for us to follow not just in this area, but right across the spectrum of economic policy in this country. We’ve got a bit used to Governments telling us what to do over the last couple of years, I think we have to break that habit. It’s had its place, sure.
The issue in responding to climate change is no longer about if, or why or when, we’ve had that debate. It is all about the very practical question of how.
The world does not need to be punished for climate change, we just need to fix it. And it will be fixed painstakingly, step-by-step, by the entrepreneurs, by scientists, by technologists, by innovators, by industrialists, by financiers, by risk takers. That’s the Australian way. That’s the way I’ve been championing on the world stage. And, you know, like minded capitalist market based economics should be doing the same.
As Liberals and Nationals we have far more trust in those who will risk their own capital to bring about these innovations than Governments using your tax dollars to tell you what to do.
And I think Australians, after almost two years of governments telling them what to do through this pandemic, they’ve had just about enough of that approach.
That approach does not come easy to us as Liberals and Nationals. It just doesn’t. Every fibre of our being in many of the decisions we’ve had to take, it goes against our instincts, it goes against our grain, but it was necessary. But, what you can take from that is we’ll reset, back to letting our economy do the work and let those who drive it be able to do that work as quickly as we possibly can, because that’s how you’ll see the Victorian economy roar back to life. It’s not something, as I said, we instinctively do, and it’s not something Australians want to see more of in the future. I don’t believe they do.
As we work to secure our economic recovery and future, we must secure Australia’s place in this new energy economy.
Countries with net zero commitments cover more than 80 per cent of world’s GDP. And 90 per cent of Australia’s exports are to countries with net zero commitments. That of course is going to have an impact here in Australia. These are decisions being taken in other countries.
We can’t ignore the reality of this. We cannot just sort of wish it away.
Again, my time in Glasgow affirmed my belief that Australia can - and must - chart its own unique path for achieving net zero emissions by 2050.
Our geography, our demography, our resource endowments, our human capital, our export profile, so reliant on rural and regional Australia, all mean that our pathway will be quite different to relatively small, densely-populated, services-based advanced economies in the North Atlantic. Just because it works in the North Atlantic doesn’t mean it’s going to work in the Indo-Pacific, in countries in the same way like Australia and certainly not in the developing countries of our region who we do business with every day.
This is why we will continue to join others in opposing prescriptive deadlines for phasing out particular fuels or gutting our agricultural sector - demands that are disconnected from realities, our industries, and our people, particularly in rural and regional Australia.
Demands that are also disconnected from technology trends and the lessons of history, the economic development imperatives of so many countries, especially in our Indo-Pacific region.
The disruptions, price spikes and energy shortages many countries are now experiencing in recent times reinforce why evolution - not revolution - is the only sustainable approach to net zero - politically, economically and, then ultimately environmentally, because it gets the job done.
The Government’s Long Term Emissions Reduction Plan, with our target of net zero emissions by 2050, embodies this approach, building on successful policies and our record of exceeding our emissions reduction targets.
Under our plan, Australians do not have to upturn their lifestyles or our economy to reach net zero. We can make our own Australian way.
Under our plan, Australia will continue producing and exporting world-class resources, energy, manufactured goods and agricultural products, led by globally competitive businesses.
There are five principles that guide our plan.&nbsp; They are:

Technology not taxes.
Respecting consumers’ choices, not telling them what to do with mandates. Trusting customers to make good calls, and trusting businesses and enterprise to respect their customer and their demands and what they want to pay for it, and ensure they can get that cost down to meet that demand.
Driving down the cost of a range of new technologies - many more horses in the race, as we like to talk about, Angus and I.
Keeping energy prices down with affordable and reliable power.
And, also being accountable for our progress. Australia reports every quarter, every gas, every sector, every emissions. The rest of the world has to catch up to that sort of transparency.

Together, all of these are designed to ensure that Australia can shift to a net zero economy in a way that does not put industries, jobs or regions at risk.
The focus of our plan is on driving down technology costs, not increasing the cost of alternatives, and accelerating their deployment at scale across our economy.
It is all about establishing Australia as a leader in low emissions technologies tied to our industrial strengths and our national interest.
We have identified our priority technologies and the stretch goals linked to those technologies to drive down costs. You want to know the targets that matter in achieving net zero:

Clean hydrogen - under $2 per kilogram
Ultra low-cost solar - under $15 per MWh
Energy storage - under $100 per MWh
Low emissions steel and aluminium - under $700 per tonne for steel and under $2,200 per tonne for aluminium
Carbon capture and storage - under $20 per tonne of CO2
Soil carbon - under $3 per hectare per year.

&nbsp;
These are the targets that matter, because if you achieve those then you can achieve a decarbonised economy and you don’t have to sell your economy out to achieve it.
My colleague Angus Taylor launched the second Low Emissions Technology Statement at COP26, and I want to thank also and recognise the contribution of another great Victorian, Dr Alan Finkel. I think Alan is here with us today. Chair of the Technology Investment Advisory Council, which advises on these statements. I’ve been well advised by so many great Victorians over, not only my colleagues who are here in the room, but people like Alan who have just been tremendous, the Doherty Institute, Professor McVernon, who you know. But also people like Pat McGorry who have been tremendous advice to the Government. I can see Alan there. Great Victorians who have been tremendous in our national effort.
As well as driving down technology costs, we’re also enabling deployment of low emissions technologies at scale.
Yesterday, we announced the first national Future Fuels and Vehicles Strategy, backed by an expanded $250 million Future Fuels Fund investment.
This Fund will focus on four areas of investment:

Public electric vehicle charging and hydrogen refuelling infrastructure
Heavy and long-distance vehicle technologies
Commercial fleets
Household smart charging.

&nbsp;
Practical things. We’re not going to be forcing Australians out of the car they want to drive or penalising those who can least afford it through bans or taxes. Those regulations and taxes hurt those who can afford it least, and they’re usually cheered on by those who can afford it most. I don’t think it’s fair. Rather, the Strategy will work to drive down the cost of low and zero emissions vehicles and enhance consumer choice.
Today, I’m announcing a further step beyond Glasgow and towards net zero, as part of our step-by-step Long Term Emissions Reduction Plan - aligned with our technology not taxes approach.
At present, around 75 per cent of the $20 billion of Commonwealth investment in low emissions technologies by 2030 is focused on supporting the deployment of near-commercial technologies.&nbsp;
Some $13 billion of total financing is through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC).
Analysis to inform our plan, including by organisations such as the International Energy Agency, show that a large share of the emissions reductions necessary to achieve net zero will come from technologies that are not yet commercially available. I made this point to Fatih Birol when I was with him in Glasgow.
For Australia to become a low emissions technology leader globally, we will need to continue to expand support for early-stage technology research, development and demonstration, that’s where we can play a role - to support the Technology Investment Roadmap stretch goals, by getting Australia within range of net zero and then to close the remaining gap through technology, not taxes.
To that end, the Government will establish a $1 billion Low Emissions Technology Commercialisation Fund within the CEFC, injecting $500 million in new capital with the balance $500 million to be sourced from private sector investors.
This Fund will address a gap in the Australian market, where currently small, complex, technology-focussed start-ups can be considered too risky to finance.
So, we’ll step in. It’s about supporting an idea, an idea that then gets to a lab, that then gets to a market, and then into your home or business.
The Fund will support Australian innovators to develop their intellectual property and grow their businesses in Australia, and is expected to earn a positive return for taxpayers. It’s a good bet.
It builds on the CEFC’s success as the world’s largest government-owned green bank. The CEFC has committed $9.5 billion across 220 large scale projects and 23,700 smaller scale transactions, driving an estimated $33 billion in new investments across the economy.
The Fund is very much in line with what Bill Gates has been talking about, and I met up with him also at Glasgow and compared notes on the technology challenges and opportunities that are ahead.
As Bill has observed this in the book that I asked my entire Cabinet to read, which they did, ‘We need to think about how to turn lab-proven concepts into ubiquitous products that people want and can afford to buy’.&nbsp;
This, he notes, ‘will require a massive effort to fund hundreds of commercial demonstration projects of early-stage climate technologies’ - projects that are complicated, risky and expensive - and hard to finance.
So, that’s the approach we’re taking. It’s precisely the challenge we are responding to with this new Fund.
The goal is to deploy a blend of private and public finance and technical assistance on the road to net zero.&nbsp;
We are seeing our technology-driven approach to reducing emissions play out right across the country, including here in Victoria, drawing on established industrial strengths and skills.
The Latrobe Valley has a long history as an energy producing region.
It is geologically suitable for producing hydrogen and storing carbon underground, while also being in close proximity to electricity and shipping infrastructure.
These advantages underpin the Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain project, a world-first pilot project supported by the Australian, Japanese and Victorian Governments - a project designed to safely and efficiently produce and transport clean hydrogen from the region, which again Alan has been closely involved in, Alan Finkel.
This is just one example of the opportunities available to regional Australia in the new energy economy.
We’re also working to secure the future of Australian manufacturing in a post-COVID, low emissions economy.
For the first time since 2009, manufacturing employment is once again topped a million jobs. A million Australians working in manufacturing. Under Labor, one in eight manufacturing jobs, gone. We’ve restored them, and we’ve done it through a pandemic and a global recession.
Our $1.3 billion Modern Manufacturing Initiative (MMI) is helping transform manufacturing businesses so they can scale up, translate ideas into commercial success and integrate into local and international supply chains.
Just two examples, I’m almost done.&nbsp;&nbsp;
The Integration Stream of MMI helps manufacturers integrate products into domestic and international value chains and to enter new markets.
With $2.3 million in funding, the Victorian manufacturer Titomic is working to commercialise the manufacture of space vehicle parts using green titanium for Australia’s growing space sector and for overseas export.
Another Victorian-based company, Savic Motorcycles, has been awarded a grant under our Commercialisation Stream, to develop a range of affordable electric motorcycles.
It is on course to develop the first Australian designed, assembled and tested high performance battery electric motorcycle to roadworthy certification.
This nexus of government and business co-investing in low emissions technologies and products will be the key to driving growth in modern manufacturing.
Ladies and gentlemen, our Government’s technology-driven approach to reducing emissions it will have clear benefits and it will also have them beyond our borders.
Through the joint efforts that Angus Taylor and Alan Finkel have undertaken, Australia has negotiated a series of new low emissions technology partnerships with key partners - Japan, Germany, Singapore, South Korea, Vietnam, the UK and Indonesia - and we are close to concluding one with our great friends in India.
Our emissions reduction goals are also indistinguishable from our geostrategic challenges.
There are two aspects to this.
The first is that carbon credits that become an important source of income for developing countries in our region.
In collaboration with our partners in the region, including the Quad - the United States, India and Japan - we’re working to establish a high quality carbon credit scheme in the Indo Pacific, building on Australia and Japan’s existing efforts.
We can’t afford for the supply chains of the new energy economy to be dominated and held hostage to the geostrategic objectives of countries that do not share our interests, or have our interests at heart.
We are therefore progressing through the Quad specific proposals to forge closer partnerships between our economies to build competitive and reliable net zero supply chains that start with the production of rare earths and critical minerals.
At the Quad meeting in Washington in September, I announced that to accelerate that work we will host a Quad Clean Energy Supply Summit in Australia in the first half of next year.
It will be a unique opportunity, frankly for Australia to show off about what we’re doing in this area, but also to learn from our many colleagues and partners in the regions. High-level dialogue between the governments of Australia, India, Japan and the United States, and many other regional partners, as well as leaders in science and technology, manufacturing, mining, finance, risk takers, entrepreneurs.&nbsp;
Tomorrow is Remembrance Day and one of the greatest figures in our history is the legendary General Sir John Monash.
Sir John was a soldier, as we know, and an engineer.
After War’s end - in 1921 - a century ago, he was made the first chairman of the State Electricity Commission here in Victoria.
In its day, it was a new industry, with technical challenges and it had more than its fair share of critics.
Sir John saw the potential of low cost and reliable power. For jobs, for households, for the regions, and for Australia’s future, and Victoria’s future.
The technologies have changed. The solutions of 1921 are not the same as 2021. For Sir John Monash, the engineer, he would have understood that.
But a century on, the challenge is similar, if the technologies may be different.
Innovating for our times. Building and creating a job boosting economy.
Keeping power prices down and ensuring reliability of supply - so that industry and households can have confidence.
And for our generation, it is to do this while keeping emissions down as we transition to a clean energy economy.
That is what we are doing, that is what our plan seeks to achieve. And, friends, that is how we secure Australia’s economic recovery, and Australia’s economic future.


Prime Minister
PRIME MINISTER: It is wonderful to be here with you all this evening and to Jane, welcome to the Emerald City, our Emerald City. How good is it to see so many of us here tonight in this one room? It's a sight that we haven't been able to see for quite a while. It's terrific looking out, you all look splendid. Fantastic.&nbsp;
Can I begin by acknowledging the Gadigal people, of course. Can I acknowledge their elders past, present and emerging. Can I also acknowledge any members of the Defence Force who are with us here this evening or who have served in our Defence Force. I was with the President of Korea today, and we talked about the road from Kapyong to Canberra in the relationship with Korea. And those more than 17,000 Australians, I should say, who served in Korea. And this has been a nation of service that has called on the men and women of our Defence Forces on so many occasions and on each and every occasion, they have not been found wanting, but it was special today to hear them acknowledged in the kind and thankful way by the Korean President. Can I acknowledge, of course, Gerard and Anne Henderson, it's wonderful to be with you. We've had this date set for a couple of years. There's been one or two things that have got in the way that has prevented us from coming together. And so I'm so pleased I can be here with both of you and thank you for the great work you do over such a long time with the Sydney Institute and to Jacquelynne Willcox, of course, and all the board of the Sydney Institute. I've got many colleagues here tonight. I hope they've listed them all. Bridget McKenzie, Paul Fletcher, Michael Sukkar, David Gillespie, Tim Wilson, is here. Stuart Ayres, the deputy leader of the Liberal Party and Minister here in New South Wales, and there are many other state and federal parliamentary colleagues, and I heard Eric Abetz was here as well. It's great to have you up from Tassie. The good news in a couple of days, Eric, you'll be able to go home and that will be terrific. I mean, he can get back across the border, I would love Eric to stay with us. And, of course, to Mr and Mrs Howard, to John and Janette Howard, you are for so many Liberals and so many who have served in the parliament and have had the great privilege to serve in the role I have, the standard. And I mean that for both Jenny and I. We look so much to your example each and every day and you blazed that trail for us. And I'm so pleased to see how, even after these many years since 2007, a room like this, the first person they'll want to shake hands with tonight is John Howard and Janette Howard, and it's wonderful to be in your presence.&nbsp;
It has been quite a few years, hasn't it? These last three years. Floods. Fires. Drought. Pandemic. Mouse plague. I turned to Josh Frydenberg one day in cabinet, I said, I think it's time we let your people go, Josh. Hopefully that's not too soon. It's that sort of night. But we're on the road back. We're on the road to recovery. We're on the right track. But we know the future remains challenging. We live in an age of disruption, technological, economic, political, biological. And as we turn the corner into 2022, it's timely to reflect on what matters most. As we seek to secure Australia's future in an uncertain world. The pandemic has touched every aspect of our lives, how we live, how we work, how we connect with one another. Each outbreak and mutation from Alpha to Omicron has tested nations, communities, families and each and every one of us. It's been a disorientating time. Yet it's also been a time of uncommon clarity. Underscoring what matters most to us as Australians. Our health, our families, our friends, our jobs, our livelihoods, our communities. How the country's governed. Our national sense of fairness. Our country, our liberty.&nbsp;
In a truly global pandemic, Australia's response has been a positive standout. We have saved lives. When you weigh it against the OECD average for performance, we've prevented the deaths in this country of around 40,000 Australians. Just reflect on it. We have one of the lowest death rates in the world from COVID. We protected our health system with more than $33 billion from the federal government in additional investment, bolstering services for those in greatest need through telehealth, record mental health support and so much more. As Jane has just said, almost 90 per cent of Australians aged over 16 are today double dosed and will be by the end of the week, which is one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. And just last week, Australia was ranked second. Second out of 195 countries in the 2021 Global Health Security Index, which is a measure of countries’ preparedness for pandemics developed by the Johns Hopkins Centre and the health security in the United States. We have saved livelihoods. Our economy has been one of the strongest performing advanced economies in the world through the pandemic. And I particularly want to pay tribute to Josh Frydenberg and his role as Treasurer, working so closely with me on those issues, as indeed Greg Hunt has on the health matters in the pandemic. Jobs and businesses were saved by the single largest economic rescue package in our history. Our economy is now springing back with more than 350,000 jobs created in a five week period after the lockdowns were lifted. And through the crisis, we have maintained that Triple-A credit rating, one of only nine countries in the world to do so, and we stepped up to support our neighbours and our family in the Pacific, delivering vaccine doses and the wherewithal to get those vaccine doses to their people in 14 Pacific and Southeast Asian nations, including up there in Timor-Leste as well, while keeping our economic supports for those countries firmly in place.&nbsp;
This evening, I want to talk to you about three take outs, my own take outs from this testing time in our nation's history and explore how we intend to apply those lessons and that experience garnered to secure Australia's future as a government. Firstly, the best bet you can always make, especially in a crisis, is to bet on the Australian people each and every time. Australians possess a quiet confidence, it's not boastful, it's a confidence and desire to do better, to aspire to live in peace and safety, to be able to care for others. It's a confidence to think big, but not big note, to be responsible for our own individual actions and those of our families and to strive to be in control of our future. And it's this quiet confidence that has built this country. Established our freedoms, our system of democracy, our economic strength and our ability to thrive as a nation. It's a confidence that enables us to believe that whatever happens, whatever comes our way, we can push through. We can deal with it and preserve our unique and enviable way of life. During the pandemic, our confidence has been put to the test, but it has not been found wanting. Our way of life has been put on hold. While necessary, it is not normal for government to tell Australians where we can go and can't go, who we can and can't invite into our homes, to stay home, to close our businesses. It is not normal to keep track of where we've been. Not be allowed to visit friends or relatives. To go to funerals and to weddings. Or go out to dinner or to the pub. None of these restrictions belong in the lives of Australians. Australians don't like it. I don't like it. Yet for the greater good, we have done it. We have denied ourselves in that way. And we got on with our lives despite the conditions to be as best as we possibly could be because we knew it would be temporary. We knew that on the other side was something that we will never, if ever we did, take for granted again: our freedom. And so Australians kept their side of the deal. And it is now time for governments to keep theirs. To step back. And let Australians step forward. To put Australians back in charge of their own lives, relying on the connecting points and relationships that exist between the state and the individual to bridge the gap. Our communities.&nbsp;
Edmund Burke, as former Prime Minister Howard would say, I still think of him that way, as John Howard would say, Edmund Burke's Little Platoons, the myriad networks of family faith groups, schools, workplaces, big and small sporting clubs, book clubs, you name it. Why do I stress this? Because I believe that some on the left of politics will draw precisely the wrong lessons from this pandemic. Where it is viewed as a pretext for more expansive government. A greater government role and reach into society across economic, social and cultural domains. They sometimes refer to it as build back better or build back stronger. But that's what they mean. This would be a profound misjudgement. In light of both our liberal democratic inheritance and what lies in front of us as we secure our recovery. The reach of government in this pandemic is not some new norm, and it will not be under our government. It has a use by date. You know, by instinct, more than ideology, Australians support effective, practical, yet limited government. An enabling partner, not a meddling busybody overseer. Government that delivers tangible benefits to people's everyday lives, that empowers people to make and pursue their choices. That opens the door for each generation and each individual to the promise of Australia. Economic opportunity and reward for hard work. A fair go for those who have a go. Can-do capitalism, a strong social safety net when times are tough and a country that always holds true to the best traditions of liberal democracy in an uncertain world and is prepared to stand for it. Where government delivers the essential services that Australians rely on while also keeping their tax burden down as much as possible, enabling Australians to keep more of what they earn. Where the state facilitates rather than dictates. Where it knows its role, but it also knows its place. An important take out.&nbsp;
The second take out from the pandemic, is you've got to get the balance right. I don't pretend as a government we've got everything right. No nation has through this pandemic. Our institutions are made up of human beings, after all, and a pandemic is a fog of radical uncertainty. There is no guidebook. And nor do I pretend that those of us who have been in positions of leadership and public responsibility were able to agree on everything. It's not how pluralist democracies work, and it's certainly not how federation works. Federations are designed to have appropriate checks and balances on centralised power.
As a federal cabinet, we have made the big calls, and by and large, I think we've got the balance right. We called the pandemic before the rest of the world and shut our borders. National emergency biosecurity orders were enacted. We made it clear that our job was to save lives and save livelihoods. That there was to be a balance struck right from the outset. The national cabinet was established at leader level to coordinate responses at that level as best as possible. It has met a grueling 57 times. The National Cabinet is not perfect, but it's certainly better than what was there before, having experienced both. And we have done better as a nation and our federation than almost any other federated system in the world. The national coordination mechanism was mobilised to deal with supply chain challenges, the COVID commission was established importantly to engage the private sector in the national response. JobKeeper supported around four million individuals and one million businesses, saving an estimated 700,000 jobs. And that was backed up by cash flow boost for business, the COVID JobSeeker supplement and pandemic disaster payments more recently in the third wave. We kept Australians learning when they couldn't be earning. With wage subsidies for apprentices, the billion dollar JobTrainer programme an additional 30,000 university places this year. And we got that vaccination job done. With now one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. Now it wasn't easy and we had our challenges and I can assure you we had our critics. But in a crisis, what matters is not that you have setbacks. And we had them. But it is that you can overcome them and you can fix them. And that is what we did, clawing back the ground we lost early on due to the non-delivery of vaccines from overseas and restrictions placed on the AstraZeneca vaccine. We overcame it. Our national plan for reopening was developed based on world leading scientific advice from the Doherty Institute. We are one of the few countries in the world to set scientific vaccine thresholds to guide public health settings. And we followed a disciplined cabinet process. We met constantly with clear decision making principles to guide these big calls that had to be made and the serious investment of public funds. And we brought together the best economic and scientific advice and data. And then we made decisions, not officials, we as a government, as the elected leaders of the country. We made the decisions for our government. We were decisive, but we were also consultative. We kept our heads and we were patient when necessary, while we waited often for sometimes a clearer picture to emerge. But at all times, we were pragmatic. We wanted to defeat the virus, not debate it. As John Howard advised Josh and I, there is no place for ideology in a crisis of this nature. So when the pandemic hit. We had already as a government established our working rhythms. It was not our first rodeo. Most of us had sat around the National Security Committee and Expenditure Review Committee for some years, and I can tell you that when you face these things, that matters, it matters a great deal. And this enabled us to move quickly and with confidence. And so over these past 20 months and indeed far longer than that, the operational tempo that we set as a government, the way we've done things has made us even more experienced, even more prepared, even more resilient, which equips us as a government for the next set of challenges that our nation faces. And there will be many. Many more in the years ahead. And you don't want to leave that to those who'd be learning on the job.&nbsp;
Thirdly, we must always make our own Australian way. This is a very important lesson. Australia has its own unique geography, governance, capabilities, challenges, relationships. We are a liberal democracy in the southern hemisphere, located in the Indo-Pacific, surrounded predominantly by developing economy nations. And despite shared values, we see the world from a different vantage point to many like minded northern hemisphere democracies such as the UK and the United States. We have developed our own balance between market and state based systems for the delivery of services and health is a very good example of that. And we must always deliver a solution then that works for Australia rather than just do a cut and paste job on responses from other nations operating in very different economic, strategic and even climatic settings, as we've seen in a pandemic. COVID has shown that Australia works best when also public and private realms work in tandem in active partnership to solve problems and meet national challenges. And I've seen this reality every day through this pandemic, from leadership by corporate CEOs, many here tonight, right through to the little platoons in the regional towns, the CWAs, the chambers of commerce, the church communities that have kept our society humming and whole. Just witness the outpouring of neighbourliness across our country. Australians devoting time to deliver meals, to check on the elderly or just listen to someone coping with the stresses of loneliness and isolation.&nbsp;
I think what's been achieved by a mix of public and private health care providers has also been extraordinary. Flexing and responding in a way that consistently got the job done on the COVID front line. And I thank all of those workers right across our health settings who have done such an amazing job. Our large public and private hospitals and pathology teams sharing the load right through to local GPs, community pharmacies all doing their part. Yes, please give them round of applause. I think of the way many large corporates also worked with our government. Not just to support their employees. And keep them COVIDSafe and their customers, but to actually act in the national interest at a time that demanded it and put aside their own interests in a time of crisis, I saw it so many times. And JobKeeper was the largest of those partnerships. It was a uniquely Australian solution. We didn't go down the path that others thought we should and criticised us for not doing. We went down a very Australian path. JobKeeper was an Australian idea. It effectively nationalised private payrolls and employers to deliver income support, with businesses committing to keep their people on their books, banks providing the cash flow and the government paying the bills. It was a unique solution for Australia that ensured that those queues that you saw outside Centrelink ended and people got the income support that they needed to face the next day.&nbsp;
And my message tonight to Team Australia is that we still have a job to do. Our goal should be to further develop and strengthen that spirit of partnership between government, the private sector and the community sector as we face the challenges and opportunities that are ahead of us. And yes, government has a vital role to play. We believe that. But we believe so do you. And we want to see all Australians play their part. When I became PM three years ago, I set out three goals. And as we look ahead, they continue to guide me and our government. Keeping our economy strong by securing this recovery so we can guarantee the essentials Australians rely on. Keeping Australians safe in an even more uncertain world, both at home and abroad, and taking our country confidently forward together, keeping Australians together. Indulge me as I just try and move through these fairly promptly. On the economy, the Reserve Bank forecast growth at 5 and a half percent next year. Job ads now at their highest level in 13 years and unemployment is expected to fall to four percent by the middle of 2023. Business confidence is strong and capital expenditure intentions show a positive outlook for business investment. Households and businesses have accumulated a staggering $370 billion on their balance sheets that was not there at the start of the pandemic. So our economy is primed for growth. But securing that recovery in 2022 can't be taken for granted, so we must continue to get the fundamentals right. We must continue our focus on these things. Lower taxes, building the infrastructure that is necessary, less regulation and sound public financial management. Having avoided the labour market scarring feared last year and the year before during the pandemic, we must continue to secure the workers we need for a jobs boom. The good news is this. We currently have 217,000 apprentices in trade training across the country right now. That is the highest level since records began in 1963. That's a lot. So the investments we’ve put into training, we have seen skills as the key economic challenge that we face going forward. And we've backed that in in this budget alone, most recently with $6.4 billion committed to skills and training.&nbsp;
In addition to that, a couple of weeks ago, at the speech the Business Council identified four economic beachheads that we need to take in Australia to move forward comfortably and recover and reopen to the world. Enhancing links between business and universities. So we turn Australia's great research into successful products and companies. This remains a big challenge, and our trailblazer universities initiative is designed to address that. Embracing the data and digital economy so we can become a top 10 digital economy by 2030. And Jane is leading that charge. By taking our place in the new energy economy through our technology focussed emissions reduction plan and technology partnerships. Another signed today with Korea. And securing the transformation of our manufacturing sector through our government's modern manufacturing strategy. You know there's a million Australians working in manufacturing today? We've restored that. Under Labor one in eight manufacturing jobs went. These are the beachheads Australia must continue to claim and win in coming years to support a business-led economic recovery. The challenge of keeping Australians safe begins at home working with states and territories. Our government is close to finalising the next national plan to end violence against women and children. The most recent budget invested a further $1.1 billion, the largest ever commitment by a federal government in that area. We will continue to introduce new laws to keep Australians safe online, and we will take on Big Tech. One of the greatest fears that parents have for their children, particularly girls, growing up in a completely different digital world than the one we grew up in. Our critical infrastructure assets are more than ever reliant on technology for the delivery of their services and everything from our communications networks to the stable distribution of our electricity grids, the functioning of satellites and financial services essential for daily retail transactions. That's the world we live in. But you know, over a third of all incidents reported to the Australian Cyber Security Centre over the last 12 months have been for critical infrastructure assets. They're targeted, and the potential for massive disruption is very real. And I want to pay special tribute to the leadership and public service of Andy Penn, who's here tonight, who has contributed enormously to the development and implementation of the government's $1.7 billion cyber security strategy as chair of the Industry Advisory Panel. I thank everyone for their role in it.&nbsp;
When Parliament returns next February, the government will pass further legislation to lift the security and protection of Australia's critical infrastructure. We need the support of industry to get this done. Internationally within our region and further afield, we've been pursuing Australia's interests, standing up to coercion and supporting a world that favours freedom and the rule of law. This involves working even more closely with partners and allies and like minded nations, just like I was today with the President of Korea. In 2021 alone, we have sealed the elevation of the Quad, together with India, Japan and the United States providing an active and positive force for stability and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, driven by leaders including development of critical minerals, supply chains, critical technologies and the coordination of vaccine supply. The landmark AUKUS Agreement, a new trilateral security partnership between ourselves, the United States and the United Kingdom, geared to the emerging security challenges of the 21st century, including accessing the technology for nuclear powered submarine fleet. The only other country to do that was the United Kingdom in 1958. This is essential to our long term security and has been long sought after. The first ever comprehensive strategic partnership with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, ASEAN, based on a shared vision for a free and resilient Indo-Pacific. And the first comprehensive free trade agreement negotiated with the UK post-Brexit. Now the common thread in all this is plain enough. These are big national plays for big strategic stakes where we must protect Australia's interests, and we have been doing so.&nbsp;
Finally keeping Australians together. A nation, a government must always prioritise national unity and social cohesion. We are the most successful immigration and multicultural nation in the world, and we intend, thank you, we intend to keep it that way with a sustainable migration programme that gets the balance right. Keeping our borders secure. Avoiding population pressures on our infrastructure and services, particularly in our major cities, and meeting the Labor needs of our economy, as well as our family reunion and humanitarian obligations. And we will continue to ensure that our economic recovery strategy places a strong priority on women's economic security that Jane is leading. Our most recent budget committed $1.9 billion over four years to support employment and entrepreneurship opportunities for women, increase retirement savings and improve the affordability of child care.&nbsp;
From my first days as prime minister, I've made a point of ensuring the interests and everyday concerns of those living in rural, regional and remote Australia are never far from my view or the government's view. First place I went was to Quilpie to go and inspect what was happening with the drought. I've stayed in touch with the family over these past few years. As you know, this year saw our government commit to net zero emissions by 2050, and I won't pretend this was easy. Our pathway to net zero for rural and regional Australia is designed to be a net positive that respects their way of life and protects their economic future. The fact that we found this not the easiest things to do, I think says very clearly to rural and regional Australia, we understand their sensitivities and concerns and we can be most trusted to protect them. You know, we either grow together or we grow apart, and we cannot allow that to happen between our rural and regional communities and our cities. Our pathway to net zero is about growing together. And once again, an active and engaged and durable partnership between government, business and local communities will be vital. This is something our government is very committed to with our major investments in clean hydrogen industrial hubs, carbon capture and storage and renewables projects from Bell Bay in the South to Darwin in the north, from Gladstone, the Hunter and Latrobe Valley in the East to the Pilbara in the West. The right policy settings, I remain supremely confident, I'm sure Bridget agrees, that it's regional Australia will continue to be an attractive, prosperous and vibrant place to live, work and raise a family, for at least one in three Australians, as it is today.&nbsp;
So friends, over the past three years, we have worked together to bring Australia through some of the most difficult challenges we have ever faced. Our success has been built on the resilience, strength and quiet confidence of the Australian people. It has been supported by the actions of our government that has worked hard to get the balance right and chart a uniquely Australian way through this crisis and into the future. And so as now 2021 recedes into the rear vision mirror, our government's sights are firmly through that windscreen on the road ahead. We know it will take the experience we have gained together over these past difficult years to see Australia through the next set of challenges, to secure Australia's success, to secure our economic recovery, to keep Australians safe in an uncertain world. And to keep Australians moving forward together, stronger, safer, together. Thank you very much for your kind attention.


